YOLO COUNTY, CA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Supplement 2026 S-20 includes:
Local legislation current through Ord. 1582,
effective January 8, 2026
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:
1.   Adoption of Code
2.   Penalty Provisions
3.   Rules of Construction
4.   Appeals
5.   Code Enforcement
Chapter 1
ADOPTION OF CODE
Sections:
   
1-1.01   Title: Reference to Code.
   
1-1.02   Authority.
   
1-1.03   Effective date.
   
1-1.04   Effect of Code on past actions and obligations.
   
1-1.05   Reference to specific ordinances.
   
1-1.06   Validity of Code.
   
1-1.07   Repeal of ordinances.
   
1-1.08   Maintenance of Code.
Sec. 1-1.01.   Title: Reference to Code.
   This Code shall be known as the “Yolo County Code”. It shall be sufficient
to refer to this Code as the Yolo County Code in any prosecution for the
violation of any provision thereof. It shall also be sufficient to designate
any ordinance adding to, amending, or repealing this Code, or portions thereof,
as an addition or amendment to, or a repeal of, the Yolo County Code, or a
portion thereof.
Sec. 1-1.02.   Authority.
   Except as otherwise herein or hereafter provided, this Code consists of all
the regulatory, penal, and administrative laws of general application of the
County of Yolo, codified pursuant to the authority contained in Article 2 of
Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the Government Code of the
State of California.
Sec. 1-1.03.   Effective date.
   This Code shall take effect upon the effective date of the ordinance
adopting this Code by reference.
Sec. 1-1.04.   Effect of Code on past actions and    obligations.
   Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of
the County shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of
ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this
Code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty at said effective
date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of
the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such
license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof,
nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required
to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all vested
rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and
effect.
Sec. 1-1.05.   Reference to specific ordinances.
   The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other
matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances
which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are
included within this Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to
the corresponding provisions contained within this Code.
Sec. 1-1.06.   Validity of Code.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code is for
any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Board hereby declares that
it would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause,
and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Sec. 1-1.07.   Repeal of ordinances.
   All ordinances of the County in force upon the effective date of this Code
are hereby repealed except those ordinances relating to matters of a special or
temporary nature (listed in Table 2 of the Appendix of this Code).
Sec. 1-1.08.   Maintenance of Code.
   At least three (3) copies of this Code, duly certified by the County Clerk,
shall be maintained on file in his office as the official copies of the Code.
Additional copies of the Code shall be distributed to the departments and
divisions of the County as shall be prescribed by the County Executive. Duly
certified copies of each ordinance making changes in the Code shall be filed in
the office of the County Clerk in books for such purpose, duly indexed for
ready reference. At least quarterly the County Clerk shall cause the loose leaf
pages of this Code in which changes have been made to be reproduced, including
the notation as to the ordinance number and date pursuant to which change is
adopted, and distributed in order that the loose leaf copies of the Code,
prepared for the use and convenience of the officers and employees of the
County and the general public, may be brought up-to-date.
Chapter 2
PENALTY PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
1-2.01   Violations a misdemeanor.
   
1-2.02   Prohibited acts.
   
1-2.03   Imposition of penalty.
   
1-2.04   Determination of punishment.
   
1-2.05   Place of confinement.
   
1-2.06   Fees, charges, and taxes made a civil debt.
Sec. 1-2.01.   Violations a misdemeanor.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this Code or the provisions of any code
adopted by reference by this Code. Any person violating any of such provisions
or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Code shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the
provisions of this Code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than Five
Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail
for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of his
Code, or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this Code, is
committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable
accordingly.
   In addition to the penalties provided by this section, any condition caused
or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code, or
the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this Code, shall be deemed a
public nuisance and may be summarily abated by this County, and each day such
condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.
Sec. 1-2.02.   Prohibited acts.
   Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include
causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of
such act or omission.
Sec. 1-2.03.   Imposition of penalty.
   The provisions of this Code which declare certain crimes to be punishable as
therein mentioned devolve a duty upon the court authorized to pass sentence to
determine and impose the punishment described.
Sec. 1-2.04.   Determination of punishment.
   Whenever in this Code the punishment for a crime is left undetermined
between certain limits, the punishment to be inflicted in a particular case
shall be determined by the court authorized to pass sentence, within such
limits as may be prescribed by this Code.
Sec. 1-2.05.   Place of confinement.
   Every person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this Code
and sentenced to imprisonment shall be imprisoned in the County Jail.
Sec. 1-2.06.   Fees, charges, and taxes made a civil debt.
   The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax of
any nature whatsoever imposed by any provision of this Code shall be deemed a
civil debt owing to the County. An action may be commenced in the name of the
County in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount
of any such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license,
or tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this
Code. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be cumulative, and the use of
an action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the
use of any other remedy provided by this Code or by law for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions thereof.
Chapter 3
RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Sections:
   
1-3.01   Scope of chapter.
   
1-3.02   Provisions construed as restatements and continuations.
   
1-3.03   Tenure of officers preserved.
   
1-3.04   Effect of headings.
   
1-3.05   Meaning of section and subsection.
   
1-3.06   References to acts or omissions within the County.
   
1-3.07   Acts by deputies.
   
1-3.08   Writing.
   
1-3.09   References to ordinances: Application to amendments.
   
1-3.10   Service of notices.
   
1-3.11   Service of notices: Proof.
   
1-3.12   Statute of limitations.
   
1-3.13   Definitions.
Sec. 1-3.01.   Scope of chapter.
   Unless the provisions of this Code otherwise specifically provide, or the
context of this Code indicates to the contrary, the general provisions, rules
of construction, and definitions set forth in this chapter shall govern the
construction of this Code. The provisions of this Code and all proceedings
under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote
justice.
Sec. 1-3.02.   Provisions construed as restatements and continuations.
   The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as
existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as
restatements and continuations and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-3.03.   Tenure of officers preserved.
   All persons who, at the time this Code takes effect, hold office under any
of the ordinances repealed by this Code, which offices are continued by this
Code, shall continue to hold them according to their former tenure.
Sec. 1-3.04.   Effect of headings.
   Title, chapter, article, and section headings contained in this Code shall
not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope,
meaning, or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, article, or section
of this Code.
Sec. 1-3.05.   Meaning of section and subsection.
“Section” shall mean a section of this Code, unless some other source is
specifically mentioned. “Subsection” shall mean a subsection of the section in
which the term occurs, unless some other section is expressly mentioned.
Sec. 1-3.06.   References to acts or omissions within the County.
   This Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the
territorial limits of the County and to that territory outside the County over
which the County has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution of
the State of California or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of
property.
Sec. 1-3.07.   Acts by deputies.
   Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, a public officer
or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a
deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized
pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise.
Sec. 1-3.08.   Writing.
   Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, or record is
required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English
language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
Sec. 1-3.09.   References to ordinances: Application to Amendments.
   Whenever any reference is made to an ordinance, the reference shall apply to
such ordinance of the County unless otherwise specifically provided. Whenever
any reference is made to any portion of this Code, or to any ordinances of the
County, the reference shall apply to all amendments and additions now or
hereafter made.
Sec. 1-3.10.   Service of notices.
   Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Code, unless different
provisions are otherwise specifically made in the Code, such notice may be
given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by
deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to such person to be notified at his last known business or residence
address as the same appears in the public records of the County or other
records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by
mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post
office.
Sec. 1-3.11.   Service of notices: Proof.
   Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or
employee of the County or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen
(18) years, which affidavit shows service in conformity with this Code or other
provisions of law applicable to the subject’ matter concerned.
Sec. 1-3.12.   Statute of limitations.
   When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance or
statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose,
has begun to run before this Code goes into effect, the time which has already
run shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation.
Sec. 1-3.13.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Code, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used in this Code are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Board” shall mean the Board of Supervisors of the County of Yolo.
   (b)   “Calendar year” shall mean from January 1 through December 31 of any
given year.
   (c)   “County” shall mean the County of Yolo.
   (d)   “Fiscal year” shall mean from July 1 of any given year through June 30
of the following year.
   (e)   “Gender” The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter
genders.
   (f)   “May” shall be permissive.
   (g)   “Month” shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise expressed.
   (h)   “Number” The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
number shall include the singular.
   (i)   “Oath” shall include affirmation.
   (j)   “Office” The use of the title of any officer, employee, office, or
ordinance shall mean such officer, employee, office, or ordinance of this
County, unless otherwise specified.
   (k)   “Official time standard”. Wherever certain hours are named in this
Code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in
current use in the County.
   (l)   “Owner”, applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part
of such building or land.
   (m)   “Person” shall include any person, firm, company, corporation,
partnership, association, any public corporation, political subdivision, city,
county, district in the County of Yolo, the State of California, or the United
States of America, or any department or agency of any thereof, unless this Code
expressly provides otherwise.
   (n)   “Personal property” shall include money, goods, chattels, things in
action, and evidences of debt.
   (o)   “Property” shall include both real and personal property.
   (p)   “Quarterly”, where used to designate a period of time, shall mean the
first three (3) calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of
three (3) calendar months.
   (q)   “Real property” shall include lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   (r)   “Road” shall include all roads, streets, highways, avenues,
boulevards, alleys, courts, places, squares, or other public ways in the County
which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such
other public property so designated in any law of this State.
   (s)   “Shall” shall be mandatory.
   (t)   “State” shall mean the State of California.
   (u)   “Tenant or occupant”, applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   (v)   “Tenses” The present tense shall include the past and future tenses,
and the future tense shall include the present tense.
Chapter 4
APPEALS
Sections:
   
1-4.01   Right to appeal.
   
1-4.02   Time limit for filing.
   
1-4.03   Hearings: Notice.
   
1-4.04   Hearings.
   
1-4.05   Hearing procedures.
Sec. 1-4.01.   Right to appeal.
   Except where an appeals procedure is otherwise specifically provided in this
Code, any person excepting to the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit
applied for or held by him pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code, or
to any administrative decision made by any official of the County, if the
denial, suspension, or revocation of such permit or the determination of such
administrative decision involves the exercise of administrative discretion or
personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code, may
appeal in writing to the Board by filing with the County Clerk a written notice
of such appeal, setting forth the specific grounds thereof.
   No appeal may be taken to any such administrative decision made by an
official of the County pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless such
decision to appeal has been first taken up with the department head concerned.
   No right of appeal to the Board from any administrative decision made by an
official of the County pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code shall
exist when such decision is ministerial and thus does not involve the exercise
of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of
the provisions of this Code, whether the administrative decision involves the
denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit or any other administrative
decision.
Sec. 1-4.02.   Time limit for filing.
   The appellant shall file a notice of appeal with the County Clerk within
fourteen (14) days after receipt of the notice of the administrative decision
concerned.
Sec. 1-4.03.   Hearings: Notices.
   Upon receipt of the filing of the notice of appeal in proper form, the
County Clerk shall place the matter the Board agenda for the next regular
meeting of the Board which will be held at least five (5) days after the date
of the filing of the notice of appeal. Except in cases of emergency when the
Board may determine the matter immediately, the Board shall set the matter for
hearing at a subsequent meeting, but in no event later than thirty (30) days
after the date of the filing of the notice of appeal with the County Clerk. The
County Clerk shall cause written notice of the hearing to be given to the
applicant not less than five (5) days prior to such hearing, unless such notice
is waived in writing by the applicant.
Sec. 1-4.04.   Hearings.
   At such hearing the appellant shall show cause on the ground specified in
the notice of appeal why the action appealed from should not be approved. The
Board may continue the hearing from time to time, and its findings on the
appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter.
Sec. 1-4.05.   Hearing procedures.
   Unless otherwise required by California law, the adopted guidelines for
quasi-judicial appeals shall apply to appeals arising under this chapter. As
set forth in the guidelines, the Board Chair may modify or waive provisions of
the guidelines as appropriate. The guidelines do not create any additional
rights and any failure to follow these guidelines shall not affect the validity
of the hearing or the decision made.
(§ 2, Ord. 1506, eff. February 28, 2019)
Chapter 5
CODE ENFORCEMENT*
*   Chapter 5 entitled "Administrative Citations", consisting of Sections 1-
5.01 through 1-5.14, codified from Ordinance No. 1320, repealed and replaced in
its entirety by § 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020.
Sections:
   
1-5.01   Declaration of purpose.
   
1-5.02   Definitions.
   
1-5.03   Administrative enforcement authority.
   
1-5.04   Violation.
   
1-5.05   Service of notices.
   
1-5.06   Courtesy notices.
   
1-5.07   Administrative citations.
   
1-5.08   Recording notices of pendency of nuisance abatement action.
   
1-5.09   Administrative hearings.
   
1-5.10   Hearing Officer's decision.
   
1-5.11   Failure to pay fines and fees.
   
1-5.12   Collection of abatement costs by lien or special assessment.
   
1-5.13   Collection by court judgement.
   
1-5.14   Recovery of collection costs.
   
1-5.15   Refusal to issue.
   
1-5.16   Confidentiality in connection with citizen complaints.
   
1-5.17   Abatement orders.
   
1-5.18   Abatement by the County.
Sec. 1-5.01.   Declaration of purpose.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors ("Board") finds that the enforcement of this
Code of Ordinances ("Code") throughout the County is an important public
service, and enforcement of the Code is vital to the protection of the public's
health, safety, and quality of life. The Board finds that enforcement starts
with the implementation of regulations that can be applied fairly and evenly
through administrative notices, enforcement, hearings, and appeals. The Board
further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system requires a variety
of administrative remedies for the effective enforcement of violations of the
Code.
   (b)   The procedures, processes, penalties, and remedies provided in this
Chapter are cumulative and in addition to all other remedies, enforcement, and
cost recovery options available to the County by law or in equity.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.02.   Definitions.
   As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the words
and terms defined herein have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
   (a)   "Administrative Citation" is a document that cites a responsible party
for a violation and imposes fines and fees arising from the violation.
   (b)   "Administrative Hearing" is an informal legal proceeding before an
impartial Hearing Officer held in accordance with this Chapter.
   (c)   "Abatement Costs" means and includes all costs, expenses, fines, and
fees, such as administrative expenses, administrative fines, civil fines,
penalties, staff time, variable costs, fixed costs, inspection costs,
investigation costs, enforcement costs, abatement costs, litigation fees,
litigation costs, hearing costs, attorneys' fees and costs, and all other costs
and expenses related to, arising out of, or incurred by the County relating to
any nuisance enforcement or abatement action to the fullest extent permitted by
law.
   (d)   "Continuing Violation" means a violation of this Code that persists
for more than 24 hours.
   (e)   "Courtesy Notice" is an informal notice that may be used to notify the
responsible parties of the violation and to order that the violation be
corrected.
   (f)   "Decision" means the decision of a Hearing Officer at the conclusion
of an administrative hearing held in accordance with this Chapter.
   (g)   "Director" means the Director, Department Head, or designee with
overall responsibility for the general subject matter of the County Code
Sections at issue with respect to a particular violation.
   (h)   "Enforcement Agency" means and includes any agency, department, or
unit authorized to enforce any provision of the County Code or State Law.
   (i)   "Enforcement Official" means any County officer or employee with the
authority to investigate and enforce a violation, and includes Code Enforcement
Officer, County Health Officer, County Administrator, County Counsel, Director
of the Community Services Department, Director of Environmental Health, Chief
Building Official, Cannabis Policy and Enforcement Manager, or their authorized
designees.
   (j)   "Grace Period" means the reasonable timeframe provided to a
responsible party to correct a violation of this Code in accordance with this
Chapter.
   (k)   "Grace Period Exception" means a code violation that is any of the
following:
      (1)   Not a continuing violation.
      (2)   An immediate danger.
      (3)   The result of, or used to facilitate, the illegal cultivation of
cannabis. This grace period exception shall not apply to the nuisance property
owner if all the following are true at the time of the cannabis cultivation
violation:
         i.   The nuisance property was a rental property.
         ii.   A tenant was in possession of the nuisance property.
         iii.   The rental agreement for the nuisance property prohibited
cannabis cultivation.
         iv.   The nuisance property owner, nor an agent of the owner, is not a
responsible party.
         v.   The nuisance property owner did not know, and could not have
reasonably known, that the tenant was illegally cultivating cannabis on the
nuisance property. The nuisance property owner will be presumed to be aware of
the illegal cannabis cultivation activity if the nuisance property owner was
previously notified about the unlawful activity.
   (l)   "Hearing Costs" means and includes all costs, expenses, Hearing
Officer fees, and attorneys' fees related to any administrative hearing held
pursuant to this Chapter.
   (m)   "Hearing Officer" means any person appointed to conduct any hearing or
proceeding under the provisions of this Chapter, unless otherwise specified,
including, without limitation, the administration of oaths, the issuance of
subpoenas, the receipt of evidence, and the entry of findings of fact and law.
   (n)   "Immediate Danger" means that the cited condition poses a reasonable
risk of causing immediate harm or damage to the health or safety of a person or
property or damage to the environment.
   (o)   "Interested Party" means any person or entity whose rights will be
affected by a nuisance abatement action.
   (p)   "Invoice" means the invoice identifying the abatement costs that the
County is entitled to recover related to a nuisance abatement action.
   (q)   "Junk" includes, but is not limited to: trash; refuse; paper; glass;
cans; bottles; rags; ashes; yard waste; other salvageable materials; litter;
inoperable appliances, parts, and tools; inoperable and unregistered vehicles,
vehicle parts, and vehicle hulks; discarded furniture; dirt, rocks, and
materials from the demolition, alteration, or construction of buildings or
structures, unless such dirt, rocks, or other materials from demolition,
alteration, or construction are being used for purposes of fill; and any such
similar items.
   (r)   "Nuisance Property" means the parcel of real property containing
violations or nuisance conditions that are the subject of a Code enforcement or
nuisance abatement action.
   (s)   "Person" means any natural person, business, organization,
corporation, or other legal entity.
   (t)   "Public Nuisance" consists of one or more of the following
(enumeration of such nuisances in this Chapter shall not be deemed exclusive):
      (1)   Anything injurious or likely to become injurious to health or
safety, offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property,
so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property,
including a condition of visual blight.
      (2)   Unlawfully obstructing the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any public park, square, street, or highway.
      (3)   Any violation of this Code, including any code adopted by reference
(California Building Standards Code, California Building Code, California
Residential Code, California Electrical Code, California Fire Code, California
Housing Code, California Plumbing Code, California Mechanical Code, California
Energy Code, California Historical Building Code, California Existing Building
Code, California Green Building Code), or any other applicable law.
      (4)   A swimming pool, pond, or other body of water which is abandoned,
unattended, unfiltered, or otherwise un-maintained, wherein the water becomes
polluted by bacterial growth, algae, remains or nesting sites of insects or
deceased animals or reptiles, rubbish, refuse, debris, or other foreign matter,
thereby creating an unhealthy, unsafe, or unsightly condition.
      (5)   Any accumulation of junk, debris, or inoperable vehicle(s) on any
parcel of land.
      (6)   Any occupancy of any land or structure in a manner other than that
for which it was approved.
   (u)   "Requesting Party" means any interested party who properly requests an
administrative hearing as required by this Chapter.
   (v)   "Responsible Party" means and includes any of the following:
      (1)   Any person or entity that causes, maintains, permits, or allows a
violation of this Code.
      (2)   Any person or entity that owns, possesses, or controls any parcel
of real property in the County upon which a violation of this Code is
maintained.
      (3)   Any trustee of any trust that holds legal title to any parcel of
real property in the County upon which a violation of this Code is maintained.
      (4)   Any person or entity that owns, possesses, operates, manages, or
controls any business within the County that is responsible for causing or
maintaining a violation of this Code.
   (w)   "Violation" includes, but is not limited to, any public nuisance and
all violations of this Code, any codes adopted by reference by the County, and
non- compliance with any condition imposed by any entitlement, permit,
agreement, or environmental document issued or approved under the provisions of
this Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.03.   Administrative enforcement authority.
   (a)   The Enforcement Official shall have the authority and powers necessary
to determine whether a violation exists and take appropriate action to gain
compliance with the law and abate any violation. The Enforcement Official shall
further have authority to issue courtesy notices, administrative citations,
invoices, and any other notices and orders necessary to obtain compliance and
cost recovery, as well as the power to inspect public and private property as
provided by law, impose fines and fees, and use the administrative remedies
that are available under State law or this Code. The Enforcement Official shall
also have authority to use the civil remedies available under State law or this
Code, including, but not limited to, receiverships, the Drug Abatement Act
("DAA"), the Red Light Abatement Act ("RLAA"), the Street Terrorism Enforcement
and Prevention Act ("STEP"), and other nuisance abatement actions.
   (b)   Every person who willfully resists, delays, or obstructs any
Enforcement Official or Hearing Officer in the discharge or attempt to
discharge any duty of their office or employment shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment in a
County jail not to exceed one year, or by both that fine and imprisonment.
   (c)   Every person who willfully states anything which that person knows to
be false in any oral or written statement to an Enforcement Official or Hearing
Officer regarding the subject of a Code Enforcement investigation or hearing
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or
by imprisonment in a County jail not to exceed one year, or by both that fine
and imprisonment.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.04.   Violation.
   (a)   Any violation of this Code is a public nuisance and shall be abated as
such. It is unlawful for any responsible party to cause or maintain a violation
of this Code or a public nuisance on a premises. To the fullest extent allowed
by law, a responsible party has a duty to prevent, remove, or abate a violation
or public nuisance on their real property when that responsible party knows, or
has reason to know, that the violation or public nuisance exists.
   (b)   Each and every day, or portion thereof, that a violation exists
constitutes a separate and distinct offense.
   (c)   Any person who violates a provision of this Code, or fails to comply
with any of the requirements thereof, shall be subject to all applicable
remedies available under this Chapter or State law. Wherever this Code makes
any act or omission unlawful, it shall include causing, maintaining,
permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing such act or omission.
   (d)   Any violation may be enforced through one or more of the following
remedies:
      (1)   Issuance of a courtesy notice, administrative citation, or invoice,
including the recovery of civil penalties and enforcement costs.
      (2)   Abatement as a public nuisance.
      (3)   Arrest or citation and release pursuant to California Penal Code
Section 836.5.
      (4)   Criminal prosecution.
      (5)   Administrative hearing.
      (6)   Civil action for injunction, civil penalties, or other appropriate
remedies, including, but not limited to, receivership, DAA, RLAA, and STEP
actions.
      (7)   The withholding of approvals, conditional approvals, and permits
until the violation conditions are cured.
      (8)   Recording of a notice of pendency of nuisance abatement action,
nuisance abatement lien, and special assessment lien.
      (9)   Revocation or suspension of licenses, permits, special use permits,
and other entitlements issued by the County.
      (10)   Issuance of a stop work order.
      (11)   Any other remedies provided by law or in equity.
   (e)   The imposition of any fines or fees prescribed herein shall not
preclude abatement of any violation enforced through this Chapter by the
Enforcement Official, the recovery of costs as authorized by law, or the
institution of any other administrative, criminal, or civil legal proceedings.
   (f)   Nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted as mandating that an
Enforcement Official take certain steps in response to a violation or citizen
complaint, or to preclude an Enforcement Official from informally encouraging
citizens to comply with this Code or other applicable laws. Though not
required, an Enforcement Official may engage in informal oral or written
requests to achieve compliance, including attempts to informally negotiate or
mediate issues relating to compliance. In no event shall an Enforcement
Official's failure to take an enforcement action described in this Code create
any liability for the Enforcement Official or the County for damages or harm
resulting from the violation.
   (g)   In addition to any remedy authorized by law, violations may be
prosecuted as criminal violations. Any violation may constitute a misdemeanor
or an infraction. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of
this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 per violation,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or both. Unless provided
otherwise, a violation may be prosecuted as an infraction with a maximum
penalty established pursuant to Government Code Section 25132.
   (h)   The Enforcement Official may investigate any violation in the
unincorporated area of the County, and as authorized within the incorporated
areas of the County, including, without limitation, those identified through
any of the following:
      (1)   Specific bona fide citizen complaints or government agency
referrals.
      (2)   The violation occurs within the context of the County's oversight
or approval for a project.
      (3)   The enforcement action is a part of a plan for the uniform
enforcement of a provision of the Code or other applicable laws within the
County.
      (4)   The Enforcement Official's personal observations.
   (i)   An administrative citation shall not be issued pursuant to a citizen
complaint until the Enforcement Official has conducted an independent
investigation and determined that a violation has occurred. Whether and how to
conduct an investigation or conduct further enforcement proceedings shall be
within the discretion of the Enforcement Official. A complaint may form the
basis of an enforcement action or inspection warrant if the violation is one of
limited temporal duration or if the violation is not apparent and the
responsible party does not consent to the Enforcement Official's inspection.
Nothing herein shall allow a complainant to compel an Enforcement Official to
take investigatory or enforcement actions or create any liability for failure
to take such actions.
   (j)   Stop Work Order. Whenever any work is reasonably suspected as being
conducted contrary to the County Code, or other pertinent laws or ordinances
implemented through the enforcement of the County Code, the Enforcement
Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons
engaged in conducting or causing such work to be done, and any such persons
shall forthwith stop such work until lawfully authorized to proceed with the
work.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.05.   Service of notices.
   (a)   Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Chapter, unless
specifically provided otherwise, it may be served by any one of the following
methods:
      (1)   Personal service.
      (2)   First-class or certified mail to the party's last known address.
      (3)   For any party that resides at, or occupies, the nuisance property,
by posting the notice in a conspicuous place at the entrance to the nuisance
property.
      (4)   For any party registered with the Secretary of State, by certified
mail to that party's agent for service of process at the address registered
with the Secretary of State, or as otherwise permitted by law. For any such
party required to register with the Secretary of State that has not designated
an agent for service of process with the Secretary of State, then a notice may
be served on that party by certified mail to the Secretary of State.
      (5)   If a valid address for any party cannot be determined, then by
posting in a conspicuous place at the entrance to the nuisance property.
      (6)   By email when an email address is provided by that party.
      (7)   In any other manner reasonably calculated to effectuate notice.
   (b)   Service by posting, personal delivery, or electronic delivery shall be
deemed effective at the time of posting or delivery. Service by mail in any
manner described in this Section shall be deemed effective upon deposit in the
mail.
   (c)   The failure of any interested party to receive any notice served in
accordance with this Section shall not affect the validity of the notice nor
any proceeding conducted pursuant to that notice.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.06.   Courtesy notices.
   (a)   When an Enforcement Official identifies a violation, the Enforcement
Official may issue a courtesy notice in order to notify the responsible parties
of the violation and to order that the violation be corrected.
   (b)   The courtesy notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   The date of the courtesy notice.
       (2)   The name and address of the responsible party for the violation,
if known.
      (3)   The address or a description of the location where the violation
occurred.
      (4)   Identification and a brief description of the laws violated.
      (5)   A re-inspection date, if applicable.
      (6)   A statement advising that the County may impose penalties if the
violation is not corrected or abated by the re-inspection date, unless a
shorter compliance deadline is necessary in the judgment of the Enforcement
Official because the violation presents an immediate public health and safety
hazard.
      (7)   A statement that each day that the violation persists is a separate
offense.
      (8)   A statement of the County's abatement costs recovery rights.
      (9)   A statement that enforcement under this Chapter does not preclude
the County, State, or federal government from pursuing any other available
administrative, criminal, or civil remedies to abate or address the violation,
conduct, or condition.
      (10)   Any other orders as may be necessary to protect the health and
safety of any persons or property.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.07.   Administrative citations.
   (a)   Whenever an Enforcement Official determines that a violation of this
Code has occurred, the Enforcement Official shall have the authority to issue
an administrative citation to each responsible party for that violation.
   (b)   The administrative citation shall contain:
      (1)   The date of the violation.
      (2)   The name of the responsible party being cited.
      (3)   The address or a description of the location where the violation
occurred.
      (4)   Identification and a brief description of the laws violated.
      (5)   Designation per cited violation whether it poses an immediate
danger.
      (6)   Designation per cited violation whether it is a continuing
violation.
      (7)   The grace period (if any) to cure each cited violation in order to
avoid the administrative fine.
      (8)   The amount of the administrative fine for each cited violation that
will be imposed if the cited violation is not cured within the grace period (if
any). If the grace period lapses without abatement or correction of the
violation, then administrative fines may be imposed commencing from the date of
service of the administrative citation. If there is no grace period, the
administrative fine shall be immediately imposed.
      (9)   The amount (if any) of the administrative fee representing the
abatement costs associated with the violation.
      (10)   An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of
the cited violations.
      (11)   A notice that the administrative fine amount may automatically re-
accrue and increase each day beyond the grace period (if any) that the cited
violation persists, up to the statutory maximum.
      (12)   An order on how to correct or abate the violation.
      (13)   An order to the responsible party that the responsible party must
report to the relevant enforcement agency when each cited violation is cured,
along with the responsible party's contact information, in order for the
relevant enforcement agency to verify.
      (14)   A brief description of how to contest the administrative citation
and the deadline to do so.
      (15)   A brief description of the administrative fine payment process,
including the timeframe to pay the administrative fine and administrative fee,
the late fee for failure to pay on time, and any other consequences for failing
to pay as required.
      (16)   The name and signature of the citing Enforcement Official.
   (c)   Continuing Violations. Each day a violation persists is a separate
offense.
   (d)   Grace Period. The responsible parties for any violation that is not a
grace period exception shall be given a reasonable grace period to cure the
violation in order to avoid the administrative fine. The grace period shall be
at least 24 hours unless the minimum period is otherwise specified in this Code
or set by resolution of the Board. If a cited violation is a grace period
exception, then the Enforcement Official may immediately impose the
administrative fine for that cited violation.
   (e)   Compliance Reporting. The responsible party must cure each cited
violation and must report to the relevant enforcement agency when each cited
violation is cured within 24 hours of curing the violation. When reporting to
the enforcement agency, the responsible party must provide their contact
information and make accommodations for the enforcement agency to verify
compliance within 72 hours, unless further delay is permitted by the
enforcement agency.
   (f)   Fine Schedule. For any violation of this Code that is punishable as a
misdemeanor, the maximum administrative fine shall be $1,000 per offense per
day. For any violation of this Code that is punishable as an infraction, the
maximum administrative fine shall be in accordance with Government Code Section
25132. The Board of Supervisors may adopt by resolution an administrative fee
schedule governing administrative fines imposed pursuant to this Chapter for
certain violations. Any fine shall be in addition to the fees assessed for the
violation.
   (g)   Re-accruing Administrative Fines. The administrative fine for a cited
violation shall automatically re-accrue and may increase, up to the set
maximum, each day beyond the grace period (if any) that a cited violation
persists.
   (h)   Administrative Fees. The County may adopt one or more administrative
fees to recover the abatement costs associated with the issuance, enforcement,
processing, and collection of administrative citations. The administrative fees
shall be based on the actual costs incurred by the County, including overhead
and indirect costs. The administrative fees shall be assessed on each
administrative citation and collected in the same manner and at the same time
as the administrative fine; however, the administrative fees shall be assessed
only once per administrative citation.
   (i)   Late Fee. Any person who fails to pay any administrative fine or
administrative fee imposed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be
liable for the payment of a late fee. The late fee shall be in an amount
established by resolution of the Board.
   (j)   Collection Costs. In addition to the administrative fee and late fee,
the County is entitled to recover all costs, expenses, fees, and attorneys'
fees associated with collecting upon any administrative fines, fees, or costs
authorized by this Chapter.
   (k)   Payment of Administrative Fines. All fines and fees shall be payable
to the County in accordance with the procedures specified in this Chapter,
unless otherwise directed in the citation. Administrative fines and fees shall
be paid to the County within 30 days from the date of service of the
administrative citation, unless a hearing is properly requested. If a hearing
is properly requested, and the fine is upheld or modified at that
administrative hearing, then the confirmed fine amount shall be paid to the
County within 30 days from the date of service of the decision. Payment of the
fines and fees shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation or bar
further enforcement action by the County.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.08.   Recording notices of pendency of nuisance abatement action.
   (a)   Upon initiating a nuisance abatement action, the Enforcement Official
may record a Notice of Pendency of Nuisance Abatement Action ("NoP") with the
County Recorder's Office. The NoP shall identify the County's enforcement and
cost recovery rights.
   (b)   Once all violations have been corrected, and all abatement costs have
been paid, any interested party may file a written request for the NoP to be
withdrawn.
   (c)   Within a reasonable time of receiving a request for a NoP Withdrawal,
the Enforcement Official shall confirm that the violations have been corrected
or abated, which confirmation may include the re-inspection of the nuisance
property. The Enforcement Official shall issue a NoP withdrawal to the
requesting party if the Enforcement Official determines that all the following
have occurred:
      (1)   All violations subject to the nuisance abatement action have been
corrected.
      (2)   All necessary approvals and permits have been issued and finalized.
      (3)   All abatement costs and administrative fines and fees have been
paid.
   (d)   If the Enforcement Official denies a request to issue a NoP
withdrawal, the Enforcement Official shall mail the requesting party a written
explanation setting forth the reasons for the denial and notice of the
opportunity to appeal the denial by requesting an administrative hearing under
this Chapter.
   (e)   Any costs associated with recording a NoP or a NoP withdrawal shall
constitute abatement costs subject to recovery pursuant to this Chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.09.   Administrative hearings.
   (a)   Hearing Request. An administrative hearing may be requested by an
interested party to appeal any nuisance abatement related administrative
process (except courtesy notices), such as: administrative citations;
administrative fines; administrative orders; correction orders; abatement
orders; permit revocations; license revocations; approval revocations; nuisance
findings; danger findings; administrative appeals; invoices; or any such
similar administrative nuisance abatement actions of the County ("enforcement
action"). An administrative hearing may be requested by completing a hearing
request form and returning it to the enforcement agency within 15 days from the
date of service of notice of the enforcement action.
      (1)   A hearing request form may be obtained from the enforcement agency
responsible for the enforcement action. Any request for administrative hearing
must be accompanied by deposit of any fines and fees that have accrued on the
violation(s), by cash or cashier's check payable to the County of Yolo. Failure
to deposit such fines and fees constitutes a waiver of all rights to an
administrative hearing and other appeal rights and shall be grounds for summary
dismissal of the appeal without a hearing. Any appealed fines and fees shall be
refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the
administrative citation was not responsible for the violation(s), or that there
was no violation(s) during the period the appealed fines and fees assessed. If
a hearing is requested but a person's financial condition prevents deposit of
the fines and fees for the administrative citation being appealed, the person
may request waiver of the deposit requirement, which shall be waived if the
person provides sufficient evidence of an inability to pay because of one of
the reasons for waiver of court filing fees enumerated in California Government
Code § 68632.
      (2)   The request may be for an in-person hearing or a hearing by written
declaration. If an in-person hearing is requested, then the County shall set
the date and time for the administrative hearing. The requesting party shall be
served written notice of the time and place set for the administrative hearing
at least 10 days prior to the date of the administrative hearing.
      (3)   If a request for hearing by written declaration is made, then the
written declaration must be made under penalty of perjury and attached to the
hearing request form. The written declaration must establish all defenses the
contesting party may have and must attach all evidence the contesting party
wishes the Hearing Officer to consider. The written declaration may not be
augmented or supplemented unless permission to do so is obtained from the
Hearing Officer prior to the issuance of the decision.
      (4)   Other than coordinating and scheduling the administrative hearing,
no ex parte communications may occur with the Hearing Officer. Any other
communications with the Hearing Officer must be in writing and submitted to all
parties either prior to, or contemporaneously with, the written communication
to the Hearing Officer.
      (5)   The enforcement agency may submit a written report concerning the
enforcement action to the Hearing Officer for consideration. If an in- person
hearing is requested, then the report may be submitted at any time prior to the
in-person hearing. If a hearing by written declaration is requested, then the
report may be submitted within 30 days of service of the hearing request.
      (6)   Failure by an interested party to timely and properly request a
hearing as required by this Chapter, including the proper submission of a
written declaration under penalty of perjury when a hearing by declaration is
requested, shall constitute an admission by that interested party to the
existence of the cited violations, an admission of that interested party's
liability for the cited violations, a waiver of that interested party's right
to contest the enforcement action, and a failure by that interested party to
exhaust their administrative remedies. The enforcement action, along with any
imposed administrative fines or abatement costs that were to be adjudicated,
shall be deemed final.
      (7)   Upon the proper filing of a hearing request, any administrative
fines and administrative fees associated with the enforcement action shall be
stayed pending the outcome of the administrative hearing.
   (b)   Hearing Officer. The County Counsel's Office shall be responsible for
the selection of a Hearing Officer required by this Chapter. A Hearing Officer
shall be a neutral third-party contracted by the County and selected in a
manner that avoids the potential for any bias against any parties to the
hearing. The Hearing Officer's compensation, if any, shall be paid by the
County; however, the non- prevailing party shall be liable to the County for
the costs of the hearing and the Hearing Officer's compensation. The Hearing
Officer's compensation shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the
outcome of the administrative hearing.
   (c)   Hearing Officer Powers. The Hearing Officer shall preside over
administrative hearings, administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and impose such
rules of decorum upon administrative proceedings as will promote the fair and
efficient consideration of matters before the Hearing Officer. The Hearing
Officer has continuing jurisdiction over the subject matter of an
administrative hearing for the purpose of granting a continuance, ensuring
compliance with an administrative order, modifying an administrative order, or
where extraordinary circumstances exist.
   (d)   Subpoenas. The Hearing Officer is authorized to issue a subpoena for
witnesses, documents, and other evidence where the attendance of the witness or
the admission of evidence is deemed necessary to decide the issues at the
hearing. If a subpoena is issued upon the appellant or the County, or the
employee of either, service may be effectuated by ordinary mail at least 10
days before the hearing date, and the witness is entitled to the reasonable
out-of-pocket costs of complying with the subpoena. If issued upon a third-
party, service and witness fees shall be in accordance with the rules of the
Code of Civil Procedure governing third-party subpoenas. The Hearing Officer
may enforce compliance with the subpoena through the procedures outlined in
Government Code Sections 25173 through 25176. All costs related to the
subpoena, including witness fees, mileage fees, and the Hearing Officer's costs
of enforcing the subpoena, shall be borne by the party requesting the subpoena.
   (e)   Hearing Procedure.
      (1)   An in-person hearing before the Hearing Officer shall be set for a
date that is not less than 15 days and not more than 60 days from the date that
the request for an in-person hearing is submitted in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter. This timeframe may be extended by necessity or
stipulation of the parties. Failure to hold the hearing within this timeframe
shall not invalidate the enforcement action, shall not preclude proceeding with
the hearing at a later date, and shall not invalidate the Hearing Officer's
decision.
      (2)   If the interested party requesting the in-person hearing fails to
attend the scheduled hearing, it shall constitute an admission by that party to
the existence of the cited violations, an admission by that party of that
party's liability for the cited violations, a waiver by that party of the right
to contest the enforcement action, and a failure by that party to exhaust that
party's administrative remedies.
      (3)   If an in-person hearing is requested, the Hearing Officer may
continue the hearing and request additional evidence from the enforcement
agency or the requesting party prior to issuing a decision.
      (4)   If a hearing by written declaration is requested, the Hearing
Officer shall review the requesting party's written declaration and the
enforcement agency's report within 30 days of receipt. Within those 30 days,
the Hearing Officer may request additional evidence from the enforcement agency
or the requesting party as necessary to render a decision. Failure by the
requesting party to respond or to produce additional evidence requested by the
Hearing Officer may be deemed by the Hearing Officer as an abandonment of the
hearing request. Failure by the enforcement agency to respond or produce
additional evidence requested by the Hearing Officer may be deemed by the
Hearing Officer as admissions in the requesting party's favor. Failure by the
Hearing Officer to strictly comply with this provision shall not invalidate the
enforcement action nor the Hearing Officer's decision.
      (5)   Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence
and discovery shall not apply. Each party shall have the opportunity to present
evidence in support of that party's case and to cross-examine witnesses. The
County bears the burden of proof at an administrative hearing to justify the
enforcement action by a preponderance of the evidence. The enforcement action,
along with any additional evidence submitted by the enforcement agency, shall
constitute prima facie evidence of the facts contained in that evidence.
      (6)   During the existence of a local emergency declaration that affects
the ability to safely conduct an in-person hearing, the Hearing Officer may
order that an in-person hearing be conducted electronically or by phone.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.10.   Hearing Officer's decision.
   (a)   Not later than 30 days after the date on which the administrative
hearing concludes—or in the case of a hearing by written declaration, not later
than 30 days after all necessary evidence is received—the Hearing Officer shall
issue a written decision to uphold, modify, or dismiss the enforcement action.
Failure by the Hearing Officer to strictly comply with this provision shall not
invalidate the enforcement action nor the decision.
   (b)   The decision shall set forth the reasons for the decision along with
notice of the right to appeal pursuant to this Chapter. The decision shall be
final.
   (c)   The Decision shall be served in accordance with this Chapter on all
parties to the administrative hearing. Failure to receive a properly addressed
decision shall not invalidate the enforcement action nor the decision.
   (d)   The hearing costs shall be advanced by the County. However, if the
enforcement action is upheld, the Hearing Officer shall award the County
reimbursement of the hearing costs, including the Hearing Officer's
compensation. If the enforcement action is only partially upheld, the Hearing
Officer may proportionately reduce the reimbursement for hearing costs that the
County is awarded as the Hearing Officer deems appropriate. If the enforcement
action is dismissed entirely, then the County shall bear the hearing costs.
   (e)   All upheld and awarded administrative fines, administrative fees,
abatement costs, hearing costs, and other costs shall be paid by the liable
parties to the County within 30 days from the date the decision is served.
   (f)   If the Hearing Officer determines that any administrative citation
should be dismissed, the County shall retain the authority to issue additional
administrative citations for additional violations, or to take any other
enforcement action authorized by law.
   (g)   Any appeal of the Hearing Officer's decision must be made to the
Superior Court within 20 days after service of the decision. No new evidence
may be submitted with the appeal. The Hearing Officer's decision and the
enforcement agency's evidence submitted at the administrative hearing shall
constitute prima facie evidence of the facts contained in that evidence.
Failure to file and serve an appeal within 20 days shall constitute a waiver of
any appeal rights and the decision shall be deemed confirmed.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.11.   Failure to pay fines and fees.
   (a)   In accordance with this Chapter, any time after an administrative
citation has been issued, the County may serve upon each interested party an
invoice identifying all abatement costs related to a nuisance abatement action.
The Invoice shall notify the liable parties that they must remit payment within
45 calendar days, specify how payment must be remitted, notify the interested
parties of their right to request an administrative hearing to contest the
invoice within 15 days, and briefly describe the process by which to request an
administrative hearing. The invoice shall further notify the interested parties
that any unpaid amounts may become a lien and special assessment against the
nuisance property.
   (b)   Any interested party to which an Invoice is issued shall have 15 days
from the date of service of the Invoice to request an administrative hearing to
contest the invoice. The request for the administrative hearing shall be made
in accordance with the instructions provided in the invoice. Upon the proper
filing of an administrative hearing request by an interested party, the invoice
shall be stayed pending the resolution of the administrative hearing. The
administrative hearing shall pertain only to the Invoice, and may not serve as
a collateral challenge to an administrative citation.
   (c)   Any liable party to whom an invoice has been issued shall have 45
calendar days from the date of that invoice to remit full payment of the
abatement costs to the County in accordance with the payment instructions in
the invoice, unless the invoice is stayed pursuant to a pending administrative
hearing request.
   (d)   The County is entitled, and is hereby authorized, to recover all past
due administrative fines, administrative fees, late fees, abatement costs,
collection costs, and hearing costs by use of all available legal means,
including, but not limited to, personal collection from the liable parties and
lien or special assessment against the nuisance property if any of the liable
parties have or control title to the nuisance property. Each liable party shall
be jointly and severally liable to the County for all the County's abatement
costs. The procedures provided in this Section are in addition to all other
remedies and cost recovery options available to the County by law or in equity.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.12.   Collection of Abatement Costs by lien or special assessment.
   (a)   All abatement costs shall be subject to collection in accordance with
this Section if those amounts have not been satisfied in full within 45
calendar days after those amounts have become final.
   (b)   Any unpaid abatement costs may be secured by a nuisance abatement lien
recorded on title to the nuisance property and by special assessment placed on
the tax bill of the nuisance property.
   (c)   Nuisance Abatement Lien.
      (1)   Prior to recording a nuisance abatement lien, the County shall
serve notice of the lien on all persons or entities with a recorded interest in
the nuisance property. In addition, the owners of record shall be served with
notice of the lien at the address provided in the last equalized assessment
roll or the supplemental roll for the nuisance property, whichever is more
current, in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with
Code of Civil Procedure, part 2, title 5, chapter 4, article 3 (commencing with
Section 415.10). If the owner of record cannot be found after diligent search,
notice of the lien may be served by posting a copy of the notice in a
conspicuous place upon the nuisance property for a period of 10 days.
      (2)   The notice of lien shall, at a minimum, identify the record owners
or possessors of the nuisance property, set forth the last known address of the
record owners or possessors, set forth the date upon which the lien was created
against the nuisance property, include a description of the real property
subject to the lien, and identify the amount of the lien.
      (3)   The lien created shall have the same priority as a judgment lien on
real property.
      (4)   In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied,
then notice of the discharge, release, or satisfaction shall be recorded on the
nuisance property.
      (5)   If the lien is not satisfied within 90 calendar days, the County
may foreclose on the lien.
   (d)   Special Assessment. The County may levy a special assessment against
the nuisance property for any unpaid abatement costs. The special assessment
may also be recorded against the nuisance property. The recording shall specify
that the nuisance property may be sold after three years by the tax collector
for the unpaid delinquent assessments.
      (1)   Prior to recording, the County shall serve notice by certified mail
of the special assessment on all persons or entities with a recorded interest
in the nuisance property.
      (2)   Notice of the special assessment shall be provided to the tax
collector for the County to add to the next regular tax bill levied against the
nuisance property, and it shall be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as ordinary taxes are collected, subject to the same penalties and
procedures under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for
other taxes.
      (3)   After recordation, the special assessment may be foreclosed on as a
lien in the manner and means provided by law.
   (e)   Attorneys' Fees. Unless the County elects at the initiation of an
individual action or proceeding not to seek attorneys' fees, the prevailing
party in any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate
a nuisance shall be entitled to attorneys' fees, not to exceed the amount of
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the County in the action or proceeding.
In the event the County prevails, the attorneys' fees awarded to the County
shall be included as abatement costs.
   (f)   Order of Payment. All payments received shall be first applied to
interest, then administrative fines, then abatement costs. Once the County
receives full payment for outstanding principal, penalties, and costs, the
County will record a notice of satisfaction. A fee shall be paid by the owners
or occupants for processing the notice of satisfaction. This notice of
satisfaction will cancel the County's lien under this Section.
   (g)   Until paid in full, the lien may be foreclosed and the real property
sold by the filing of a complaint for foreclosure in a court of competent
jurisdiction, and the issuance of a judgment to foreclose. There shall be no
right to trial by jury. The prevailing party in such an action shall be
entitled to its reasonable attorneys' fees and costs, not to exceed the amount
of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the County in the action or
proceeding.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.13.   Collection by court judgment.
   In addition to any other available remedies, the County may bring a civil
action and obtain a judgment in the Superior Court for the purpose of
collecting any unpaid abatement costs imposed pursuant to this Chapter. That
action may be filed as a small claims, limited civil, or unlimited civil case,
depending on the amount at issue.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.14.   Recovery of collection costs.
   (a)   Any liable party who fails to pay any obligation imposed pursuant to
this Chapter shall be liable in any action brought by the County for all costs
incurred in securing payment of that delinquent amount, including but not
limited to, all administrative costs, attorneys' fees, and other abatement
costs.
   (b)   Collection costs shall be in addition to any penalties, interest, and
late charges imposed upon the delinquent obligation.
   (c)   Collection costs imposed under this provision shall be added to and
become a part of the underlying obligation.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.15.   Refusal to issue.
   (a)   No department, commission, or employee of the County vested with the
duty or authority to issue or approve permits, licenses, or other entitlements
shall do so when there is an outstanding violation, or any outstanding balance
for abatement costs, on any nuisance property, except permits, licenses, or
entitlements necessary to abate those violations.
   (b)   The refusal to issue shall be rescinded once all violations have been
cured and all outstanding balances have been paid.
   (c)   The Director may waive the provisions of this Section if the Director
determines it is necessary to allow desirable remedial work, protective work,
preventative work, or in other exceptional circumstances.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.16.   Confidentiality in connection with citizen complaints.
   The County shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that the identity and
personal information of any person making a complaint to the County concerning
a violation shall remain confidential. It is declared and found by the Board
that the public interest served by encouraging complaints to Code Enforcement
without fear of retribution clearly outweighs the public interest served by
disclosure of the complainant's identity and information.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.17.   Abatement Orders.
   (a)   Whenever the Enforcement Official or Hearing Officer determines that a
nuisance property is in violation of any Section of this Code, an abatement
order may be issued to the responsible parties to abate the violation. An
abatement order may be combined with any other remedial measure or enforcement
action. If the abatement order pertains to events occurring on, or the status
or condition of, the nuisance property, the abatement order shall also be
served on all interested parties. The abatement order shall include the
following:
   (1)   Identification and a brief description of the violations to be abated.
   (2)   Deadlines by which the violations must be corrected.
   (3)   A description of the possible consequences should the responsible
parties fail to cure the violations by the deadlines.
   (4)   Notice that any interested party may request an administrative hearing
in accordance with this Chapter to contest the abatement order within 15 days,
and the procedures to do so. Notice that failure to request a hearing will be
deemed an admission by that party of the violations identified, a waiver of
that party's right to contest the abatement order, and a failure by that party
to exhaust that party's administrative remedies.
   (5)   Notice that failure to abate the violations, or to request a hearing,
within the time provided for in the abatement order may result in abatement by
the County in accordance with this Chapter, which may include the removal and
destruction of property giving rise to the violations.
   (6)   Notice that the responsible parties must notify Code Enforcement in
writing once compliance has occurred, and notice that the violations will be
deemed on-going until written notice is received.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Sec. 1-5.18.   Abatement by the County.
   (a)   Due Process. Generally, an Enforcement Official may seek a court-
issued abatement warrant in order to abate a violation after the Enforcement
Official has provided all interested parties an abatement order that affords an
opportunity to request an administrative hearing. However, in urgent
situations, as determined by the Enforcement Official as necessary to protect
people or property, the Enforcement Official may seek an abatement warrant to
abate a Violation without first providing the interested parties with an
opportunity for an administrative hearing or possibly without even providing
notice of the abatement. In such urgent situations, the Enforcement Official
shall inform the issuing court that the interested parties shall be provided
notice and an opportunity to be heard regarding the abatement by the County
post-abatement. In certain emergency situations, when securing an abatement
warrant is not possible, as determined by the Enforcement Official, including
those situations when danger is imminent, an Enforcement Official may proceed
with summary abatement and provide the interested parties with notice and an
opportunity to be heard regarding the summary abatement post-abatement.
   (b)   Abatement Warrant. In compliance with the requirements of this
Section, an Enforcement Official may seek and obtain an abatement warrant from
the court to abate any nuisance condition. Upon the issuance of the abatement
warrant by the court, the conditions may be abated by County personnel or by a
private contractor hired by the County for that purpose, subject to the
requirements of this Chapter and the warrant. The enforcement agency shall give
all interested parties reasonable notice of the County's abatement before
conducting the abatement.
      (1)   When the abatement is completed, a warrant return describing the
work performed and an itemized accounting of the total abatement and
administrative costs shall be prepared by the Enforcement Official. The report
shall contain the names and addresses of the interested parties, the name and
address of the property owner, and a description of the nuisance property
sufficient to enable identification of the property.
   (c)   Summary Abatement. Whenever an Enforcement Official or a Hearing
Officer determines that an imminent threat to public health or safety exists
that requires immediate correction or elimination, the Enforcement Official may
summarily abate the hazard or nuisance. The Enforcement Official shall pursue
only the minimum level of correction or abatement as necessary to eliminate the
imminent hazard. The Enforcement Official may exercise the following powers to
summarily abate the hazard or nuisance:
      (1)   Order any tenants to vacate a property and prohibit occupancy until
repairs are completed.
      (2)   Condemn, red-tag, quarantine, or post the premises as unsafe,
substandard, or dangerous.
      (3)   Board, fence, or secure the building or site per County
requirements.
      (4)   Raze and grade that portion of the building or site as necessary to
prevent risk of collapse.
      (5)   Make any emergency repairs as necessary to eliminate any immediate
threat to public health or safety.
      (6)   Remove the hazard or nuisance that constitutes an immediate threat
to public health or safety.
      (7)   Take any other reasonable action deemed by the Enforcement Official
as appropriate under the circumstances.
   (d)   Property Report. If any personal property is altered or removed as
part of an abatement action by the County, written notice shall be provided to
all interested parties and conspicuously posted in the area where the personal
property was located. The written notice shall contain the following:
      (1)   The date and approximate time the personal property was altered or
removed.
      (2)   A general description of the personal property altered or removed.
      (3)   A statement identifying the grounds for alteration or removal of
the personal property.
      (4)   The address where the personal property will be located, including
a telephone number through which a person may receive information.
      (5)   A statement indicating whether an interested party may retrieve the
property by calling the number provided or whether the interested party must
request a post-removal hearing at which it will be determined whether the
property will be returned, unless immediate destruction is necessary to protect
health and safety.
      (6)   A statement that, if an interested party does not retrieve or
request a post- removal hearing within 45 days of the date of the notice, the
property will be deemed abandoned and forfeited, and the property may be
discarded or destroyed.
   (e)   Cost Recovery. All abatement costs incurred by the County during the
abatement process, including any contractor costs, shall be assessed,
collected, and recovered against the nuisance property, and from the
responsible parties, as provided in this Chapter.
   (f)   Remedies Cumulative. The Enforcement Official may also pursue any
other administrative, criminal, or civil remedies available regarding the
violations.
(§ 2, Ord. 1526, eff. October 29, 2020)
Title 2
ADMINISTRATION
Chapters:
1.   Board of Supervisors
2.   Boards, Commissions, and Committees
3.   Judicial District
4.   Juvenile Homes and Camps
5.   Offices and Departments
6.   Personnel Merit System (Repealed)
7.   Property
8.   Use of Vehicles on County Business
9.   Informal Bidding Procedures for Public Projects
10.   Community Choice Aggregation
Chapter 1
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Sections:
Article 1. Rules Governing Meetings
   
2-1.101   Definitions.
   
2-1.102   Purpose.
   
2-1.103   Time and place.
   
2-1.104   Adjourned Meetings: Notices.
   
2-1.105   Special meetings: Notices.
   
2-1.106   Election of Chairman and Vice-Chairman.
   
2-1.107   Presiding officer.
   
2-1.108   Duties of presiding officer.
   
2-1.109   Duties of Clerk.
   
2-1.110   Duties of County Counsel.
   
2-1.111   Open meetings.
   
2-1.112   Executive sessions.
   
2-1.113   Actions and decisions.
   
2-1.114   Suspension of rules.
   
2-1.115   Amendment and repeal.
   
2-1.116   Reconsideration.
   
2-1.117   Procedural irregularities.
   
2-1.118   Motions requiring a two-thirds vote.
Article 2. Rules Governing Conduct of Business
   
2-1.201   Purpose.
   
2-1.202   Requests for appearance: Filing.
   
2-1.203   Requests for appearance: Form.
   
2-1.204   County Counsel approval of contracts, ordinances, and resolutions.
   
2-1.205   Agenda.
   
2-1.206   Order of business.
   
2-1.207   Addressing the Board.
   
2-1.208   Referrals.
   
2-1.209   Committees.
Article 3. Rules Governing Conduct of Judicial or Quasi-Judicial Proceedings
   
2-1.301   Purpose.
   
2-1.302   Scope.
   
2-1.303   Hearings: Applications.
   
2-1.304   Hearings: Notices.
   
2-1.305   Hearings: Default.
   
2-1.306   Hearings.
   
2-1.307   Hearings: Evidence.
   
2-1.308   Hearings: Witnesses.
   
2-1.309   Hearings: Objections.
   
2-1.310   Hearings: Decisions.
   
2-1.311   Hearings: Findings.
Article 4. Supervisorial Districts
   
2-1.401   Supervisorial District Boundaries.
Article 5. Rules of the County Board of Equalization (Repealed).
Article 6. Conflict of Interest Code
   
2-1.601   Adoption of the Conflict of Interest Code.
   
2-1.602   Application of Code.
   
2-1.603   Disclosures.
   
2-1.604   Circumstances requiring disqualification.
   
2-1.605   Definitions.
Article 1.
Rules Governing Meetings
Sec. 2-1.101.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of Articles 1, 2, and 3 of this chapter, unless otherwise
apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in Articles 1, 2, and
3 of this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Party” shall mean any person disclosed by an application or the
records of the County or an officer thereof to have an interest or possible
interest in the subject matter of a hearing.
   (b)   “Person” shall mean any person, firm, association, organization,
partnership, business trust, corporation, company, or the County, or an officer
or department head thereof. (Rule 42, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.102.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide rules for the conduct of meetings
of the Board. (Rule 1, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.103.   Time and place.
   Regular meetings of the Board shall be held at the times and dates specified
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. (Rule 2, Ord. 555, as amended by §
1, Ord. 695, eff. January 23, 1974, § 1, Ord. 743, eff. March 1, 1976, § 1,
Ord. 842, eff. April 19, 1979, § 1, Ord. 922, eff. October 22, 1981, § 1, Ord.
984, eff. September 13, 1984, § 1, Ord. 1086, eff. February 2, 1989, § 1, Ord.
1100, eff. January 1, 1990, and § 1, Ord. 1251, eff. August 31, 2000)
Sec. 2-1.104.   Adjourned meetings: Notices.
   The Board may adjourn any regular, adjourned regular, specials, or adjourned
special meeting to a time and place specified in the order of adjournment. Less
than a quorum may so adjourn from time to time. If all members are absent from
any regular or adjourned regular meeting, the Clerk of the Board may declare
the meeting adjourned to a stated time and place, and he shall cause a written
notice of the adjournment to be given in the same manner as provided in
Section-2-1.105 of this article for special meetings, unless such notice is
waived as provided for special meetings. A copy of the order or notice of
adjournment shall be conspicuously posted on or near the door of the Board
Chambers or place where the regular, adjourned regular, special, or adjourned
special meeting was held within twenty-four (24) hours after the time of
adjournment. When a regular or adjourned regular meeting is adjourned as
provided in this section, the resulting adjourned regular meeting shall be a
regular meeting for all purposes. When an order of adjournment of any meeting
fails to state the hour at which the adjourned meeting is to be held, it shall
be held at the hour specified for regular meetings. (Rule 3, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.105.   Special meetings: Notices.
   An emergency or special meeting may be called at any time by the Chairman of
the Board, or by a majority of the members of the Board, by delivering
personally or by mail a notice in writing to each member and to each local
newspaper of general circulation and radio or television station requesting
notice. Such notice shall be delivered personally or by mail at least twenty-
four (24) hours before the time of such meeting as specified in the notice. The
call and notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and the
business to be transacted. No other business shall be considered at such
meetings by the Board. Such written notice may be dispensed with as to any
member who at or prior to the time the meeting convenes files with the Clerk of
the Board a written waiver of notice. Such waiver may be given by telegram.
Such written notice may also be dispensed with as to any member who is actually
present at the meeting at the time it convenes. (Rule 4, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.106.   Election of Chairman and Vice-Chairman.
   At the first meeting in each calendar year, the Board shall elect a Chairman
and a Vice-Chairman. (Rule 5, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.107.   Presiding officer.
   The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Board. The Vice-Chairman
shall preside at all meetings of the Board in the absence of the Chairman.
(Rule 6, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.108.   Duties of presiding officer.
   The presiding officer of the Board shall preserve order and decorum and
shall decide questions of order, subject to appeal to the Board. Any action on
an appeal that would override the requirement for a two-thirds vote must be
adopted by a two-thirds vote. The presiding officer may place a motion before
the Board from the chair. (Rule 7, Ord. 555, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1227, eff.
November 5, 1998)
Sec. 2-1.109.   Duties of Clerk.
   The Clerk of the Board shall prepare and mail to each member of the Board on
or before the Thursday following the regular meeting a copy of the minutes of
the previous meeting. Upon a majority vote of the Board, the approval of
minutes of previous meetings, may be done without the reading of such minutes.
(Rule 8, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.110.   Duties of County Counsel.
   All questions of law shall be referred to the County Counsel for his
opinion. (Rule 9, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.111.   Open Meetings.
   All meetings of the Board shall be open and public and all persons shall be
permitted to attend any meeting of the Board except as provided in Section 2-
1.112 of this article or by State law. (Rule 10, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.112.   Executive sessions.
   The Board may hold executive sessions during a regular or special meeting to
consider the appointment, employment, or dismissal of a public officer or
employee or to hear complaints or charges brought against such officer or
employee unless such officer or employee requests a public hearing. (Rule 11,
Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.113.   Actions and decisions.
   No action or decision of the Board shall be valid or binding unless a
majority of all the members concur therein; provided, however, where required
by law or this article, no action or decision shall be valid or binding in the
absence of a two-thirds or unanimous vote. Roll call votes, when taken, shall
commence with the closest member to the left of the presiding officer and shall
continue clockwise, the presiding officer voting last. (Rule 12, Ord. 555, as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1227, eff. November 5, 1998)
Sec. 2-1.114.   Suspension of rules.
   Any of the rules set forth in this article not required by law may be
suspended by two-thirds of the members of the Board. (Rule 13, Ord. 555, as
amended by § 3, Ord. 1227, eff. November 5, 1998)
Sec. 2-1.115.   Amendment and repeal.
   Any rule may be altered, amended, or repealed at any time by a majority vote
of the Board; provided, however, that the portion of any rule requiring a two-
thirds vote may only be amended, altered, or repealed by a two-thirds vote of
the Board; and further provided, any amendment or repeal shall not affect any
pending matter. (Rule 14, Ord. 555, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1227, eff. November
5, 1998)
Sec. 2-1.116.   Reconsideration.
   At the meeting at which an otherwise final vote is taken on any question,
including a quasi-judicial determination, any member voting with the majority
may move reconsideration of the matter. Such a motion made and seconded shall
suspend consideration of the matter until the next succeeding meeting of the
Board, at which time it shall have precedence over every other motion, except
for a motion to adjourn. The matter shall not be deemed final until disposition
of the motion for consideration. (Rule 15, Ord. 555, as amended by § 5, Ord.
1227, eff. November 5, 1998)
Sec. 2-1.117.   Procedural irregularities.
   No deviation from or failure to follow the procedure set forth in this
article and Articles 2 and 3 of this chapter shall invalidate any action or
decision of the Board unless such deviation or failure shall have effectively
prejudiced the rights of any person of the County. (Rule 16, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.118.   Motions requiring a two-thirds vote.
   Any motion to extend or limit debate or to move the previous question or cut
off debate shall require a two-thirds vote of the Board. (§ 6, Ord. 1227, eff.
November 5, 1998)
Article 2.
Rules Governing Conduct of Business
Sec. 2-1.201.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide rules for the conduct of all
business, except judicial or quasi-judicial hearings of the Board, to the end
that matters can be expeditiously processed. (Rule 21, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.202.   Requests for appearance: Filing.
   A request for appearance concerning any matter to be presented and acted
upon by the Board at a regular meeting shall be filed in the office of the
Clerk of the Board not later than 5:00 p.m. on the Tuesday preceding the
regular meeting. Unless a request for appearance is so filed, a matter will not
be considered by the Board until the next succeeding regular meeting of the
Board. Any matter may be considered upon the request of any member of the Board
present at the meeting. (Rule 22, Ord. 555, as amended by § 1, Ord. 605, § 2,
Ord. 695, eff. January 23, 1974, and § 1, Ord. 756, eff. May 6, 1976)
Sec. 2-1.203.   Requests for appearance: Form.
   Requests for appearance shall be on the form provided and shall specifically
set forth both the matter to be discussed and the action requested of the
Board, together with sufficient copies of all documentary, informational, or
supporting materials. (Rule 23, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.204.   County Counsel approval of contracts, ordinances, and
resolutions.
   All contracts and proposed ordinances and resolutions not prepared by the
office of the County Counsel shall be referred to his office for approval as to
form. (Rule 24, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.205.   Agenda.
   An agenda shall be prepared by the Clerk of the Board before each meeting of
the Board, and an abstract of all matters requiring action shall be set forth
therein. (Rule 25, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.206.   Order of business.
   The regular order of business of the Board shall be as follows:
   (a)   Roll call;
   (b)   At the discretion of the presiding officer, an invocation;
   (c)   At the discretion of the presiding officer, a flag salute;
   (d)   Approval of the minutes of the previous meeting;
   (e)   Agenda of the Board; and
   (f)   Adjournment. (Rule 26, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.207.   Addressing the Board.
   Any person desiring to address the Board shall, when recognized by the
Chairman, step to the rostrum and give his name and address to the Clerk of the
Board. The Chairman, in the interests of facilitating the business of the Board
and the avoidance of repetition, may limit the amount of time which a person
may use in addressing the Board. (Rule 27, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.208.   Referrals.
   Any matter coming before the Board may, if deemed necessary, be referred to
the officer or department concerned therewith. (Rule 28, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.209.   Committees.
   The Board shall appoint such standing and special committees as it may deem
necessary. (Rule 29, Ord. 555)
Article 3.
Rules Governing Conduct of Judicial or Quasi-Judicial Proceedings
Sec. 2-1.301.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide rules for the conduct of judicial
and quasi-judicial hearings before the Board to the end that matters can be
expeditiously processed and, when a hearing is required by law, the party will
have notice of the hearing and an opportunity to appear before the Board and
present his case. (Rule 41, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.302.   Scope.
   Unless otherwise provided by law or by rules and regulations of limited
application adopted by the Board, the provisions of this article shall govern
all judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings before the Board. (Rule 43, Ord.
555)
Sec. 2-1.303.   Hearings: Applications.
   Proceedings shall be initiated by application. The application shall be
filed with the Clerk of the Board. The application shall set forth specific
facts of the matter in sufficient detail to notify the parties of the nature of
the proceeding to place the parties upon notice as to how any proposed action
may affect their interest so that they may formulate their defense or
opposition without being subjected to surprise. The application shall contain
the name and address of the applicant and, to the extent known by the
applicant, of all parties. (Rule 44, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.304.   Hearings: Notices.
   At its next regular meeting after the filing of the application, the Board
shall set a date for a hearing thereon and shall give notice thereof to the
applicant and to all parties disclosed in the application. A notice shall be
given by mail, addressed to the party at the address set forth in the
application or other address known to the Clerk of the Board, and shall be
deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, at least five (5) days
prior to the date of the hearing. (Rule 45, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.305.   Hearings: Default.
   When a notice of hearing has been given in accordance with the provisions of
this article, a hearing may proceed in the absence of any party, and the Board
may decide the matter. (Rule 46, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.306.   Hearings.
   (a)   Basic standard. All hearings shall be full and fair in a substantial
sense so that all necessary parties shall be afforded ample opportunity to make
a showing fairly adequate to establish the propriety or impropriety, from a
standpoint of justice and law, of the action proposed to be taken, giving the
parties an opportunity to present in a deliberate, regular, and orderly manner
issues of law and fact.
   (b)   Disqualification.
   (1)   Unless a quorum is broken thereby, any member of the Board who has a
personal interest or bias in the matter shall disqualify himself.
   (2)   Mess a quorum is broken thereby, upon a showing of personal interest
or bias, the Board shall order the disqualification of a member.
   (3)   Only members of the Board who have heard the whole matter may
participate in the decision.
   (c)   Records.
   (1)   The Clerk of the Board shall cause all testimony to be summarized and
shall receive and mark all exhibits.
   (2)   Any party may provide and pay the compensation for a shorthand
reporter. A transcript of the testimony taken by a certified shorthand reporter
so provided shall constitute the official record of testimony.
   (d)   Continuances. The Board may order the hearing continued from time to
time without notice. (Rule 47, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.307.   Hearings: Evidence.
   (a)   Basic standard. All relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the
sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the
conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or
statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over
objection in civil action.
   (b)   Hearsay evidence. In a contested hearing, incompetent hearsay evidence
may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any other evidence
but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding.
   (c)   Privilege. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same
extent as they are now or hereafter may be recognized in civil actions.
   (d)   Burden of proof. The burden of proof shall rest upon the party
asserting the affirmative of an issue.
   (e)   Interferences and presumptions. Rules regarding interferences and
presumptions in civil actions shall obtain.
   (f)   Rebuttal. Each party shall have the right to rebut evidence against
him. (Rule 48, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.308.   Hearings: Witnesses.
   (a)   Oath. The testimony of all witnesses shall be under oath.
   (b)   Exclusion. The Board may exclude from any such public or private
meeting, during the examination of a witness, any or all other witnesses in the
matter being investigated by the Board. (Rule 49, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.309.   Hearings: Objections.
   Unless timely objection is made to the Board, errors shall be waived. (Rule
50, Ord. 555)
Sec. 2-1.310.   Hearings: Decisions.
   The decision of the Board shall be rendered following the conclusion of the
hearing and shall set forth the action taken by the Board. (Rule 51, Ord. 555,
as amended by § 3, Ord. 695, eff. January 23, 1974)
Sec. 2-1.311.   Hearings: Findings.
   If any party to the proceedings desires written findings of fact, his
request shall be in writing and be submitted to the Clerk before the
commencement of the hearing. The requesting party may abandon the request and
waive findings at the conclusion of the hearing. If the requesting party
abandons his request at this time, any other party may orally or in writing
renew the request. The Board may impose a reasonable fee, not to exceed Ten and
no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars, for providing written findings. (§ 4, Ord. 695,
eff. January 23, 1974)
Article 4.
Supervisorial Districts*
* Sections
2-1.401 through
2-1.407, codified from Ordinance No. 532, as amended by Ordinance Nos. 658,
effective November 25, 1971, and 663, effective January 26, 1972, repealed by
Ordinance No. 916, effective July 30,1981. Sections
2-1.401 through
2-1.407, codified from Ordinance No. 916, as amended by Ordinance No. 1024,
effective December 26, 1985, repealed by Ordinance No. 1127, effective October
31, 1991.
Sec. 2-1.401.   Supervisorial District Boundaries.
   Supervisorial Districts may be established by resolution. The resolution
establishing supervisorial districts shall be published and available on the
County of Yolo website for as long as said districts are in effect. (§ 2, Ord.
1544, eff. January 6, 2022)
Article 5.
Rules of the County Board of Equalization*
*   Sections 2-1.501 through 2-1.505, as added by Ordinance No. 759, effective
July 22, 1976, repealed by Ordinance No. 987, effective October 4, 1984.
Article 6.
Conflict of Interest Code
Sec. 2-1.601.   Adoption of the Conflict of Interest Code.
   In compliance with the provisions of Section 87300 of the Government Code of
the State, the Board hereby adopts this Conflict of Interest Code. (§ 1, Ord.
764, eff. September 30, 1976)
Sec. 2-1.602.   Application of Code.
   This Conflict of Interest Code shall be applicable to members of the Board,
whether acting as Board members or as members of any County board or
commission. (§ 1, Ord. 764, eff. September 30, 1976)
Sec. 2-1.603.   Disclosures.
   Board members are already required to disclose investments and interests in
real property and income under Sections 87200 et seq. of the Government Code of
the State; therefore, no other or additional disclosure requirements are
imposed by this Conflict of Interest Code. (§ 1, Ord. 764, eff. September 30,
1976)
Sec. 2-1.604.   Circumstances requiring disqualification.
   Any member of the Board, whether acting as a Board member or as a governing
board member or commissioner of any County agency, shall disqualify himself or
herself from making or participating in the making of any decision which will
foreseeably have a material financial effect, distinguishable from its effect
on the public generally, on any economic interest, as defined in Section 87103
of the Government Code of the State. No member shall be prevented from making
or participating in the making of any decision to the extent his or her
participation is legally required for the decision to be made. (§ 1, Ord. 764,
eff. September 30, 1976)
Sec. 2-1.605.   Definitions.
   Except as otherwise indicated, the definitions contained in the Political
Reform Act of 1974 (Section 81000 of the Government Code of the State) and the
Regulations adopted pursuant thereto are incorporated into this Conflict of
Interest Code. (§ 1, Ord. 764, eff. September 30, 1976)
Chapter 2
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
Sections:
Article 1. Yolo County Health Council
   
2-2.101   Creation.
   
2-2.102   Membership.
   
2-2.103   Membership: Terms.
   
2-2.104   Membership: Organization.
   
2-2.105   Quorum.
   
2-2.106   Minutes and records.
   
2-2.107   Meeting: Time and place.
   
2-2.108   Role and purpose.
   
2-2.109   Recommendations.
   
2-2.110   Subcommittees.
   
2-2.111   Absence.
   
2-2.112   Conflict of Interest.
   
2-2.113   Unused.
   
2-2.114   Child Health and Disability Prevention Subcommittee. (Repealed)
   
2-2.115   Developmental Disability Subcommittee. (Repealed).
Article 2. Appeals Board
(Repealed)
Article 3. Aviation Advisory Committee
   
2-2.301   Created.
   
2-2.302   Membership.
   
2-2.303   Membership: Terms.
   
2-2.304   Membership: Termination.
   
2-2.305   Officers.
   
2-2.306   Meetings.
   
2-2.307   Meetings: Minutes.
   
2-2.308   Meetings: Quorum.
   
2-2.309   Duties and responsibilities.
Article 4. Delinquency Prevention Commission
   
2-2.401   Created.
   
2-2.402   Membership, Officers, Meetings and Related Matters.
   
2-2.403   Coordination with the Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council.
Article 5. Office of Emergency Services
(Repealed)
Article 6. Fish and Game Advisory Committee
(Repealed)
Article 7. Health Professional Utilization Review Committee
(Repealed)
Article 8. Highway Transportation Advisory Committee
(Repealed)
Article 9. Historical Advisory Committee
(Repealed)
Article 10. Housing and Community Development Advisory Committee
(Repealed)
Article 11. Hospital Advisory Board
(Repealed)
Article 12. Library Advisory Board
   
2-2.1201   Created.
   
2-2.1202    Membership.
   
2-2.1203   Membership: Terms: Vacancies.
   
2-2.1204   Membership: Organization.
   
2-2.1205   Meetings: Quorum.
   
2-2.1206   Meetings: Minutes.
   
2-2.1207   Duties.
Article 13. Mental Health Board
   
2-2.1301   Created.
   
2-2.1302   Duties and responsibilities.
   
2-2.1303   Membership.
   
2-2.1304   Membership: Terms.
   
2-2.1305   Meetings: Quorum.
   
2-2.1306   Membership: Termination.
   
2-2.1307   Officers.
   
2-2.1308   Reimbursement for expenses.
   
2-2.1309   Subcommittees.
Article 14. Park, Recreation, and Wildlife Advisory Committee
   
2-2.1401   Created.
   
2-2.1402   Membership.
   
2-2.1403   Membership: Terms.
   
2-2.1404   Membership: Organization.
   
2-2.1405   Membership: Expense. Reimbursement.
   
2-2.1406   Meetings: Quorum.
   
2-2.1407   Membership: Minutes.
   
2-2.1408   Duties.
Article 15. Personnel Board
   
2-2.1501   Established.
Article 16. Planning Commission
   
2-2.1601   Authority.
   
2-2.1602   Membership.
   
2-2.1603   Jurisdiction.
   
2-2.1604   Rules for the conduct of business.
   
2-2.1605   Quorum: Commission action: Tie votes.
   
2-2.1606   Board of Permit Appeals.
   
2-2.1606   Community Redevelopment Law.
   
2-2.1608   Historic Preservation Commission.
   
2-2.1609.   Business License Appeals Board.
Article 17. Employer/Employee Occupational Health and Safety Committee
(Repealed)
Article 18. Waste Advisory Committee
   
2-2.1801   Created.
   
2-2.1802   Definitions.
   
2-2.1803   Membership; Residency; Limitations.
   
2-2.1804   Membership terms.
   
2-2.1805   Membership termination; Vacancy.
   
2-2.1806   Membership organization.
   
2-2.1807   Meetings; Quorum; Minutes.
   
2-2.1808   Duties.
   
2-2.1809   Compliance with laws.
Article 19. Water Resources Board
   
2-2.1901   Created.
   
2-2.1902   Membership.
   
2-2.1903   Membership: Terms.
   
2-2.1904   Membership: Termination.
   
2-2.1905   Membership: Organization.
   
2-2.1906   Meetings.
   
2-2.1907   Duties.
Article 20. West Plainfield Advisory Committee on Airport Development
   
2-2.2001   Created.
   
2-2.2002   Membership.
   
2-2.2003   Membership: Terms.
   
2-2.2004   Membership: Termination.
   
2-2.2005   Officers.
   
2-2.2006   Meetings.
   
2-2.2007   Meetings: Minutes.
   
2-2.2008   Meetings: Quorum.
   
2-2.2009   Duties and responsibilities.
Article 21. Yolo County Affirmative Action Advisory Committee
   
2-2.2101   Created.
   
2-2.2102   Duties.
   
2-2.2103   Membership.
   
2-2.2104   Membership: Term.
   
2-2.2105   Membership: Organization.
   
2-2.2106   Officers.
   
2-2.2107   Membership: Quorum.
   
2-2.2108   Meetings: Minutes.
   
2-2.2109   Meetings: Time and place.
   
2-2.2110   Meetings: Remove.
Article 22. Yolo County Equal Employment Opportunity Appeals Process
   
2-2.2201   Created.
   
2-2.2202   Duties.
   
2-2.2203   Hearing Officer.
   
2-2.2204   Conduct of Hearing.
   
2-2.2205   Hearing Time and Place.
   
2-2.2206   Appeals: Applications.
   
2-2.2207   Appeals: Applications: Notices of Hearings.
   
2-2.2208   Appeals: Applications: Hearings.
   
2-2.2209   Subpoenas
   
2-2.2210   Appeals: Applications: Final determinations.
Article 23. Emergency Medical Care Committee
(Repealed)
Article 24. Salud Clinic Advisory Board
(Repealed)
Article 25. Transportation Advisory Committee
   
2-2.2501   Created.
   
2-2.2502   Membership.
   
2-2.2503   Term of board appointees.
   
2-2.2504   Termination or resignation.
   
2-2.2505   Officers.
   
2-2.2506   Meetings.
   
2-2.2507   Meetings: Quorum.
   
2-2.2508   Duties and responsibilities.
Article 26. Underground Utility Advisory Committee
(Repealed)
Article 27. Business License Appeals Board
(Repealed)
Article 28. Technical Review Committee on Building Construction
(Repealed)
Article 29. Yolo County Drug, Alcohol, Tobacco Advisory Council
(Repealed)
Article 30. Yolo County Assessment Appeals Board
   
2-2.3001   Created.
   
2-2.3002   Membership.
   
2-2.3003   Compensation.
   
2-2.3004   Filing fee for application for changed assessment.
Article 31. Yolo County Disaster Council
   
2-2.3101   Purposes.
   
2-2.3102   Definition.
   
2-2.3103   Disaster council membership.
   
2-2.3104   Disaster council powers and duties.
   
2-2.3105   Director and assistant director of Emergency Services.
   
2-2.3106   Powers and duties of the director and deputy director of emergency
services.
   
2-2.3107   Emergency organization.
   
2-2.3108   Emergency plan.
   
2-2.3109   Expenditures.
   
2-2.3110   Punishment of violations.
Article. 32. Solid Waste Independent Hearing Panel
(Repealed)
Article 33. Yolo County Children and Families Commission
   
2-2.3301   Created.
   
2-2.3302   Membership.
   
2-2.3303.   Membership: Terms.
   
2-2.3304.   Membership: Termination.
   
2-2.3305   Officers.
   
2-2.3306   Meetings.
   
2-2.3307   Meetings: Minutes.
   
2-2.3308   Duties and responsibilities.
   
2-2.3309   Procedural Requirements.
   
2-2.3310   Compensation.
Article 34. Partnership HealthPlan of California Commission
   
2-2.3401   Creation.
   
2-2.3402   Authorization to Join Commission.
   
2-2.3403   Membership of Commission.
   
2-2.3404   Term of Office.
   
2-2.3405   Powers and Duties of Commission.
   
2-2.3406   Obligations of Commission.
   
2-2.3407   Committees.
   
2-2.3408   Termination of Membership.
Article 35. Yolo County In-Home Supportive Services Public Authority
   
2-2.3501   Separate Authority.
   
2-2.3502   Definitions.
   
2-2.3503   Purpose.
   
2-2.3504   Governing Board: Board of Supervisors.
   
2-2.3505   Public Authority Board Powers.
   
2-2.3506   Public Authority Duties and Responsibilities.
   
2-2.3507   Administration.
   
2-2.3508   Public Authority Board: Advisory Committee.
   
2-2.3509   Employment Functions.
   
2-2.3510   State’s Responsibilities.
   
2-2.3511   County Responsibilities.
   
2-2.3512   Recipient Selection.
   
2-2.3513   Public Authority: Labor Relations.
   
2-2.3514   County Costs.
   
2-2.3515   Public Authority: County Agreement.
   
2-2.3516   Fiscal Provisions.
   
2-2.3517   Limitations of Public Authority: Authority Liability.
   
2-2.3518   Limitations of County Liability.
   
2-2.3519   Liability Insurance.
   
2-2.3520   Indemnification.
   
2-2.3521   Severability.
   
2-2.3522   Termination: Review.
Article 36. Procedures for Advisory Boards, Commissions and Committees
Established by the Board of Supervisors
   
2-2.3601.   Applicability.
   
2-2.3602.   Definitions: “advisory board, commission, and committees”; “General
Plan Citizens Advisory Committee”, “representational members”, “rotating
members”.
   
2-2.3603.   Membership: Residency; Limitations.
   
2-2.3604.   Appointment and Removal; Supervisorial District Nomination;
Resignation.
   
2-2.3605.   Terms; Vacancy.
   
2-2.3606.   Quorum; Voting; Rules; Permissive Use of Roberts Rules, etc.
   
2-2.3607.   Meetings; Requirements; Officers; Minutes.
   
2-2.3608.   Compliance with Laws.
Article 37. Housing Commission
   
2-2.3701.   Established.
   
2-2.3702.   Membership.
   
2-2.3703.   Qualifications.
   
2-2.3704.   Terms of Office.
   
2-2.3705.   Method of Appointment.
   
2-2.3706.   Method of Removal.
   
2-2.3707.   Resignation.
   
2-2.3708.   Vacancies.
   
2-2.3709.   Powers of the Housing Commission.
   
2-2.3710.   Quorum.
   
2-2.3711.   Officers.
   
2-2.3712.   Bylaws.
Article 38. Financial Oversight Committee
   
2-2.3801.   Creation of Financial Oversight Committee.
   
2-2.3802.   Membership.
   
2-2.3803.   Membership: Non-Voting and Alternate Members.
   
2-2.3804.   Membership: Terms and Termination.
   
2-2.3805.   Meetings.
   
2-2.3806.   Duties and Responsibilities.
Article 39. Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council
   
2-2.3901.   Creation and Role of Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council and
Subcommittee.
   
2-2.3902.   Membership.
   
2-2.3903.   Appointments, Terms and Removal.
Article 40. Audit Committee
   
2-2.4001.   Creation of Audit Committee.
   
2-2.4002.   Membership.
   
2-2.4003.   Membership: Terms and Termination.
   
2-2.4004.   Meetings.
   
2-2.4005.   Duties and Responsibilities.
Article 1.
Yolo County Health Council*
*   Article 1 entitled “Advisory Committee on Youth and Health Services,”
consisting of Sections
2-2.101 through
2-2.108, codified from Ordinance No. 471, repealed by Ordinance No. 675,
effective December 6, 1972. Article 1 entitled “Advisory Committee on Youth
Services and Health Planning,” consisting of Sections
2-2.101 through
2-2.115, as added by said Ordinance No. 675, as amended by Ordinance Nos. 717,
effective March 26, 1975, 760, effective July 29, 1976, and 763, effective
September 9, 1976, repealed by Ordinance No. 771, effective March 24, 1977.
Sec. 2-2.101.   Creation.
   There is hereby created in the County a committee to be known as the Yolo
County Health Council, created in May, 1977. (§ 2, Ord. 771, eff. March 24,
1977, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1084A, eff. December 22, 1988)
Sec. 2-2.102.   Membership.
   The membership of the Health Council shall consist of twenty-five (25)
rotating voting members, who shall be residents of the County, both consumers
and providers, and who are representative of social, economic, linguistic,
disabled and ethnic populations, and geographic areas in the County, as
follows:
   (a)   Five (5) members, one (1) from each of the supervisorial districts as
selected by each supervisor.
   (b)   Three (3) members selected at large by the entire Board of
Supervisors.
   (c)   Nine (9) members, one (1) representative from each of the following
health care systems:
      (1)   CommuniCare Health Centers
      (2)   Elica Health Centers
      (3)   Kaiser Permanente
      (4)   Partnership Health Plan of California
      (5)   Sutter Davis Hospital
      (6)   UC Davis
      (7)   Winters Health Care
      (8)   Woodland Health Care
      (9)   Northern Valley Indian Health Services
   (d)   Eight (8) members, one (1) representative from each of the following
County committees:   
      (1)   Health and Human Services Agency Provider Stakeholder Group
      (2)   Local Mental Health Board
      (3)   Yolo County Commission of Aging
      (4)   First 5 Yolo
      (5)   Healthy Yolo
      (6)   Maternal Child and Adolescent Health Advisory Board
      (7)   Yolo County Children's Alliance
      (8)   Emergency Medical Care Committee.
(§ 2, Ord. 771, eff. March 24, 1977, as amended by § 1, Ord. 836, eff. March 8,
1979, §§ 1 and 2, Ord. 864, eff. January 25, 1980, §§ 1 and 2, Ord. 881, eff.
June 5, 1980, § 1, Ord. 959, eff. October 6, 1983, §§ 1 and 2, Ord. 1039, eff.
September 11, 1986, § 2, Ord. 1084A, eff. December 22, 1988, and § 1, Ord.
1169, eff. June 16, 1994, § 1, Ord. 1310, eff. November 20, 2003,§ 2, Ord.
1429, eff. June 20, 2013, and § 2, Ord. 1510, eff. April 25, 2019)
Sec. 2-2.103.   Membership: Terms.
   The At-Large and Supervisorial District rotating members of the Yolo County
Health Council shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors for a term of two
(2) years. Membership shall be effective upon appointment by the Board of
Supervisors. However, all terms shall be deemed to have commenced on February 1
following the initial appointment, and thereafter all terms shall be aligned to
begin on February 1 and to end on January 31. Terms of rotating members of the
Health Council as of the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this
section shall be extended to the January 31 following their presently scheduled
expiration date. The Health Council may make recommendations to the Board of
qualified persons to serve as rotating members. Each Health Care System shall
appoint a rotating member for a term of two (2) years and shall designate an
alternate who can vote in the absence of the rotating member. The chairperson
of each County Committee shall appoint a rotating member for a term of two (2)
years and shall designate an alternate who can vote in the absence of the
rotating member.
(§ 2, Ord. 771, eff. March 24, 1977, as amended by § 2, Ord. 836, eff. March 8,
1979, § 3, Ord. 1084A, eff. December 22, 1988, § 2, Ord. 1169, eff. June 16,
1994, and § 3, Ord. 1429, eff. June 20, 2013)
Sec. 2-2.104.   Membership: Organization.
   The officers of the Health Council shall be a chair and vice-chair, and such
other officers as the Council may deem necessary, who shall be elected by the
members of the Council from among their number. Any vacancy in any office shall
be filled by the Council for the unexpired portion of the term of such office.
The Chair shall appoint a nomination committee at the April meeting each year;
officers shall be elected to a one-year term at the May meeting each year.
Officers may serve a two (2) term maximum. (§ 2, Ord. 771, eff. March 24, 1977,
and § 4, Ord. 1084A, eff. December 22, 1988, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1310, eff.
November 20, 2003 and § 4, Ord. 1429, eff. June 20, 2013)
Sec. 2-2.105.   Quorum.
   Any contrary provision of Section
2-2.3606(a) of this Code notwithstanding, a majority of the currently appointed
rotating members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at
all meetings of the Council. (§ 2, Ord. 771, eff. March 24, 1977, as amended by
§ 3, Ord. 836, eff. March 8, 1979, and § 3, Ord. 864, eff. January 25, 1980, §
5, Ord. 1084A, eff. December 22, 1988, and § 3, Ord. 1169, eff. June 16, 1994,
and § 3, Ord. 1310, eff. November 20, 2003)
Sec. 2-2.106.   Minutes and records.
   The Health and Human Services Agency Community Health Branch Director or
her/his designee shall serve as the Secretary to the Council, and shall keep
the minutes of all meetings of the Council and file a copy thereof with the
Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
   Minutes shall include a record of attendance, a listing of reports received,
and all action taken and recommendations adopted. The Health and Human Services
Agency Community Health Branch Director shall arrange for such additional
clerical or other assistance as the Director deems necessary to be provided. (§
2, Ord. 771, eff. March 24, 1977, and § 6, Ord. 1084A, eff. December 22, 1988,
as amended by § 4, Ord. 1169, eff. June 16, 1994,§ 4, Ord. 1310, eff. November
20, 2003, and § 3, Ord. 1510, eff. April 25, 2019)
Sec. 2-2.107.   Meeting: Time and place.
   The Health Council shall meet monthly at least six (6) times per year at
such times and places as shall be determined by the Council. Additional
meetings of the Council may be called by the Chair or Vice-Chair upon notice
mailed to all members of the Council, the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors,
and local newspapers not less than five (5) days prior to said meeting and
shall be posted by the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors in the Erwin Maier
Administration Building, 625 Court Street, Woodland, California. All meetings
shall be publicly announced, open to the public, and held in a location
accessible to the general public. (§ 2 Ord. 771, eff. March 24, 1977, and § 7,
Ord. 1084A, eff. December 22, 1988, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1169, eff. June 16,
1994, and § 5, Ord. 1429, eff. June 20, 2013)
Sec. 2-2.108.   Role and purpose.
   The role and purpose of the Yolo County Health Council is to advise and make
recommendations to the Board of Supervisorsand the Health and Human Services
Agency Community Health Branch Director on the following:
   (a)   Establish and maintain activities identifying public health needs and
resources of the County; review and make recommendations on health services-
related budgets, program plans, policies, grant proposals, and similar matters,
in cooperation with other health advisory committees; and review and advise on
public health issues facing the County;
   (b)   Advocate for action to coordinate and make maximum, efficient use of
existing and planned facilities, health care services, and personnel in the
fields of physical, mental, and environmental health;
   (c)   Make recommendations for maintaining and improving health services in
the County;
   (d)   Foster effective communication among public agencies, private
voluntary agencies, private health providers, health advisory committees, and
the general public, and cooperate with appropriate public, private, and
voluntary agencies in the preparation of plans to improve health services in
the County;
   (e)   Coordinate with and provide assistance to local, state, and regional
health services planning efforts and other planning councils and commissions.
(§ 2, Ord. 771, eff. March 24, 1977, as amended by § 4, Ord. 864, eff. January
25, 1980, § 8, Ord. 1084A, eff. December 22, 1988,§ 6, Ord. 1169, eff. June 16,
1994, and § 4, Ord. 1510, eff. April 25, 2019)
Sec. 2-2.109.   Recommendations.
   Recommendations of the Council shall be submitted to the Yolo County Board
of Supervisors, the Director of the Health and Human Services Agency, the
Health and Human Services Agency Branch Directors for Community Health and
Adult and Aging, and the Health and Human Services Agency Alcohol and Drug
Administrator, as appropriate. (§ 2, Ord. 771, eff. March 24, 1977, and § 9,
Ord. 1084A, eff. December 22, 1988, as amended by § 7, Ord. 1169, eff. June 16,
1994, and § 5, Ord. 1510, eff. April 25, 2019)
Sec. 2-2.110.   Subcommittees.
   The Yolo County Health Council may appoint subcommittees to investigate,
report, and make findings in connection with any subject pertaining to the
matters within the jurisdiction of the Council. Such subcommittees may consist
of no more than five (5) Council members, and the other subcommittee members
may not be Council members but may be other persons designated as Associate
Members. Only a member of the Council may serve as a Chairperson of a
subcommittee. (§ 2, Ord. 771, eff. March 24, 1977, as amended by § 1, Ord. 920,
eff. August 13, 1981, § 10, Ord. 1084A, eff. December 22, 1988, and § 8, Ord.
1169, eff. June 16, 1994)
Sec. 2-2.111.   Absence.
   Any rotating member of the Council who is absent from any three (3)
consecutive regular meetings of the Council within one year shall vacate his or
her office on the Council. An absence for which a valid excuse is delivered to
the chairperson of the Council prior to or at the time of the meeting shall not
be counted for the purposes of this section. (§ 2, Ord. 771, eff. March 24,
1977, and § 11, Ord. 1084A, eff. December 22, 1988, as amended by § 9, Ord.
1169, eff. June 16, 1994)
Sec 2-2.112.   Conflict of interest.
   No member of the Council shall vote on a proposal or resolution if he or she
has a legal conflict of interest. A legal conflict of interest means a conflict
as defined by applicable statutory and case law. Any possible legal conflict.
of interest on the part of a member shall be declared before discussion
commences on the agenda item in question. If it is unclear whether a member has
a legal conflict of interest, the question shall be referred to County Counsel
for determination of whether the member has a legal conflict of interest, and,
if so, to what extent the member may participate, if at all, in the discussion
and voting on the agenda item.
   In addition, when a member does not have a legal conflict of interest in an
agenda item, but her or his participation in discussion and voting on that
agenda item would create an appearance of impropriety, the member shall not
participate in the voting or discussion of that agenda item. (§ 2, Ord. 771,
eff. March 24, 1977, and § 12, Ord. 1084A, eff. December 22, 1988, as amended
by § 10, Ord. 1169, eff. June 16, 1994)
Sec. 2-2.113.   Unused.
Sec. 2-2.114.   Child Health and Disability Prevention Subcommittee.
   Repealed*. (§ 2, Ord. 771, eff. March 24, 1977, as amended by § 1, Ord. 784,
eff. August 18, 1977, and §§ 4 and 5, Ord. 836, eff. March 8, 1979; * § 5, Ord.
864, eff. January 25, 1980)
Sec. 2-2.115.   Developmental Disability   Subcommittee.
   Repealed*. (§ 2, Ord. 771, eff. March 24, 1977, as amended by §§ 6 and 7,
Ord. 836, eff. March 8, 1979; * § 6, Ord. 864, eff. January 25, 1980)
Article 2.
Appeals Board*
   *(Repealed by § 2, Ordinance No. 1443, effective July 10, 2014)
Article 3.
Aviation Advisory Committee
Sec. 2-2.301.   Created.
   There is hereby created the Yolo County Aviation Advisory Committee. (§ 1,
Res. 69-8, as amended by § 1, Ord. 777, eff. July 7, 1977)
Sec. 2-2.302.   Membership.
   The membership of the Aviation Advisory Committee shall consist of seven (7)
members selected and appointed by the Board as follows:
   (a)   One member appointed by each Supervisor;
   (b)   Two (2) members appointed at large by the Board; and
   (c)   At least four (4) members shall be licensed pilots. (§ 3, Res. 69-8,
as amended by § 1, Ord. 777, eff. July 7, 1977)
Sec. 2-2.303.   Membership: Terms.
   Upon the adoption of this article, the Board shall appoint said seven (7)
members to the Aviation Advisory Committee as follows:
   (a)   Four (4) members shall be appointed for four (4) year terms.
   (b)   Three (3) members shall be appointed for two (2) year terms.
   (c)   Thereafter, as vacancies occur, subsequent appointments shall be made
for four (4) year terms.
   (d)   No member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms.
   (e)   Membership shall be effective upon appointment by the Board, and all
terms shall begin on January 1 following the initial appointment and thereafter
coincide with the calendar year. (§ 3, Res. 69-8, as amended by § 1, Ord. 777,
eff. July 7, 1977)
Sec. 2-2.304.   Membership: Termination.
   The term of office of a member of the Aviation Advisory Committee who fails
to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the Committee may be terminated by
the Board after notification of such member, and the vacancy thereby created
shall then be filled by an appointment of another representative of the same
area of representation for the remainder of the unexpired term of the member
being replaced. A person so appointed may then serve a maximum of two (2)
additional terms following the completion of the unexpired term. (§ 4, Res. 69-
8, as amended by § 1, Ord. 777, eff. July 7, 1977)
Sec. 2-2.305.   Officers.
   The members of the Aviation Advisory Committee shall elect a chairman and
vice-chairman at the first meeting, and, at each annual meeting thereafter,
such offices shall be filled by election for the next succeeding twelve (12)
month term. The Airport Director shall serve as secretary to the Committee and
shall provide such clerical assistance or supplies as may be necessary. (§ 5,
Res. 69-8, as amended by § 1, Ord. 777, eff. July 7, 1977)
Sec. 2-2.306.   Meetings.
   Meetings of the Aviation Advisory Committee shall be held at least once each
six (6) calendar months or more frequently as called by the chairman of the
Airport Director. (§ 2, Res. 69-8, as amended by § 1, Ord. 777, eff. July 7,
1977)
Sec. 2-2.307.   Meetings: Minutes.
   The secretary of the Aviation Advisory Committee shall keep minutes of all
meetings of the Committee and shall file a copy of all minutes with the City
Clerk of the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. July 7, 1977)
Sec. 2-2.308.   Meetings: Quorum.
   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the currently appointed members of
the Aviation Advisory Committee. (§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. July 7, 1977, as amended
by § 1, Ord. 878, eff. May 8, 1980)
Sec. 2-2.309.   Duties and responsibilities.
   The Aviation Advisory Committee shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
   (a)   To act in an advisory capacity to the Board;
   (b)   To review and make policy recommendations on use or development
proposals for the Yolo County Airport;
   (c)   To evaluate use or development proposals as to conformity with the
policies and guidelines contained in the Airport Specific Plan;
   (d)   To review and make recommendations pertaining to updating or changing
the policies and guidelines contained in the Airport Specific Plan;
   (e)   To advise as to matters of policy concerning the maintenance,
operation, capital improvements, and acquisition of land or airspace rights at
the Yolo County Airport;
   (f)   To advise on policy matters concerning aviation and air transportation
within the County; and
   (g)   To advise the Board regarding the land use, planning, zoning,
restrictions on land usage, and similar matters having a direct impact on the
Yolo County Airport or any other airport operated in the County; provided,
however, recommendations by the Committee shall in no way limit or diminish the
jurisdiction of the Planning Commission or Board on such land use issues. (§ 1,
Ord. 777, eff. July 7, 1977)
Article 4.
Delinquency Prevention Commission*
*   (Repealed by § 3, Ordinance No. 1443, effective July 10, 2014; restored by
§ 2, Ordinance No. 1536, effective August 12, 2021)
Sec. 2-2.401.   Created.
   The Yolo County Juvenile Justice Commission is hereby designated the "Yolo
County Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Commission." The Commission
is authorized to act as a delinquency prevention commission in addition to
serving as the local juvenile justice commission. In its capacity as a
delinquency prevention commission, its duties and responsibilities shall
include coordinating on a countywide basis the work of governmental and
nongovernmental organizations engaged in activities designed to prevent
juvenile delinquency, consistent with related provisions of California law
(including but not limited to Welfare & Institutions Code sections 225-230 and
233). (§ 2, Ord. 1536, eff. August 12, 2021)
Sec. 2-2.402.   Membership, Officers, Meetings and Related Matters.
   The Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Commission shall follow all
applicable provisions of state law and any adopted bylaws in matters of
membership, administration, and operations, including but not limited to the
qualifications and terms of members, member removal, election of officers,
matters of meeting quorums and administration, and all other related matters.
The Yolo Superior Court is the appointing authority pursuant to state law and,
consequently, Yolo County policies governing advisory boards, commissions, and
committees shall not apply. (§ 2, Ord. 1536, eff. August 12, 2021)
Sec. 2-2.403.   Coordination with the Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council.
   In carrying out its duties as a local delinquency prevention commission, the
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Commission shall recognize and
afford deference to the Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council on matters
primarily or exclusively within its authority, as set forth in Title 2, Article
39 of the Yolo County Code and related provisions of state law, including but
not limited to Welfare & Institutions Code section 749.22. (§ 2, Ord. 1536,
eff. August 12, 2021)
Article 5.
Office of Emergency Services*
*   The title of Article 5, formerly entitled “Disaster Council”, amended by
Section 1, Ordinance No. 671, effective August 16, 1972, and Section 1,
Ordinance No. 673, effective September 20, 1972. Article 5, consisting of
Section 2-2.501, repealed by Section 1, Ordinance No. 894, effective November
6, 1980.
Article 6.
Fish and Game Advisory Committee*
*   Sections 2-2.601 through 2-2.606, codified from Ordinance No. 454, repealed
by Ordinance No. 1067, effective January 21, 1988.
Article 7.
Health Professional Utilization Review Committee*
*   Sections 2-2.701 through 2-2.703, codified from Resolution No. 66-80,
repealed by Ordinance No. 687, effective October 24, 1973.
Article 8.
Highway Transportation Advisory Committee*
*   Sections 2-2.801 through 2-2.805, codified from Resolution No. 64-40,
repealed by Ordinance No. 716, effective February 19, 1975.
Article 9.
Historical Advisory Committee*
*   Article 9 entitled “Historical Landmarks Advisory Committee”, consisting of
Sections 2-2.901 through 2-2.905, codified from Ordinance No. 551, amended in
its entirety by Ordinance No. 832, effective March 8, 1979. Article 9 entitled
“Museum and Historic Landmarks Advisory Committee”, consisting of Sections 2-
2.901 through 2-2.906, as added by said Ordinance No. 832, as amended by
Ordinance No. 875, effective May 8, 1980, amended in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 923, effective November 12, 1981. Repealed by § 4, Ordinance No. 1443,
effective July 10, 2014.
Article 10.
Housing and Community Development Advisory Committee*
*   Article 10 entitled “Home Health Agency Advisory Board”, consisting of
Sections 2-2.1001 through 2-2.1003, codified from Resolution No. 66-80,
repealed by Ordinance No. 687, effective October 24, 1973. The title of Article
10, formerly entitled “Housing Advisory Committee”, amended by Ordinance No.
871, effective April 24, 1980. Repealed by § 5, Ordinance No. 1443, effective
July 10, 2014.
Article 11. Hospital Advisory Board*
   *(Repealed by § 6, Ordinance No. 1443, effective July 10, 2014.)
Article 12.
Library Advisory Board
Sec. 2-2.1201. Created.
   There is hereby created in the County a board to be known as the Library
Advisory Board. (§I, Ord. 558)
Sec. 2-2.1202. Membership.
   The Library Advisory Board shall consist of eight (8) members as follows:
   (a)   Five (5) rotating members, selected by the Board of Supervisors, one
from each of the supervisorial districts, who shall be residents of the
district from which appointed; and
   (b)   Three (3) permanent membership agencies, which shall be the appointing
authorities for their representatives, and which shall be responsible for
advising the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors in writing of the names of their
representatives and any change in their representatives. The three (3)
permanent members shall be from the following:
   (1)   The City of Winters;
   (2)   The City of Davis; and
   (3)   The City of West Sacramento.
(§III, Ord. 558, as amended by § 1, Ord. 830, eff. March 8, 1979, § 1, Ord.
876, eff. May 8, 1980, and § 1, Ord. 1049, February 12, 1987)
Sec. 2-2.1203. Membership: Terms: Vacancies.
   The terms of rotating members of the Library Advisory Board shall be four
(4) years and shall commence on February 1 and end on January 31. A vacancy on
the Library Advisory Board shall exist upon the death, resignation, or
termination of residence within the city or area of the supervisorial district
from which appointed. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the
appointing authority. Each member shall serve until the appointment and
qualification of his successor; provided, however, no member shall serve more
than two (2) consecutive terms. A one-year term shall not be counted as one of
the two (2) consecutive terms. (§IV, Ord. 558, as amended by § 2, Ord. 830,
eff. March 8, 1979, § 1, Ord. 979, eff. August 9, 1984, and § 2, Ord. 1049,
eff. February 12, 1987)
Sec. 2-2.1204. Membership: Organization.
   At their first meeting, the members of the Library Advisory Board shall
elect a chairman and vice-chairman to hold office for a twelve (12) month term,
and at each June meeting thereafter the members shall elect members to fill
such offices for the next succeeding twelve (12) month term. The County
Librarian shall be the secretary of the Library Advisory Board. No person shall
hold the office of chairman for more than two (2) consecutive terms (§VI, Ord.
558)
Sec. 2-2.1205. Meetings: Quorum.
   The first regular meeting of the Library Advisory Board shall be in June,
1965, and thereafter regular meetings shall be held bimonthly. Special meetings
may be held on call of the chairman with at least one week’s written notice of
such special meeting. The chairman shall call a special meeting upon receiving
the written request of four (4) members of said Board. A quorum to conduct a
regular or special meeting shall consist of a majority of the currently
appointed members of said Board. (§V, Ord. 558, as amended by § 2, Ord. 876,
eff. May 8, 1980)
Sec. 2-2.1206. Meetings: Minutes.
   A copy of the minutes of each meeting of the Library Advisory Board shall be
filed with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors. (§VII, Ord. 558, as amended
by § 3, Ord. 1049, eff. February 12, 1987)
Sec. 2-2.1207. Duties.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Library Advisory Board shall be as
follows:
   (a)   To act in an advisory capacity to the Board of Supervisors and the
County Librarian;
   (b)   To review library operations and services;
   (c)   To consider the needs of the library system pertaining to services and
facilities;
   (d)   To study and review plans and programs for the long-range development
of the County library system;
   (e)   To consider proposals or requests submitted by individual citizens or
groups, which proposals or requests may pertain to the County library system;
   (f)   To review budget proposals and make recommendations on the budget to
the Board of Supervisors; and
   (g)   To make such recommendations to the County Administrative Officer and
the Board of Supervisors as may be necessary and desirable. (§II, Ord. 558, as
amended by § 3, Ord. 876, eff. May 8, 1980)
Article 13.
Mental Health Board*
*   Sections
2-2.1301 through
2-2.1307, codified from Ordinance No. 517, amended in their entirety by Section
1, Ordinance No. 831, effective March 8, 1979. Sections
2-2.1301 through
2-2.1309, codified from Ordinance No. 831, amended in their entirety by
Ordinance No. 1159, effective May 20, 1993.
Sec. 2-2.1301.   Created.
   There is created the Yolo County Behavioral Health Board. Prior to May 8,
2025, the Behavioral Health Board was known as the Mental Health Board and had
substantially the same duties and responsibilities. (§ 2, Ord. 1159, eff. May
20, 1993, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1573, eff. May 8, 2025)
Sec. 2-2.1302.   Duties and responsibilities.
   The Behavioral Health Board shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
   (a)   Review and evaluate the community’s mental health and substance use
disorder needs, services, facilities, and special problems;
   (b)   Review any county agreements entered into pursuant to Welfare and
Institutions Code Section 5650;
   (c)   Advise the governing body and the local behavioral health director as
to any aspect of the local behavioral health program;
   (d)   Review and approve the procedures used to ensure citizen and
professional involvement at all stages of the planning process;
   (e)   Submit an annual report to the governing body on the needs and
performance of the county’s behavioral health system;
   (f)   Review and make recommendations on applicants for the appointment of a
local director of behavioral health services. The board shall be included in
the selection process prior to the vote of the governing body;
   (g)   Review and comment on the county’s performance outcome data and
communicate its findings to the County Health and Human Services Agency, the
Board of Supervisors, and the State Behavioral Health Commission. (§ 3, Ord.
1159, eff. May 20, 1993, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1573, eff. May 8, 2025)
Sec. 2-2.1303.   Membership.
   The Behavioral Health Board shall consist of sixteen (16) members appointed
by the Board of Supervisors as follows:
   (a)   Permanent member. There shall be one permanent member of the board,
who shall be a member of the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   Rotating members. There shall be fifteen (15) rotating members
appointed as follows:
   (1)   At least fifty (50%) percent of the members shall be consumers or the
parents, spouse sibling, or adult children of consumers, who are receiving or
have received behavioral health services;
   (2)   At least twenty (20%) percent of the total membership shall be
consumers and at least twenty (20%) percent of the total membership shall be
families of consumers.
   (c)   The Board of Supervisors shall, through its appointments to the
Behavioral Health Board, strive to reflect the ethnic diversity of the client
population of the County.
   (d)   Veteran or veteran advocate member. At least one member of the board
shall be a veteran or veteran advocate, as defined in Welfare and Institutions
Code Section 5604(i). To ensure compliance with this subsection, the Board of
Supervisors shall notify the Yolo County Veterans Services Office about
vacancies on the board as they occur.
   (e)   The Board of Supervisors is encouraged to appoint individuals who have
experience and knowledge of the behavioral health system. (§ 4, Ord. 1159, eff.
May 20, 1993, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1566, eff. March 28, 2024, and § 2, Ord.
1573, eff. May 8, 2025)
Sec. 2-2.1304.   Membership: Terms.
   The initial terms of the fifteen (15) rotating members of the Behavioral
Health Board shall be as follows:
   (a)   Five (5) members shall be appointed for a three (3) year term.
   (b)   Five (5) members shall be appointed for a two (2) year term.
   (c)   Five (5) members shall be appointed for a one-year term.
   (d)   Thereafter, as vacancies occur, subsequent appointments shall be made
for three (3) year terms.
   (e)   Membership shall be effective upon appointment by the Board of
Supervisors. However, all terms shall be deemed to have commenced on February 1
following the initial appointment, and thereafter all terms shall be aligned to
begin on February 1 and end on January 31.
   (f)   There shall be an equal number of appointees by each member of the
Board of Supervisors.
   (g)   No member of the Behavioral Health Board or his or her spouse shall be
a full-time or part-time county employee of a County behavioral health service,
an employee of the State Department of Behavioral Health, or an employee of, or
a paid member of the governing body of, a Bronzan-McCorquodale contract agency.
   (h)   A member of the Behavioral Health Board shall abstain from voting on
any issue in which the member has a financial interest as defined in Section
87103 of the California Government Code.
   (i)   If, prior to the expiration of a term, a member ceases to retain the
status which qualified the member for appointment to the Behavioral Health
Board, the membership of the member shall be terminated, and a vacancy shall be
declared.
   (j)   If it is not possible to secure membership as specified from among
persons who reside in the County, the Board of Supervisors may substitute
representatives of the public interest in behavioral health who are not full-
time or part-time employees of the County behavioral health service, the State
Department of Behavioral Health, or on the staff of, or a paid member of the
governing body of, a Bronzan-McCorquodale contract agency. (§ 5, Ord. 1159,
eff. May 20, 1993, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1573, eff. May 8, 2025)
Sec. 2-2.1305.   Meetings: Quorum.
   A quorum for meetings of the Behavioral Health Board shall consist of not
less than one-half (1/2) of the currently appointed members. A majority vote of
the members present shall be required for any motion, resolution, or other
action. (§ 6, Ord. 1159, eff. May 20, 1993, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1573, eff.
May 8, 2025)
Sec. 2-2.1306.   Membership: Termination.
   The term of office of a rotating member who has three (3) consecutive
unexcused absences from meetings of the Behavioral Health Board may be
terminated by the Board of Supervisors after notification to the member and the
Behavioral Health Board. The vacancy thereby created shall be filled by the
appointment of another representative of the same group for the remainder of
the unexpired term of the member being replaced. A person so appointed may then
serve a maximum of two (2) additional terms following the completion of the
unexpired term. (§ 7, Ord. 1159, eff. May 20, 1993, as amended by § 2, Ord.
1573, eff. May 8, 2025)
Sec. 2-2.1307.   Officers.
   The officers shall be a chairperson and a vice-chairperson who shall be
Behavioral Health Board members and who shall serve on a yearly basis and be
subject to election in May of each year. A secretary may be elected, unless
secretarial staff is otherwise provided. (§ 8, Ord. 1159, eff. May 20, 1993, as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1573, eff. May 8, 2025)
Sec. 2-2.1308.   Reimbursements for Expenses.
   Members of the Behavioral Health Board shall receive reimbursements for
their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties
outside the boundaries of the County. A member shall obtain written approval
from the Behavioral Health Director prior to attending any event outside the
boundaries of the County for which the member wishes to be reimbursed. Odometer
readings and receipts will be required for reimbursement in accordance with the
rules established by the County Auditor-Controller.
   Reimbursements shall be budgeted and charged against County Behavioral
Health funds and shall be subject to the budget limitations and restrictions
placed on such funds. (§ 9, Ord. 1159, eff. May 20, 1993, as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1573, eff. May 8, 2025)
Sec. 2-2.1309.   Subcommittees.
   The Mental Health Board may appoint such subcommittees as it deems
appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties and
responsibilities. (§ 10, Ord. 1159, eff. May 20, 1993)
Article 14.
Park, Recreation, and Wildlife Advisory Committee*
*   Article 14 entitled “Park and Recreation Advisory Committee,” consisting of
Sections
2-2.1402 through
2-2.1408, codified from Resolution No. 67-14, amended in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 1067, effective January 21, 1988.
Sec.
2-2.1401.   Created.
   The Park and Recreation Advisory Committee shall henceforth be known as the
Park, Recreation, and Wildlife Advisory Committee. (§ 2, Ord. 1067, eff.
January 21, 1988)
Sec. 2-2.1402.   Membership.
   The Park, Recreation, and Wildlife Advisory Committee shall consist of ten
(10) Members appointed by the Board, and each Supervisor shall recommend and
nominate two (2) private citizens from the supervisorial district represented
by the Supervisor. One member of the Board and the County Administrative
Officer shall be ex officio members of the Committee. The members of the Park
and Recreation Advisory Committee disbanded by Ordinance No. 1067 shall
comprise the initial membership of the Park, Recreation, and Wildlife
Committee. (§ 3, Ord. 1067, eff. January 21, 1988)
Sec. 2-2.1403.   Membership: Terms.
   The members of the Park, Recreation and Wildlife Advisory Committee shall
serve at the pleasure of the Board. (§ 4, Ord. 1067, eff. January 21, 1988)
Sec. 2-2.1404.   Membership: Organization.
   The members of the Park, Recreation, and Wildlife Advisory Committee shall
elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson to hold office for a twelve (12)
month term at each March meeting. The Director of Parks and Recreation, who
shall not be a member of the Committee, shall serve as secretary of the
Committee. (§ 5, Ord. 1067, eff. January 21, 1988)
Sec. 2-2.1405.   Membership: Expense reimbursements.
   The members of the Park, Recreation, and Wildlife Advisory Committee shall
receive reimbursements for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties outside the boundaries of the County. (§ 6, Ord.
1067, eff. January 21, 1988)
Sec. 2-2.1406.   Meetings: Quorum.
   The Park, Recreation, and Wildlife Advisory Committee shall meet on the call
of the chairperson with at least one week’s written notice of such meeting. A
quorum to conduct a meeting shall consist of one-half plus one of the current
membership of the Committee. The County Clerk-Recorder shall be notified of the
date and time of each meeting of the Committee. (§ 7, Ord. 1067, eff. January
21, 1988, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1113, eff. December 20, 1990)
Sec. 2-2.1407.   Meetings: Minutes.
   A copy of the minutes of each meeting of the Park, Recreation, and Wildlife
Advisory Committee shall be filed with the Clerk of the Board and the County
Administrative Officer. (§ 8, Ord. 1067, eff. January 21, 1988)
Sec. 2-2.1408. Duties.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Park, Recreation, and Wildlife
Advisory Committee and shall be as follows:
   (a)   To act in an advisory capacity to the Board and the Director of Parks;
   (b)   To consider the needs of the County with respect to the development of
a regional park system;
   (c)   To study and review plans and programs for the long-range development
of the County park master plan;
   (d)   To consider proposals and requests submitted by individual citizens or
groups;
   (e)   To advise and recommend the most economical method for the expenditure
of fish and game funds; and
   (f)   To make recommendations to the Board and the County Administrative
Officer about park, recreation, and wildlife matters as may be necessary and
desirable. (§ 9, Ord. 1067, eff. January 21, 1988)
Article 15.
Personnel Board
Sec. 2-2.1501.   Established.
   See Chapter 6 of this title.
Article 16.
Planning Commission
Sec. 2-2.1601.   Authority.
   The provisions of this article have been enacted pursuant to the provisions
of Chapter 3 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State (Planning and
Zoning Law). (§ 3, Ord. 122)
Sec. 2-2.1602.   Membership.
   The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) rotating County resident
members appointed by the Board. Five (5) members shall be selected, one
nominated by each district supervisor and thereafter appointed by majority vote
of the Board of Supervisors. The remaining two (2) members shall be selected at
large and may be nominated by any Board member, with appointment thereafter by
majority vote. At all times during the recruiting process, all reasonable
measures to recruit suitable candidates shall be used, including but not
limited to those measures customarily used to seek candidates for vacant
positions on other County boards, commissions, and committees.
(§ 1, Ord. 122, as amended by § 1, Ord. 430, § 1, Ord. 957, eff. September 8,
1983, § 1, Ord. 1070, eff. February 4, 1988,§ 2, Ord. 1337, eff. September 1,
2005, and § 2, Ord. 1479, eff. January 12, 2017)
Sec. 2-2.1603.   Jurisdiction.
   The Planning Commission shall be lawfully constituted and have jurisdiction
to proceed to act as provided by law upon the appointment of the members
thereof by an order of the Board duly entered in the minutes and upon each of
such members taking and filing an oath of office as provided by law. (§ 2, Ord.
122)
Sec. 2-2.1604.   Rules for the conduct of business.
   The Planning Commission, by resolution, shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing the conduct of its business as the Commission deems
appropriate, which rules shall be consistent with this Code and all provisions
of State laws. (§ 1, Ord. 843, eff. April 26, 1979)
Sec. 2-2.1605.   Quorum: Commission action: Tie votes.
   A majority of the duly appointed members of the Planning Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the conduct of Commission business. Action by the
Planning Commission shall be taken only on the affirmative vote of a majority
of the members then present, excluding those who abstain due to a conflict of
interest, but including those who abstain for any other reason.
   In the event there is a tie vote on any motion pending before the Planning
Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals, the chairman shall call for any further
motions of any member on the subject. In the event no further motions are made,
or that such further motions also result in a tie vote, the chairman shall call
for a motion to declare the Commission or Board deadlocked. If the declaration
of a deadlock is passed by a majority of a quorum, or if the vote on the motion
of a deadlock is also a tie vote, the chairman shall declare a deadlock.
   The declaration of deadlock shall be considered a denial of the matter and
shall be appealable to the Board of Supervisors to the same extent and in the
same manner as if the Commission or Board had denied the request. The Clerk of
the Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized and instructed to waive the
applicable filing fee for any appeal resulting from a declaration of a
deadlock. (§ 2, Ord. 843, eff. April 26, 1979, as amended by § 7, Ord. 1178,
eff. April 27, 1995)
Sec. 2-2.1606.   Board of Permit Appeals.
   The Planning Commission hereby is designated as the Yolo County Board of
Permit Appeals pursuant to Section 65903 of the Government Code of the State
for the purpose of hearing and determining appeals from the decisions of the
Zoning Administrator or for reviewing such decisions on its motion or the
motion of the Zoning Administrator pursuant to Section
8-2.225 of Article 2 of
Chapter 2 of Title 8 of this Code.
   The procedure for such appeals shall be as set forth in Section
8-2.225 of Article 2 of
Chapter 2 of Title 8 of this Code relating to appeals to the Planning
Commission.
   The Planning Commission, sitting as the Board of Permit Appeals, may reverse
or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify any order, requirement, decision, or
determination upon which the appeal was taken and may make such order,
requirement, decision, or determination as should be made.
   The action of the Planning Commission, sitting as a Board of Permit Appeals,
shall be appealable to the Board of Supervisors as provided in Section
8-2.225 of Article 2 of
Chapter 2 of Title 8 of this Code.
   The action of the Board of Permit Appeals to approve or disapprove any
project which has been appealed to it shall constitute approval or disapproval
by the County pursuant to Section 65950 of the Government Code of the State. If
the action of the Board of Permit Appeals is appealed to the Board of
Supervisors, such appeal shall stay the effective date of the County's approval
and shall toll the time limits set forth in said section. (§ 2, Ord. 888, eff.
September 11, 1980)
Sec. 2-2.1607.   Community Redevelopment Law.
   (a)   Jurisdiction. The Planning Commission hereby is authorized to perform
all functions delegated to a planning commission by the California Community
Redevelopment Law (Part 1 of Division 24 of the Health and Safety Code of the
State, commencing with Section 33000).
   (b)   Appealability of actions: Standing. Any decision of the Planning
Commission pursuant to this section may be appealed to the Board by filing an
appeal with the Clerk of the Board within fifteen (15) days following the
Planning Commission’s action. The Board shall sustain, modify, reject, or
overrule the Planning Commission’s decision and may either declare its decision
to be final or, in its discretion, remand the matter to the Planning
Commission.
   Any aggrieved person shall have standing to file such appeal, including the
executive director of any redevelopment agency affected by the decision.
   There shall be no filing fee for any such appeal. (§ 1, Ord. 1019, eff.
September 26, 1985)
Sec. 2-2.1608.   Historic Preservation Commission.
   The Planning Commission hereby is designated as the Historic Preservation
Commission. The main duties and responsibilities of the Historic Preservation
Commission shall be as follows:
   (a)   To establish various criteria, guidelines and Standards to carry out
the intent of the Historic Preservation ordinance codified in
Chapter 11 of Title 8 of the Yolo County Code;
   (b)   To maintain a comprehensive inventory of historic landmarks and
historic districts within the County; publicize and update it periodically;
   (c)   With the help and cooperation of the Historical Advisory Committee, to
recommend to the Board of Supervisors the designation of historic landmarks and
historic districts;
   (d)   To participate in administering regulations pertaining to historic
landmarks and historic districts.
   The secretary of the Commission shall keep minutes of all meetings of the
Commission and shall file a copy of the minutes with the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors. Meetings of the Commission shall be held, and notice given in
conformance with California Government Code Sections 54951.1 - 54961 (The Ralph
M. Brown Act). (§ 1, Ord. 1080, eff. August 18, 1988)
Sec. 2-2.1609.   Business License Appeals Board.
   The Planning Commission hereby is designated as the Business License Appeals
Board pursuant to Section
12-1.203 of the County Code for the purpose of hearing and determining appeals
from the decisions of the Business Licensing Officer. The procedures for such
appeals shall be as set forth in Article 5 of Title 12 of the Yolo County Code.
   The Planning Commission, sitting as the Business License Appeals Board, may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify any order, requirement,
decision, or determination upon which the appeal was taken.
   The action of the Planning Commission, sitting as the Business License
Appeals Board, shall be appealable to the Board of Supervisors as provided in
Section
8-2.225 of Article 2 of
Chapter 2 of Title 8 of this Code.
   The action of the Business License Appeals Board to approve or disapprove
any project which has been appealed to it shall constitute approval or
disapproval by the County. If the action of the Business License Appeals Board
is appealed to the Board of Supervisors, such appeal shall stay the effective
date of the County’s approval or disapproval. (§ 3, Ord. 1275, eff. December 6,
2001)
Sec. 2-2.1610   Board of Building Appeals.
   The Planning Commission hereby is designated as the Board of Building
Appeals pursuant to Section
7-1.04 of the County Code for the purpose of hearing and determining appeals
from the decisions of the Chief Building Official; and pursuant to Section
7-1.11 of the County Code for the purpose of hearing and determining appeals
from the decisions made by the Chief Building Official in his/her capacity as
the Fire Chief. The Board of Building Appeals shall serve as the Housing
Appeals Board described in Section 108.8 of the California Building Code (2007
edition). Such appeals shall be filed within fifteen (15) days of the decision
appealed from and shall otherwise be governed by the procedures set forth in
Article 2 of Title 8 of the Yolo County Code. The Planning Commission, sitting
as the Board of Building Appeals, may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify any order, requirement, decision, or determination upon which the
appeal was taken. The action of the Planning Commission, sitting as the Board
of Building Appeals, shall be appealable to the Board of Supervisors as
provided in Section
8-2.225 of Article 2 of
Chapter 2 of Title 8 of this Code. The action of the Board of Building Appeals
to approve or disapprove any project which has been appealed to it shall
constitute approval or disapproval by the County. If the action of the Board of
Building Appeals is appealed to the Board of Supervisors, such appeal shall
stay the effective date of the County's approval or disapproval. (§ 2, Ord.
1420, eff. May 10, 2012)
Article 17.
Employer/Employee Occupational Health and Safety Committee*
*   Sections 2-2.1701 through 2-2.1706, codified from Ordinance No. 510, as
amended by Ordinance Nos. 833, effective March 8, 1979, and 928, effective
March 18, 1982, repealed by Ordinance No. 1109, effective October 18, 1990;
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1283, effective May 30, 2002.
Article 18.
Waste Advisory Committee*
*   Sections
2-2.1801 through
2-2.1803, codified from Minute Order No. 64-504, as amended by Minute Order No.
67-18, repealed by implication by Ordinance No. 834, effective March 8, 1979.
See Article 28 of this chapter. Sections
2-2.1801 through
2-2.1809, codified from Ordinance No. 1106, effective June 21, 1990, amended in
their entirety by Ordinance No. 1184, effective December 7. 1995. Section
2-2.1808(b) amended by Ordinance 1370, effective April 25, 2008.
Sec. 2-2.1801.   Created.
   There is hereby created in the County a committee to be known as the Yolo
County Waste Advisory Committee as required pursuant to Section 25135.2 of the
Health and Safety Code.
   The Waste Advisory Committee shall perform the duties of the Local Task
Force as required pursuant to Section 40950 of the Public Resources Code. (§ 1,
Ord. 1184, eff. December 7, 1995)
Sec. 2-2.1802.   Definitions.
   (a)   A “rotational member” shall mean a member of the committee appointed
for a fixed term. Unless otherwise expressly specified, all members shall be
rotating members and shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   A “constituent member” means a member appointed to represent the
public or a portion thereof at large, as opposed to one appointed to represent
a particular professional or technical expertise. (§ 1, Ord. 1316, eff. April
1, 2004)
Sec. 2-2.1803.   Membership; Residency; Limitations.
   (a)   The membership of the Waste Advisory Committee shall consist of eleven
(11) rotating members who shall be selected as follows:
   (1)   One member from each city shall be appointed by the Cities of Davis,
West Sacramento, Winters, and Woodland.
   (2)   One member shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors to represent
the University of California-Davis.
   (3)   The Board of Supervisors shall appoint six (6) members as follows: one
representative of industry, one representative of an environmental
organization, one representative of a special district such as a fire
protection district or a community services district, and three (3)
representatives of the public who, to the extent possible, have expertise
concerning aspects of integrated waste management planning, including, but not
limited to, engineering, geology, and water quality.
   (b)   To the extent possible, City members shall be constituent members and
residents of Yolo County.
   (c)   Every Board-appointed member of the committee shall be a resident of
Yolo County; provided, however, that the foregoing provision shall not apply if
the Board of Supervisors determines that there is no County resident reasonably
available with the qualifications or subject matter expertise as required by
(a)(2) or (3) above.
   (d)   County employees may not serve as a constituent member of the
committee if the committee decisions or recommendations pertain to the
functional areas in which the employee works. Any dispute regarding the
application of the foregoing shall be decided by the Board of Supervisors. (§
1, Ord. 1184, eff. December 7, 1995, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1316, eff. April
1, 2004 )
Sec. 2-2.1804.   Membership terms.
   (a)   The term of membership shall be four (4) years.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the term of one City-appointed member
shall expire each year, and the term of not less than one, but not more than
two (2) of the County-appointed members shall expire each year. The Director of
Public Works shall develop a schedule to stagger the terms as set forth herein.
The Appointing Authority shall be advised of the expiration of the member’s
term a minimum of two (2) months prior to the end of the term.
   (c)   Terms shall begin on February 1st and shall expire on January 31st. (§
1, Ord. 1184, eff. December 7, 1995)
Sec. 2-2.1805.   Membership termination; Vacancy.
   (a)   A Board-appointed member shall be appointed by majority vote of the
Board of Supervisors, shall serve at the pleasure of the Board, and may be
removed at any time for any reason by majority vote of the Board, and
   (b)   A City-appointed member shall be appointed by, serve at the pleasure
of, and be removed at any time for any reason by the appointing authority for
that member.
   (c)   The Yolo County Waste Advisory Committee may recommend termination of
membership if in their opinion a member is not adequately performing the duties
for which the member was appointed. The Appointing Authority shall terminate
the membership of any person who in their opinion is not adequately performing
the duties for which the member was appointed.
   (1)   Member attendance records shall be provided to the members and
appointing authorities semi-annually.
   (2)   Three (3) consecutive absences by any committee member will result in
a notice of non-attendance performance being sent to the member’s Appointing
Authority. It will be at the Appointing Authorities discretion to determine
what action, if any, is required.
   (d)   A vacancy shall occur upon the death, resignation, removal or
disqualification of any member (including but not limited to the termination of
residency in the County, city or other area if required, or the cessation of
the status which qualified the member for appointment.
   (e)   Resignations of members shall be accompanied by a letter or written
documentation from the resigning member.
   (f)   In the event of death, resignation, removal or disqualification, the
Appointing Authority shall appoint a new member for the remainder of the
unexpired term. (§ 1, Ord. 1184, eff. December 7, 1995, as amended by § 3, Ord.
1316, eff. April 1, 2004)
Sec. 2-2.1806.   Membership organization.
   (a)   The Waste Advisory Committee shall meet and elect a chairperson and
vice-chairperson annually at its first meeting after February 1st. Such
officers shall serve until their successors are elected. The Director of Public
Works or a designee of the Director shall serve as staff liaison to the
Committee and shall provide secretarial services to the Committee. The County
Health Officer or a designee of the County Health Officer shall also serve as
staff liaison. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint one Board member to serve
as its liaison to the committee. (§ 1, Ord. 1184, eff. December 7, 1995, as
amended by § 4, Ord. 1316, eff. April 1, 2004)
Sec. 2-2.1807.   Meetings, Quorum; Minutes.
   (a)   Date. Meetings of the Waste Advisory Committee shall be held on a
regular date set by the Committee. Either the Chairperson or a majority of the
appointed members may call special meetings as necessary.
   (b)   Quorum.
   (1)   Unless otherwise provided by law, a majority of all currently
appointed members shall be required to constitute a quorum.
   (2)   A majority vote of those present and constituting a quorum, excluding
those who abstain due to a legal conflict of interest, but including those who
abstain for any other reason, shall be required for any action by the
committee, except that a vote of a majority of those present shall be
sufficient to adjourn or continue any proceeding.
   (c)   Minutes.  Minutes shall include the names of all members who are
present and absent, all reports received, approved or otherwise considered, any
formal actions or votes taken (including but not limited to recommendations
adopted) and the vote of each member as voted thereon, and such additional
information as is deemed necessary and appropriate. The minutes and member
attendance shall be filed with the clerk of the Board of Supervisors, and the
Clerks of the city Councils. (§ 1, Ord. 1184, eff. December 7, 1995, as amended
by § 5, Ord. 1316, eff. April 1, 2004)
Sec. 2-2.1808.   Duties.
   (a)   The duties and responsibilities of the Local Task Force shall be as
follows:
   (1)   Identify solid waste management issues of countywide or regional
concern.
   (2)   Determine the need for solid waste collection and transfer systems,
processing facilities and marketing strategies, that can serve more than one
local jurisdiction within the region.
   (3)   Facilitate the development of multi-jurisdictional arrangements for
the marketing of recyclable materials.
   (4)   To the extent possible, facilitate resolution of conflicts and
inconsistencies between or among City and County source reduction and recycling
elements.
   (5)   Develop goals, policies and procedures which are consistent with
guidelines and regulations adopted by the Board, to guide the development of
the siting element of the Countywide integrated waste management plan.
   (b)   The duties and responsibilities of the Waste Advisory Committee shall
be as follows:
   (1)   Advise the County staff, the Board of Supervisors of the County, and
the staff, Mayors and Council Members of the Cities within the County on issues
related to the development, approval, and administration of the County
Hazardous Waste Management Plan.
   (2)   Hold informal public meetings and workshops as required on the County
Hazardous Waste Management Plan.
   (3)   Review issues of integrated waste management relative to the County
and provide recommendations to the County and Cities within the County on those
issues. (§ 1, Ord. 1184, eff. December 7, 1995)
   (4)   Conduct hearings for those appealing decisions made under Article 6,
Chapter 15 of the Yolo County Code. (§ 1, Ord. 1370, eff. April 25, 2008)
Sec. 2-2.1809.   Compliance With Laws.
   All meetings and actions of the committee and its members shall comply with
the Brown Act (Government Code Section 54950 and following), the Political
Reform Act and other conflict of interest laws (Government Code Sections 1090
and following and 81700 and following; Yolo County Code Section
2-6.42 and the Yolo County Conflict of Interest Resolution), the Public Records
Act (Government Code Section 6250 and following), Health and Safety Code
Section 25135.2, and Public Resources Code Section 40950, as well as with all
other applicable laws and regulations as may be adopted or amended from time-
to-time. (§ 6, Ord. 1316, eff. April 1, 2004)
Article 19.
Water Resources Board*
*   Sections
2-2.1901 through
2-2.1907, codified from Ordinance No. 433, as amended by Ordinance Nos. 680,
effective May 9, 1973, § 11, effective December 12, 1974,772, effective April
7, 1977 and 971 effective January 12, 1984, repealed and amended in its
entirety by Sections 1 and 2, respectively, by Ordinance No. 1096, effective
August 10, 1989.
Sec. 2-2.1901.   Created.
   There is hereby created in the County a board to be known as the Water
Resources Board. (§ 2, Ord. 1096, eff. August 10, 1989)
Sec. 2-2.1902.   Membership.
   The membership of the Water Resources Board shall consist of seven (7)
rotating members who shall be selected as follows:
   (a)   Each Supervisor shall appoint one member;
   (b)   One member shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors upon
recommendation by the University of California at Davis and shall be a person
knowledgeable in the area of water resources;
   (c)   One member shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors upon the
recommendation of the Interagency Water Management Group from its membership.
(§ 2, Ord. 1096, eff. August 10, 1989)
Sec. 2-2.1903.   Membership: Terms.
   (a)   The term of membership of the new member recommended by the
Interagency Water Management Group shall be one year. The term of the remaining
members shall be four (4) years.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, of the initial members serving terms of
normal four (4) year duration, two (2) shall serve a term of two (2) years, two
(2) shall serve a term of (3) years, and two (2) shall serve a term of four (4)
years. The allocation of terms shall be determined by the Water Resources Board
by lot.
   (c)   Terms shall begin on February 1st and shall expire on January 31st.
The terms of the initial members shall be computed from the February 1st
following appointment. (§ 2, Ord. 1096, eff. August 10, 1989)
Sec. 2-2.1904.   Membership: Termination.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors may terminate the membership of any person
who has three (3) unexcused absences from scheduled meetings or who, in the
opinion of the Board of Supervisors, is not adequately performing the duties
for which the member was appointed.
   (b)   Resignations of members shall be accompanied by a letter or written
documentation from the member or the Water Resources Board. (§ 2, Ord. 1096,
eff. August 10, 1989)
Sec. 2-2.1905.   Membership: Organization.
   The Water Resources Board shall meet and elect a chairman, vice-chairman and
secretary. Such officers shall serve until their successors are elected. The
Director of Public Works shall serve as staff liaison to the Board. (§ 2, Ord.
1096, eff. August 10, 1989)
Sec. 2-2.1906.   Meetings.
   (a)   Date. Meetings of the Water Resources Board shall be held from time to
time as is appropriate on a ready, regular date set by the Committee. The
Chairman may call such special meetings as may be necessary.
   (b)   Quorum. A majority of all serving members shall constitute a quorum of
the Water Resources Board.
   (c)   Minutes. The secretary of the Water Resources Board shall keep minutes
of all specific actions taken and of the recommendations made to the Board of
Supervisors of the members present and absent and shall file copies of the
minutes with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors. (§ 2, Ord. 1096, eff.
August 10, 1989)
Sec. 2-2.1907.   Duties.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Water Resources Board shall be to
advise the Board of Supervisors on water matters affecting the County and its
inhabitants, including analyzing information and suggesting alternatives and
including but not limited to the consideration of issues of quantity and
quality of water, the consideration of flood control and drainage issues, and
the coordination of such issues among the various water entities affecting the
County, and doing so within a regional and Statewide context as well as a
County context. The Water Resources Board shall also make an annual report of
its activities to the Board of Supervisors. (§ 2, Ord. 1096, eff. August 10,
1989)
Article 20.
West Plainfield Advisory Committee on Airport Development
Sec. 2-2.2001.   Created.
   There is hereby created the West Plainfield Advisory Committee on Airport
Development. (§ 1, Ord. 1148, eff. October 15, 1992)
Sec. 2-2.2002.   Membership.
   (a)   The West Plainfield Advisory Committee on Airport Development shall
consist of five (5) rotating members appointed by the Board of Supervisors as
follows:
   (1)   Two (2) shall be members residing within a one mile radius of the
exterior boundaries of the Yolo County Airport;
   (2)   Three (3) shall reside within the boundaries of the West Plainfield
Fire Protection District.
   (b)   Appointments shall be made from:
   (1)   Applications submitted to the Clerk of the Board by eligible persons;
and/or
   (2)   Nominations of eligible persons submitted to the Clerk of the Board by
the West Plainfield Advisory Committee on Airport Development. (§ 1, Ord. 1148,
eff. October 15, 1992)
Sec. 2-2.2003.   Membership: Terms.
   The terms shall be four (4) years and shall commence on February 1 and end
on January 31. A vacancy shall exist upon the death, resignation or termination
of residence within the designated area from which the member was appointed.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the appointing authority.
Each member shall serve until the appointment and qualification of a successor.
Of the initial members two determined by lot shall serve a term of two (2)
years. The terms of service shall be computed from February 1, 1992. (§ 1, Ord.
1148, eff. October 15, 1992)
Sec. 2-2.2004.   Membership: Termination.
   The term of office of a member of the West Plainfield Advisory Committee on
Airport Development who fails to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the
Committee may be terminated by the Board after notification of such member, and
the vacancy thereby created shall be filled by a person of the same
qualifications and nominated in the same manner as the person being replaced.
(§ 1, Ord. 1148, eff. October 15, 1992)
Sec. 2-2.2005.   Officers.
   The members of the West Plainfield Advisory Committee on Airport Development
shall elect a chairman and vice chairman at the first meeting and at each
annual meeting thereafter, such offices shall be filled by election for the
next succeeding twelve (12) month term. (§ 1, Ord. 1148, eff. October 15, 1992)
Sec. 2-2.2006.   Meetings.
   Meetings of the Committee shall be held at such regular times as determined
by the Committee and at least one meeting for the consideration of
recommendations upon a development project shall be held jointly with the
Aviation Advisory Committee and special meetings may be held upon call of the
Chairman, a majority of the members or the Airport Manager of the County. (§ 1,
Ord. 1148, eff. October 15, 1992)
Sec. 2-2.2007.   Meetings: Minutes.
   The Airport Manager of the County shall serve as liaison to the Committee
and shall assist in the administration of all meetings and Committee shall file
a copy of all minutes with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors. (§ 1, Ord.
1148, eff. October 15, 1992)
Sec. 2-2.2008.   Meetings: Quorum.
   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members currently serving.
Action shall require the concurrence of a majority of the members currently
serving. (§ 1, Ord. 1148, eff. October 15, 1992)
Sec. 2-2.2009.   Duties and responsibilities.
   The Committee shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
   (a)   To act in an advisory capacity to the Board as to matters concerning
the Yolo County Airport area of influence as defined in the County Airport
Comprehensive Land Use Plan;
   (b)   To review and make policy recommendations on development projects
located in that area of influence;
   (c)   To make recommendations upon development projects located at the Yolo
County Airport as to the conformity with the policies and guidelines contained
in the Airport Specific Plan;
   (d)   To review and make recommendations pertaining to updating or changing
the policies and guidelines contained in the Airport Specific Plan for Yolo
County Airport and in connection therewith on due notice to have one member
serve on the technical advisory committee for airport planning and
environmental reviews and to participate in the scoping and design of the work
program for the Airport Specific Plan and the accompanying environmental impact
report;
   (e)   No proposed development project located at the Yolo County Airport
shall receive discretionary approval by the County without an opportunity for
review by the Committee;
   (f)   To advise as to matters of policy concerning the maintenance,
operation, capital improvements, and acquisition of land or airspace rights at
the Yolo County Airport;
   (g)   To advise on policy matters concerning aviation and air transportation
at the Yolo County Airport;
   (h)   To advise the Board regarding the land use, planning, zoning
restrictions on land usage on the Yolo County Airport area of influence;
   (i)   To coordinate with the Aviation Advisory Committee by sending at least
one member of this Committee to attend meetings of that Committee at which it
considers development projects, and to invite the attendance of at least one
member of the Aviation Advisory Committee at meetings of this Committee at
which it considers development projects;
   (j)   As used in this article and prior to the adoption of a new Airport
Master Plan (AMP) to replace the 1977 ASP, “development project” shall mean (1)
any airport proposal consisting of a (a) change of use, (b) construction of an
improvement, or (c) construction of an addition to an improvement, (2) at the
Yolo County Airport, and (3) which is a discretionary project. A discretionary
project is one (1) as defined as such by the State CEQA Guidelines [14 CCR
153751], (2) where the public agency making the decision to approve or
disapprove is the County of Yolo, and (3) which is not exempt from CEQA. An
airport proposal includes granting a lease or approving a sublease that
authorizes a change of use, construction of an improvement, or construction of
an addition to an improvement. It does not apply to a lease which does not
grant such authority. An airport proposal includes granting a lease or
approving a sublease that contains new authority for a change of use,
construction of an improvement, or construction of an addition to an
improvement. It does not apply to an approval which does not grant such
authority.
   The officer or body of the County that considers the development project to
shall have the authority to make a determination whether a proposal is a
development project;
   (k)   The recommendations by the Committee shall in no way limit or diminish
the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors. (§ 1, Ord.
1148, eff. October 15, 1992)
Article 21.
Yolo County Affirmative Action Advisory Committee
Sec. 2-2.2101.   Created.
   There is hereby created in the County a committee to be known as the Yolo
County Affirmative Action Advisory Committee. (§ 1, Ord. 688, eff. October 24,
1973)
Sec. 2-2.2102.   Duties.
   The purpose and duties of the Yolo County Affirmative Action Advisory
Committee are to advise the Board, the County Administrative Officer, and the
Personnel Director of ways to ensure equal employment opportunities in
recruiting, examining, and training for all applicants and employees of the
County. (§ 1, Ord. 688, eff. October 24, 1973)
Sec. 2-2.2103.   Membership.
   The membership of the Yolo County Affirmative Action Advisory Committee
shall consist of thirteen (13) members, comprised as follows:
   (a)   Ten (10) rotating members comprised of two (2) members appointed by
each supervisor; and
   (b)   Three (3) permanent membership agencies, which shall each appoint one
member from that agency, and which shall be responsible for advising the Clerk
of the Board in writing of the name of their representatives and of any change
in the names of their representatives. The three (3) agencies having permanent
membership are as follows:
   (1)   The Yolo County Government Employees’ Association;
   (2)   The Yolo County Deputy Sheriffs’ Association; and
   (3)   The Yolo County Management Association. (§ 1, Ord. 688, eff. October
24, 1973, as amended by § 1, Ord. 749, eff. March 3, 1976, and § 1, Ord. 824,
eff. March 8, 1979)
Sec. 2-2.2104.   Membership: Terms.
   (a)   The term of office of each member of the Yolo County Affirmative
Action Advisory Committee appointed by the Board shall be four (4) years and
until his successor is appointed, except that the terms of the members first
appointed shall be as follows:
   (1)   Four (4) members shall serve two (2) years;
   (2)   Three (3) members shall serve three (3) years;
   (3)   Three (3) members shall serve four (4) years; and
   (4)   Each subsequent appointment shall be for a term of four (4) years.
   (b)   No rotating member shall serve for more than two (2) consecutive full
terms. Initial two (2) and three (3) year terms shall not be counted as one of
the two (2) consecutive terms. (§ 1, Ord. 688, eff. October 24, 1973, as
amended by § 2, Ord. 824, eff. March 8, 1979)
Sec. 2-2.2105.   Membership: Organization.
   The first meeting of the Yolo County Affirmative Action Advisory Committee
shall be called by the chairperson of the Board, at which meeting the members
shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson and set a regular meeting date.
At its first regular meeting, the members of the Committee shall classify
themselves by lot as to their respective terms of office. The Committee may
adopt such rules and procedures as it deems necessary for the conduct of its
business. (§ 1, Ord. 688, eff. October 24, 1973)
Sec. 2-2.2106.   Officers.
   (a)   The chairperson and the vice-chairperson of the Yolo County
Affirmative Action Advisory Committee shall be elected by and from the
membership of the Committee. The terms of such officers shall be for one year
or until the election of their successors.
   (b)   The chairperson or, in his absence, the vice-chairperson, shall
preside at all meetings. In the absence of both the chairperson and the vice-
chairperson, the members present at such meeting shall elect a chairperson pro
tern who shall preside at the meeting for which he is elected.
   (c)   The Affirmative Action Coordinator shall serve as secretary to the
Committee.
   (d)   The chairperson shall vote only in the case of a tie. (§ 1, Ord. 688,
eff. October 24, 1973, as amended by § 1, Ord. 724, eff. July 23, 1975)
Sec. 2-2.2107.   Membership: Quorum.
   A quorum of the Yolo County Affirmative Action Advisory Committee shall
consist of seven (7) or more members, and a majority of the votes of the
members voting on any issue shall be required for any action. (§ 1, Ord. 688,
eff. October 24, 1973)
Sec. 2-2.2108.   Meetings: Minutes.
   The secretary of the Yolo County Affirmative Action Advisory Committee shall
keep minutes of all meetings of the Committee and shall file a copy of all
minutes with the County Clerk-Recorder. (§ 1, Ord. 688, eff. October 24, 1973)
Sec. 2-2.2109.   Meetings: Time and place.
   Regular meetings of the Yolo County Affirmative Action Advisory Committee
shall be held at least once each month at a time and place to be determined by
the members. If, for any reason, the business to be considered at a regular
meeting cannot be concluded, those present at such meeting shall designate the
time and place for an adjourned meeting to consider any unfinished terms of
business. The meetings shall be open to the public. (§ 1, Ord. 688, eff.
October 24, 1973)
Sec. 2-2.2110.   Meetings: Remove.
   When any member of the Yolo County Affirmative Action Advisory Committee
fails to attend three (3) consecutive meetings without being excused by the
chairperson, the chairperson shall report the fact to the Board. The Board may
declare the seat vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of
the unexpired term in the manner set forth for regular appointments to
membership on the Committee. (§ 1, Ord. 688, eff. October 24, 1973)
Article 22.
Yolo County Equal Employment Opportunity Appeals Process*
*   Article 22 entitled “Yolo County Health Council” consisting of Sections
2-2.2201 through 2-2.2217 codified from Ordinance No. 708, eff. September 18,
1974, amended in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1305, eff. September 4, 2003.
Sec. 2-2.2201.   Created.
   There is hereby created in the County an Equal Employment Opportunity
Appeals Process.
Sec. 2-2.2202.   Duties.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the Yolo County Equal Employment Opportunity
Appeals Process is to hear and determine the following appeals, subject to the
limitations set forth in subsection (b) of this section:
   (1)   Appeals on the grounds of discrimination against any individual
because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
national origin, marital status, or (as defined by subsection (f) of Section
12926 of the Government Code of the State) medical condition, age, or physical
or mental disability from actions of officers and employees of the County taken
as to applications for County employment, the administration of competitive
examinations to fill vacancies in County service and eligible lists therefor,
appointments to and dismissals from positions subject to Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, as amended (including all controversies concerning such
discrimination arising out of the selection process or concerning “tests”, as
defined by the Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures of the United States
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (29 CFR, Part 1607)), and the
administration of the following written materials which govern County employees
as such: laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, policies, or
provisions of memoranda of understanding which supersede County laws; and
   (2)   Any matter specified as appealable to the Hearing Board by the
Affirmative Action Plan of the County, including the granting or denial of a
hiring policy.
   (b)   Limitations.
   (1)   Only an employee of the County, or an applicant for employment by the
County, or (notwithstanding the provisions of Section
2-6.31 of Chapter 6 of this title) a person rejected as a probationary employee
of the County shall have standing to use this appeal procedure.
   (2)   The commencement of an appeal pursuant to this section shall
constitute a waiver of any other administrative review procedure of the County
as to such matters.
   (3)   The commencement of proceedings under any other administrative
procedure of the County shall bar the use of this procedure as to such matters.
   (4)   An appeal under this procedure shall not lie as to any matter that is
appealable under an administrative procedure adopted by the County pursuant to
a State or Federal grant or subvention program.
   (5)   Any matter that is pending between an appellant and the County or any
officer or employee of the County in any judicial action or proceeding or in
any administrative proceeding before a governmental entity other than the
County (including, but not limited to, a complaint proceeding before the
Department of Fair Employment and Housing of the State, an accusation before
the Fair Employment and Housing Commission of the State, or a charge of
discrimination filed with the United States Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission) shall not be heard by the person designated by the Equal Employment
Opportunity Process (hearing officer)while such other action or proceeding is
pending.
   (6)   Where the action appealed lies within the discretion of a County
officer or employee, the hearing officer shall determine whether the officer or
employee abused discretion, but the hearing officer shall not exercise the
discretion of the officer or employee.
   (7)   In the determination of any appeal, the hearing officer shall be
restricted to determinations made which may order back pay or reinstatement but
may make recommendations based upon findings relating to county policies,
procedures, practices and protocols
Sec. 2-2.2203.   Hearing Officer.
   The hearing officer selected to make findings and determinations under the
Yolo County Equal Employment Opportunity Hearing Process shall be a qualified
Administrative Law Judge provided by the California Office of Administrate Law
Judges, upon the request submitted by the human resources manager following
receipt of an appeal as described above. A qualified Administrative Law Judge
described herein shall be an Administrative Law Judge who has personnel
experience, labor relations management experience, affirmative action or equal
employment opportunity experience or legal experience in adjudicating
administrative matters. A qualified Administrative Law Judge shall not include
any person who is a County employee, or a member or employee of any of the Yolo
County employee organizations.
Sec. 2-2.2204.   Conduct of Hearing.
   The hearing officer shall preside over an administrative hearing relative to
the matters described above upon the call of the human resources manager. The
hearing officer shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and papers. Rules
governing the proceedings of the hearing shall be those rules as set for the by
the Office of Administrative Hearings in general governing administrative
hearings.
Sec. 2-2.2205.   Hearing Time and Place.
   The administrative hearing described herein shall be held at a time and
place to be determined by the hearing officer, human resources manager and
appellant, except that no hearing shall be conducted at a private residence or
non-public building or location.
Sec. 2-2.2206.   Appeals: Applications.
   An appeal shall be commenced by filing an application in writing, setting
forth the action appealed from, the name of the County officer or employee who
took the action, and the facts and grounds for the appeal, with the human
resources manager. within thirty (30) days after the action appealed from.
Sec. 2-2.2207.   Appeals: Applications: Notices of Hearings.
   The human resources manager, after consultation with the hearing officer and
appellant shall set the application for a hearing within thirty (30) days after
filing and shall give at least ten (10) days’ written notice of the hearing to
hearing officer and to the parties. A copy of the application shall accompany
each notice of hearing.
Sec. 2-2.2208.   Appeals: Applications: Hearings.
   At the time and place set for the hearing, the applicant shall have the
burden of proof, and other parties shall have an opportunity to respond. The
hearing officer may continue the hearing from time to time and at the
conclusion of the hearing shall make its determination of the appeal.
Sec. 2-2.2209.   Subpoenas.
   Upon the application of any party, the hearing officer shall issue subpoenas
to require attendance to take testimony in any matter before it. The hearing
officer may issue subpoenas on his/her own motion. The person making an
application for a subpoena shall be responsible for serving it and for the
payment of witness fees and mileage. An application for the production of
books, documents, or other things under the control of the witness shall be
supported by an affidavit such as is prescribed by Section 1985 of the Code of
Civil Procedure of the State.
Sec. 2-2.2210.   Appeals: Applications: Final determinations.
   Once an order determining an appeal is final, the parties shall be bound
thereby. (amended in its entirety by § 1, Ord. 1035, eff. September 4, 2003)
Article 23.
Emergency Medical Care Committee*
*   Article 23 entitled “Emergency Medical Services and Medical Disaster
Committee”, consisting of Sections 2-2.2301 through 2-2.2309, as added by
Ordinance No. 733, effective October 15, 1975, as amended by Ordinance Nos.
752, effective March 10, 1976, and 828, effective March 8, 1979, amended in its
entirety by Section 2, Ordinance No. 894, effective November 6, 1980. Article
23 entitled “Emergency Services Council,” consisting of Sections 2-2.2301
through 2-2.2309, as added by Ordinance No. 894, effective November 6, 1980,
amended in its entirety by Section 2, Ordinance No. 1111, effective December
20, 1990; repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1284, effective May 30,
2002)
Article 24.
Salud Clinic Advisory Board*
*   Article 23, as added by Ordinance No. 1176, effective March 9, 1995,
renumbered and amended Article 24, Salud Clinic Advisory Board. Repealed by §
7, Ordinance No. 1443, effective July 10, 2014.
Article 25.
Transportation Advisory Committee
Sec. 2-2.2501.   Created.
   There is hereby created in the County a committee to be known as the Yolo
County Transportation Advisory Committee. (§ 1, Ord. 838, eff. March 15, 1979,
as amended by § 1, Ord. 844, eff. May 10, 1979, and § 2, Ord. 1180, eff. June
15, 1995)
Sec. 2-2.2502.   Membership.
   The membership of the Yolo County Transportation Advisory Committee shall
consist of seven (7) members as follows:
   (a)   Six (6) members appointed by the Board:
   (1)   One from each supervisorial district; and
   (2)   One at large, representing bicycling; and
   (b)   One member appointed by and representing the Yolo County Transit
Authority (a joint powers authority).
   The Transit Authority shall be responsible for advising the Clerk of the
Board in writing of the name of its representative and of any change in the
name of its representative.
   (c)   The member appointed by the Transit Authority may be from its
governing board or staff, or citizens residing within its boundaries, and shall
serve at the pleasure of the Transit Authority.
   (d)   All of such appointments should be made to provide as many diverse
interests as possible. (§ 1, Ord. 838, eff. March 15, 1979, as amended by § 1,
Ord. 844, eff. May 10, 1979, § 1, Ord. 879, eff. May 8, 1980, § 1, Ord. 882,
eff. June 12, 1980, § 1, Ord. 1114, eff. December 20, 1990, and § 2, Ord. 1180,
eff. June 15, 1995)
Sec. 2-2.2503.   Term of board appointees.
   (a)   The initial term of office of the Board appointees shall be as
follows:
   (1)   Supervisorial Districts 2 and 4 and at large (representing bicycling)
shall be for four (4) years, terminating January 31, 1995; and
   (2)   Supervisorial Districts 1, 3 and 5 shall be for two (2) years,
terminating January 31, 1993.
   (b)   Thereafter, all such terms shall be for a term of four (4) years.
   (c)   Membership shall be effective upon appointment by the Board. However,
all terms shall be deemed to have commenced on February 1 following the initial
appointment, and thereafter all terms shall commence on February 1 and end on
January 31. (§ 1, Ord. 838, eff. March 15, 1979, as amended by § 1, Ord. 844,
eff. May 10, 1979, § 2, Ord. 879, eff. May 8, 1980, § 2, Ord. 882, eff. June
12, 1980, § 2, Ord. 1114, eff. December 20, 1990, and § 2, Ord. 1180, eff. June
15, 1995)
Sec. 2-2.2504.   Termination or resignation.
   The term of office of a member of the Transportation Advisory Committee who
fails to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the Committee may be
terminated by the Board after notification to such member. Any vacancy created
by termination or resignation shall be then filled by an appointment of another
representative of the same area of representation for the remainder of the
unexpired term of the member being replaced. (§ 1, Ord. 838, eff. March 15,
1979, as amended by § 1, Ord. 844, eff. May 10, 1979, and § 2, Ord. 1180, eff.
June 15, 1995)
Sec. 2-2.2505.   Officers.
   The members of the Transportation Advisory Committee shall elect a chair and
vice-chair at the first meeting, and at each annual meeting thereafter, after
February 1, such offices shall be filled by election for the next succeeding
twelve (12) month term. The Director of Public Works shall serve as secretary
to the Committee and shall provide such staff assistance or supplies as may be
required. (§ 1, Ord. 838, eff. March 15, 1979, as amended by § 1, Ord. 844,
eff. May 10, 1979, and § 2, Ord. 1180, eff. June 15, 1995)
Sec. 2-2.2506.   Meetings.
   Meetings of the Transportation Advisory Committee shall be held at least
once each three (3) months or more frequently as called by the Committee chair
or the Director of Public Works. (§ 1, Ord. 838, eff. March 15, 1979, as
amended by § 1, Ord. 844, eff. May 10, 1979, and § 2, Ord. 1180, eff. June 15,
1995)
Sec. 2-2.2507.   Meetings: Quorum.
   A quorum shall consist of four (4) members of the Transportation Advisory
Committee. A majority vote of the members present shall be required for any
motion, resolution, or other action. (§ 1, Ord. 838, eff. March 15, 1979, as
amended by § 1, Ord. 844, eff. May 10, 1979, and § 2, Ord. 1180, eff. June 15,
1995)
Sec. 2-2.2508.   Duties and responsibilities.
   The Transportation Advisory Committee shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
   (a)   To act in an advisory capacity to the Board concerning transportation
matters;
   (b)   To review and make policy recommendations as follows:
   (1)   Planning, financing, development, and maintenance of routes and
facilities for public transportation, bicycling, surface transportation,
canals, bridges, and ground access to aviation.
   (2)   County, Regional, Metropolitan, State, and Federal transportation
improvement plans.
   (3)   Other transportation-related items as may be identified by the
Committee or referred by the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 838, eff. March 15, 1979, as
amended by § 1, Ord. 844, eff. May 10, 1979, § 3, Ord. 879, eff. May 8, 1980, §
3, Ord. 882, eff. June 12, 1980, and § 2, Ord. 1180, eff. June 15, 1995)
Article 26.
Underground Utility Advisory Committee.*
   *(Repealed by § 8, Ordinance No. 1443, effective July 10, 2014.)
Article 27.
Business License Appeals Board*
*   Sections 2-2.2701 through 2-2.2707, codified from § 1. Ord. 960, eff.
October 6, 1983, repealed by § 4, Ord. 1275, eff. December 6, 2001.
Article 28.
Technical Review Committee on Building Construction*
   *(Repealed by § 9, Ordinance No. 1443, effective July 10, 2014.)
Article 29.
Yolo County Drug, Alcohol, Tobacco Advisory Council*
*   Article 29 entitled “Alcohol and Other Drug Abuse Advisory Committee,”
consisting of Sections 2-2.2901 through 2-2.2907, as added by Ordinance No.
825, effective March 8, 1979, amended in its entirety by Urgency Ordinance No.
1028, effective April 1, 1986. Sections 2-2.2901 through 2-2.2907, codified
from Ordinance No. 1028, amended in their entirety by Ordinance No. 1167,
effective May 26, 1994. Repealed by § 10, Ordinance No. 1443, effective July
10, 2014.
Article 30.
Yolo County Assessment Appeals Board*
*   Article 30 entitled “Voter Registration Outreach Program Committee”,
consisting of Sections 2-2.3001 through 2-2.3009, as added by Ordinance No.
835, effective March 8, 1979, repealed by Ordinance No. 901, effective January
29, 1981. Article 30 entitled “Yolo County Assessment Appeals Board” added by
Ord. 987, eff. October 4, 1984
Sec. 2-2.3001.   Created.
   Pursuant to Section 13 of Article 13 of the Constitution of the State and
Article 1.5 (commencing with Section 1620) of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of Part 3
of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, there is hereby created in the
County a board to be known as the Yolo County Assessment Appeals Board. (§ 1,
Ord. 987, eff. October 4, 1984)
Sec. 2-2.3002.   Membership.
   The Yolo County Assessment Appeals Board shall consist of three (3) members
appointed directly by the Board of Supervisors. Approval of each member shall
be by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors may
appoint not to exceed six (6) alternate members. (§ 1, Ord. 987, eff. October
4, 1984)
Sec. 2-2.3003.   Compensation.
   Members and alternates of the Yolo County Assessment Appeals Board shall be
compensated for attendance at regular and special meetings at the rate of One
Hundred Twenty Five and no/100ths ($125.00) Dollars for meetings of four (4)
hours or less per day and One Hundred Seventy Five and no/100ths ($175.00)
Dollars for meetings over four (4) hours per day. (§ 1, Ord. 987, eff. October
4, 1984, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1229, eff. February 4, 1999)
Sec. 2-2.3004.   Filing Fee for Application for Changed Assessment.
   Pursuant to Section 16 of Article XIII of the California Constitution, there
is hereby established a non-refundable filing fee in the amount of $45.00 for
each Application for Changed Assessment filed with the County of Yolo
Assessment Appeals Board for the Clerk’s services associated with processing
the application and the handling of the appeal. This fee will take effect July
1, 2011. Filing fees are not refunded but may be waived where the applicant
would qualify for a waiver of court fees and costs pursuant to California
Government Code Sections 68630-68641. (§ 1, Ord. 1409, eff. July 2, 2011)
Article 31.
Yolo County Disaster Council
Sec. 2-2.3101.   Purposes.
   The declared purposes of this article are to provide for the preparation and
carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this
County in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency
organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this County
with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected
private persons. (Ord. 1112, eff. December 20, 1990)
Sec. 2-2.3102.   Definition.
   As used in this article, “emergency” shall mean the actual or threatened
existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of
persons and property within this County caused by such conditions as severe air
pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other
conditions which are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services,
personnel, equipment, and facilities of this County, requiring the combined
forces of other political subdivisions for effective response. “Emergency”
shall not include conditions resulting from a labor controversy. (Ord. 1112,
eff. December 20, 1990)
Sec. 2-2.3103.   Disaster council membership.
   The Yolo County Disaster Council, “Council,” is hereby created and shall
consists of the following:
   (a)   The Chairperson of the Board of Supervisors of the County, who shall
be the chairperson of the Council.
   (b)   The Deputy Director of Emergency Services who shall be the vice
chairperson of the Council.
   (c)   Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current
emergency plan of this county, adopted pursuant to this article.
   (d)   Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans,
professional, or other organizations having an official emergency
responsibility, as may be appointed by the Board of Supervisors. (Ord. 1112,
eff. December 20, 1990)
Sec. 2-2.3104.   Disaster council powers and duties.
   It shall be the duty of the Yolo County Disaster Council, and it is hereby
empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the Board of Supervisors,
emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and
resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans
and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the Chairperson
or, in the Chairperson’s absence from the County or inability to call such
meeting, upon call of the Vice Chairperson. (Ord. 1112, eff. December 20, 1990)
Sec. 2-2.3105.   Director and assistant director of emergency services.
   (a)   There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Services.
The Chairperson of the Board of Supervisors shall be the Director of Emergency
Services.
   (b)   There is hereby created the office of Deputy Director of Emergency
Services. The County Administrative Officer shall be the Deputy Director of
Emergency Services. (Ord. 1112, eff. December 20, 1990)
Sec. 2-2.3106.   Powers and duties of the director and deputy director of
emergency services.
   (a)   The Director is hereby empowered to:
   (1)   Request the Board of Supervisors to proclaim the existence or
threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the Board of Supervisors is in
session, or to issue such proclamation if the Board of Supervisors is not in
session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the Board of
Supervisors shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days
thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.
   (2)   Request or recommend that the County Administrative Officer request
the Governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the
Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the
emergency.
   (3)   Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this
county for the accomplishment of the purposes of this article.
   (4)   Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of
the emergency organization of this County and resolve questions of authority
and responsibility that may arise between them.
   (5)   Represent this County in all dealings with public or private agencies
on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.
   (6)   In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as provided
herein, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the
Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a
“state of war emergency,” the Director is hereby empowered:
   (i)   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related
to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided,
however, that such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest
practicable time by the Board of Supervisors;
   (ii)   To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found
lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the
County for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer
the same for public use;
   (iii)   To require emergency services of any County officer or employee and,
in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the County or the
existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens
of this County as he/she deems necessary in the execution of duties; such
persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are
provided by state law for registered disaster service workers;
   (iv)   To requisition necessary personnel or material of any County
Department or agency; and
   (v)   To execute all of his/her ordinary powers as Chairperson of the Board
of Supervisors, all of the special powers conferred upon him/her by this
article or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the Board
of Supervisors, all powers conferred upon him/her by any statute, by any
agreement approved by the Board of Supervisors, and by any other lawful
authority.
   (b)   The Deputy Director of Emergency Services shall be granted the same
powers as the Director of Emergency Services, to take effect in the event the
Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his/her duties
during an emergency. An order of succession to the positions of Director/
Assistant Director of Emergency shall be designated; such order of succession
shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors.
   (c)   The Deputy Director of Emergency Services shall, under the supervision
of the Director and with the assistance of the emergency service chiefs,
develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this County and
shall have such other power and duties as may be assigned by the Director.
(Ord. 1112, eff. December 20, 1990)
Sec. 2-2.3107.   Emergency organization.
   All officers and employees of this County, together with those volunteer
forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations,
and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons
impressed into service under the provisions of Section
2-2.3106(a)(6)(iii) of this article, who are charged with duties incident to
the protection of life and property in this County during such emergency, shall
constitute the emergency organization of the County of Yolo. Day-to-day
emergency management program support will be provided by the Emergency Services
Coordinator assigned to the Office of Emergency Services within the Yolo County
Communications Emergency Service Agency. During time of emergency, the
Emergency Services Coordinator will serve as staff to the Director/Assistant
Director of Emergency Services. (Ord. 1112, eff. December 20, 1990)
Sec. 2-2.3108.   Emergency plan.
   The Yolo County Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of
the County of Yolo Emergency Plan, which plan shall provide for the effective
mobilization of all of the resources of this County, both public and private,
to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or
state of war emergency. The plan shall provide for the organization, powers and
duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization and shall take effect
upon adoption by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. (Ord. 1112, eff.
December 20, 1990)
Sec. 2-2.3109.   Expenditures.
   Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including
mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct
protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the County of Yolo.
(Ord. 1112, eff. December 20, 1990)
Sec. 2-2.3110.   Punishment of violations.
   It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed Five Hundred
and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6)
months, or both, for any person during a state of war emergency, state of
emergency, or local emergency, to:
   (a)   Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this article, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or
her by virtue of this article.
   (b)   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant
to this article, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to
give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of
inhabitants of this County, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or
protection thereof.
   (c)   Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification
specified by the emergency agency of the State or County. (Ord. 1112, eff.
December 20, 1990)
Article 32.
Solid Waste Independent Hearing Panel*
*   Article 32, codified from Ordinance No. 1141, effective May 28, 1992,
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1418, effective April 12, 2012.
Article 33.
Yolo County Children and Families Commission
Sec. 2-2.3301.   Created.
   There is hereby created the Yolo County Children and Families Commission
which may also be known as First 5 Yolo. (§ 1, Ord. 1231, eff. January 7, 1999,
retroactive to December 8, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1247, eff. June 22,
2000; and § 2, Ord. 1338, eff. November 3, 2005)
Sec. 2-2.3302.   Membership.
   The Commission shall consist of nine (9) members and one (1) alternate
member as follows:
   (a)   One (1) member of the Commission shall be a member of the Board of
Supervisors appointed by the Board of Supervisors, who shall be the Chair of
the Commission.
   (b)   Two (2) members shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors from
among the County Health Officer or persons responsible for management of the
following County functions: children's services, education, public health
services, behavioral health services, social services, tobacco and other
substance abuse prevention and treatment services.
   (c)   One (1) member shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors from
among the following categories: Recipients of project services included in the
County strategic plan; representatives of a local child care resource or
referral agency, or a local child care coordinating group; representatives of a
local organization for prevention of early intervention for families at risk;
representatives of community-based organizations that have the goal of
promoting and nurturing early childhood development; representatives of the
business community and representatives of local medical, pediatric, or
obstetric associations or societies.
   (d)   Five (5) rotating members, of whom one shall be nominated by each
individual Supervisor, shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors from the
following categories: recipients of project services included in the County
strategic plan; educators specializing in early childhood development;
representatives of a local child care resource or referral agency, or a local
child care coordinating group; representatives of a local organization for
prevention of early intervention for families at risk; representatives of
community-based organizations that have the goal of promoting and nurturing
early childhood development; representatives of local school districts; and
representatives of local medical, pediatric, or obstetric associations or
societies.
   (e)   The alternate member shall be a member of the Board of Supervisors. In
the absence of the voting member of the Board of Supervisors, the alternate
member shall have all of the power of a voting member.
   (f)   A Commissioner, other than the Board of Supervisors member appointed
pursuant to Subsection (a) above, may request the Board of Supervisors, in
writing, to grant the Commissioner a leave of absence for a specified period of
time. The Board of Supervisors may deny the request, or may grant the request
for a specified period, if the leave will not adversely impact the functioning
of the Commission. If the request is granted, the Board of Supervisors shall
appoint an interim Commissioner to serve on the Commission in place of the
member on leave. If the Commissioner on leave does not return by the expiration
of the specified time period, the position shall be deemed vacant, and will be
filled by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to the procedure specified in
Section
2-2.3303 for filling vacancies.
(§ 1, Ord. 1231, eff. January 7, 1999, retroactive to December 8, 1998, as
amended by § 1, Ord. 1233, eff. April 15, 1999, § 1, Ord. 1238, eff. July 29,
1999, § 3, Ord. 1247, eff. June 22, 2000, § 1, Ord. 1314, eff. February 29,
2004, § 3, Ord. 1338, eff. November 3, 2005, § 2, Ord. 1387, eff. August 14,
2009, and § 2, Ord. 1435, eff. November 21, 2013)
Sec. 2-2.3303.   Membership: Terms.
   The terms of the member and alternate who are members of the Board of
Supervisors shall be one (1) year and shall commence on February 1 and end on
January 31. The terms of rotating members shall be four (4) years and shall
commence on February 1 and end on January 31. A vacancy shall exist upon the
death, resignation or termination of residence within the designated area from
which the member was appointed. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term by the appointing authority. Each member shall serve upon the appointment
and qualification of a successor. Of the initial members, two (2) chosen by lot
shall serve a term of two (2) years. The terms of service shall be computed
from February 1, 1999. (§ 1, Ord. 1231, eff. January 7, 1999, retroactive to
December 8, 1998; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1238, eff. July 29, 1999, and § 4,
Ord. 1247, eff. June 22, 2000)
Sec. 2-2.3304.   Membership: Termination.
   (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article concerning terms, all
members of the Commission shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing
authority, and may be removed at any time for any reason by the appointing
authority.
   (b)   Any member of any board, commission or committee may resign at any
time by submitting a written resignation to the Clerk of the Board. Any such
resignation shall be effective upon submission, or upon such later date as is
specified in the resignation if such date is not more than sixty (60) days
after the date of submission. (§ 1, Ord. 1231, eff. January 7, 1999,
retroactive to December 8, 1998; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1247, eff. June 22,
2000)
Sec. 2-2.3305.   Officers.
   The members of the Children and Families Commission shall elect a vice chair
from the rotating members. The election shall be held at the first meeting and
at each annual meeting thereafter to fill the office for the next succeeding
twelve (12) month term. (§ 1, Ord. 1231, eff. January 7, 1999, retroactive to
December 8, 1998; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1238, eff. July 29, 1999; and § 6,
Ord. 1247, eff. June 22, 2000)
Sec. 2-2.3306.   Meetings.
   Meetings of the Commission shall be held at such regular times as determined
by the Commission. (§ 1, Ord. 1231, eff. January 7, 1999, retroactive to
December 8, 1998)
Sec. 2-2.3307.   Meetings: Minutes.
   The Board of Supervisors shall designate a representative of the County who
shall serve as the liaison to the Commission and shall assist in the
administration of all meetings and the Commission shall file a copy of all
minutes with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors. (§ 1, Ord. 1231, eff.
January 7, 1999, retroactive to December 8, 1998)
Sec. 2-2.3308.   Duties and Responsibilities.
   The Commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
   (a)   To adopt and complete a County strategic plan for the support and
improvement of early childhood development within the County that complies with
the following:
   (1)   The County strategic plan shall be consistent with, and in furtherance
of the purposes of the “California Children and Families Act of 1998”, Health
and Safety Code section 130100 and following, and any guidelines adopted by the
California Children and Families Commission pursuant to subdivision (b) of
Section 130125 of the Health and Safety Code that are in effect at the time the
plan is adopted.
   (2)   The County strategic plan shall, at a minimum, include the following:
description of the goals and objectives proposed to be attained; a description
of the programs, services, and projects proposed to be provided, sponsored, or
facilitated; and a description of how measurable outcomes of such programs,
services, and projects will be determined by the County Commission using
appropriate reliable indicators. No County strategic plan shall be deemed
adequate or complete until and unless the plan describes how programs,
services, and projects relating to early childhood development within the
County will be integrated into a consumer-oriented and easily accessible
system.
   (b)   To periodically review its County strategic plan and to revise the
plan as may be necessary or appropriate.
   (c)   To submit its adopted County strategic plan, and any subsequent
revisions thereto, to the State Commission.
   (d)   To prepare and adopt an annual audit and report pursuant to Section
130150 of the Health and Safety Code. The County Commission shall conduct at
least one public hearing prior to adopting any annual audit and report. The
County Commission shall measure the outcomes of county funded programs through
the use of applicable, reliable indicators and review that information on a
periodic basis as part of the public review of its county strategic plan. (as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1351, eff. July 20, 2006).
   (e)   To administer programs authorized by and funds allocated and
appropriated to this Commission by the California Children and Families Act in
accordance with the intent of that Act to emphasize local decision making and
to provide greater local flexibility in designing delivery systems, including,
but not limited to:
   (1)   implementing the County strategic plan with respect to non County
providers by entering into funding agreements in accordance with the provisions
and standards of that plan.
   (2)   implementing the County strategic plan with respect to County
departments by funding programs and submitting them to the Board of Supervisors
for adoption and appropriation to County departments in accordance with the
provisions and standards of that plan.
   (3)   administering funds allocated to administrative purposes by purchasing
personal property reasonably necessary therefor in accordance with standards
and procedures of the County Purchasing Agent, by making contracts for services
(including those with persons especially trained, experienced, expert and
competent to perform special services) in accordance with the standards and
procedures of the County, exercising or delegating to its executive director
the authority of an appointing authority pursuant to the County Personnel
Regulations, and determining the number, qualifications, and compensation of
employees consistent with the Personnel Regulations of the County and other
aspects of the County personnel system. (§ 1, Ord. 1231, eff. January 7, 1999,
retroactive to December 8, 1998; as amended by § 7, Ord. 1247, eff. June 22,
2000; and § 1, Ord. 1254, eff. Sept. 28, 2000)
Sec. 2-2.3309.   Procedural Requirements.
   The Commission shall comply with the following procedural requirements in
carrying out its duties and responsibilities:
   (a)   All meetings shall be held and conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the Brown Act, Government Code section 54950 and following.
   (b)   Before adopting a County strategic plan, the Commission shall both
obtain the recommendations of the Board of Supervisors and hold at least one
public hearing on the proposed plan.
   (c)   Before adopting any revisions to the County strategic plan, the
Commission shall both obtain the recommendations of the Board of Supervisors
and hold at least one public hearing on the proposed plan.
   (d)   Before adopting any annual audit or report, the County Commission
shall obtain the recommendations of the Board of Supervisors and hold at least
one public hearing. (§ 1, Ord. 1231, eff. January 7, 1999, retroactive to
December 8, 1998)
Sec. 2-2.3310.   Compensation.
   Members of the Commission shall not be compensated for their service except
that they shall be paid reasonable per diem and reimbursement of reasonable
expenses for attending meetings and discharging other official responsibilities
as authorized by the Commission in the manner prescribed by resolution by the
Board of Supervisors.
(§ 1, Ord. 1231, eff. January 7, 1999, retroactive to December 8, 1998)
Article 34.
Partnership HealthPlan of California Commission*
Sec. 2-2.3401.   Creation.
   Partnership HealthPlan of California Commission (“Commission”) is a multi-
county commission that has created a Medi-Cal managed health care plan for
Medi-Cal recipients. The purpose of this chapter is to update the terms of the
County of Yolo’s participation in the Commission. This chapter allows the
implementation of a county organized health system in Yolo County, as
authorized by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 14087.54.
   The Commission has a proven record of improving health care access to its
members, who are Medi-Cal recipients, and improving Medi-Cal reimbursement
rates to health care providers. The Commission links each member with a primary
care provider and has been successful in reducing inappropriate use of
emergency rooms, providing appropriate levels of inpatient care for its
members, developing innovative case management programs and arranging for the
provision of an enhanced level of local health care services.
   The Commission negotiated a contract with the California Department of
Health Care Services, as specified in Welfare and Institutions Code Section
14087.5, to arrange for the provision of health care services provided under
Welfare and Institutions Code Chapter 7, Part 3, Division 9. The Commission is
authorized to negotiate a contract with the California Department of Health
Care Services to expand the Commission into additional member counties. This
expansion is expected to occur on or about January 1, 2024. (§ 2, Ord. 1565,
eff. February 22, 2024)
Sec. 2-2.3402.   Authorization to Join Commission.
   Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 14087.54, the Yolo County
Board of Supervisors hereby authorizes the County of Yolo to continue
participation in the Commission under the terms set forth in this ordinance.
(§ 2, Ord. 1565, eff. February 22, 2024)
Sec. 2-2.3403.   Membership of Commission.
   The Commission shall be comprised of Commissioners appointed by the Board of
Supervisors of each member county. Unless and until the Commission, by formal
action, establishes a different formula or system of membership, Commission
representation for each member county shall be based on the number of Medi-Cal
beneficiaries enrolled in the Commission’s health plan in each county according
to the following formula:
   (a)   Zero (0) to forty-five thousand (45,000) Medi-Cal beneficiaries within
the county equals one Commission seat.
   (b)   Forty-five thousand one (45,001) to sixty thousand (60,000) Medi-Cal
beneficiaries within the county equals two Commission seats.
   (c)   Sixty thousand one plus (60,001+) Medi-Cal beneficiaries within the
county equals three Commission seats.
   The Yolo County Board of Supervisors will prioritize the selection of
members from the following settings: safety net providers, including providers
at federally qualified health centers, behavioral health providers, regional
center providers, local education authorities, dental providers, Indian Health
Service facility providers and hospital providers with special efforts to
select candidates, as opportunity allows, who reflect the diversity of the
community and regions including, but not limited to race, ethnicity, language,
and disability status.
   Members appointed by the Yolo County Board of Supervisors shall serve at the
pleasure of the Board and shall be selected as follows:
   (1)   The Director of Health & Human Services will serve as the “County
Representative”and primary member representing the County of Yolo unless
otherwise specified by the Yolo County Board of Supervisors.
   (2)   Other members will be nominated by local health care providers that
serve Medi-Cal beneficiaries such as hospitals, physicians, community clinics
and health centers.
   The Yolo County Health & Human Services Director will receive and evaluate
nominations and make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors. The Director
will endeavor to ensure that one member will be a physician. (§ 2, Ord. 1565,
eff. February 22, 2024)
Sec. 2-2.3404.   Term of Office.
   The term for the Commissioners shall be for four (4)-year periods. Nothing
herein shall prohibit a person from serving more than one term. Each Commission
member shall remain in office at the conclusion of that member’s term until a
successor member has been selected and installed into office. An office shall
become vacant if a Commissioner fails to attend three (3) Commission meetings
in a row. (§ 2, Ord. 1565, eff. February 22, 2024)
Sec. 2-2.3405.   Powers and Duties of Commission.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Welfare and Institutions Code Section
14087.54, as it exists on the date of adoption of this ordinance, the
Commission shall:
   (a)   Have the power to negotiate the exclusive contract with the California
State Department of Health Care Services as specified in Welfare and
Institutions Code Section 14087.5, and to arrange for the provision of health
care services provided under Chapter 7, Part 3, Division 9 of the Welfare and
Institutions Code;
   (b)   Be considered an entity separate from the County of Yolo;
   (c)   File the statement required by Government Code Section 53051;
   (d)   Have the power to acquire, possess, and dispose of real or personal
property, including creating and/or acquiring affiliated or supporting
entities, as may be necessary for the performance of its functions; to employ
personnel, including health care providers in accordance with California law;
to contract for services required to meet its obligations; and to sue or be
sued; and
   (e)   Have all the rights, powers, duties, privileges, and immunities
conferred by Article 2.8 of Chapter 7, Part 3, Division 9 of the Welfare and
Institutions Code in addition to those previously specified in this Section. (§
2, Ord. 1565, eff. February 22, 2024)
Sec. 2-2.3406.   Obligations of Commission.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Welfare and Institutions Code Section 14087.54
(d) as it exists on the date of adoption of this ordinance, any obligations of
the Commission, statutory, contractual, or otherwise, shall be the obligations
solely of the Commission and shall not be the obligations of the County of
Yolo. The Commission shall do business as Partnership HealthPlan of California.
(§ 2, Ord. 1565, eff. February 22, 2024)
Sec. 2-2.3407.   Committees.
   The Commission may establish advisory committees from time to time for any
purpose that will be beneficial in accomplishing the work of the Commission. (§
2, Ord. 1565, eff. February 22, 2024)
Sec. 2-2.3408.   Termination of Membership.
   The Commission shall continue to represent the County of Yolo until such
time as the Yolo County Board of Supervisors terminates the representation. To
terminate the representation, the Yolo County Board of Supervisors or its
designee shall provide ninety (90)-days’ notice to other member counties and
the California Department of Health Care Services, as specified in Welfare and
Institutions Code Section 14087.54(g). (§ 2, Ord. 1565, eff. February 22, 2024)
Article 35.
Yolo County In-Home Supportive Services Public Authority
Sec. 2-2.3501.   Yolo County In-Home Supportive Services Public Authority
Created; Separate Entity.
   (a)   Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 12301.6, there is
hereby created the Yolo County In-Home Supportive Services Public Authority.
   (b)   The Yolo County In-Home Supportive Services Public Authority shall be
a public entity separate from the County of Yolo, and shall file the statements
required by Government Code Section 53051. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September 27,
2001)
Sec. 2-2.3502.   Definitions.
   (a)   “IHSS” means in-home supportive services as described in Welfare and
Institutions Code Section 12300 et seq.
   (b)   “In-home supportive services personnel” and “provider” mean a person
who provides in-home supportive services to one or more recipients.
   (c)   “Public Authority” means the Yolo County In-Home Supportive Services
Public Authority.
   (c)   “Recipient” means a person eligible and authorized to receive in-home
supportive services under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 12300 et seq.
   (d)   “County” means the County of Yolo. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September 27,
2001)
Sec. 2-2.3503.   Purpose.
   The purpose of the Public Authority is to provide for the delivery of in-
home supportive services to qualified residents of the County, subject to all
applicable Federal and State laws and regulations, and to the provisions of
this Article. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3504.   Governing Board: Board of Supervisors.
   The governing body of the Public Authority is the Yolo County Board of
Supervisors (hereinafter the “Public Authority Board”). (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff.
September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3505.   Public Authority Board Powers.
   The Public Authority shall be a corporate public body, exercising public and
essential governmental functions, and, subject to the provisions set forth in
this Article, shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out
the delivery of in-home supportive services in the County, including but not
limited to the power to contract for services pursuant to Welfare and
Institutions Code Sections 12302 and 12302.1, and to make or provide for direct
payment to a provider chosen by the recipient pursuant to Welfare and
Institutions Code Sections 12302 and 12302.2. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September
27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3506.   Public Authority Duties and
   Responsibilities.
   The Public Authority shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
   (a)   Provide assistance to recipients in finding in-home supportive
services personnel through the establishment of a registry.
   (b)   Investigate the qualifications and background of potential in-home
supportive services personnel.
   (c)   Establish a referral system under which in-home supportive services
personnel shall be referred to recipients.
   (d)   Provide for training for providers and recipients; provided, however,
that the Public Authority shall not be obligated to provide training directly,
to pay for training provided privately or in the community, to pay providers
for the time spent in training, to accompany recipients to training, to pay for
transportation to training, or to pay for any materials required by the
training. The Public Authority also shall not be obligated to screen or be
responsible for the content of any training it informs providers or recipients
is available in the community (i.e., not provided directly by the Public
Authority), or to ensure that any provider or recipient attend or complete any
training.
   (e)   Ensure that the requirements of the personal care option pursuant to
Subchapter 19 (commencing with Section 1396) of Chapter 7 of Title 42 of the
United States Code are met.
   (f)   Develop written procedures to address consumer and consumer
representative complaints related to a provider’s delivery of in-home
supportive services.
   (g)   Adopt rules and regulations for the administration of the Public
Authority consistent with the provisions of this Article.
   (h)   Perform other functions related to the delivery of in-home supportive
services as may hereafter be prescribed by law. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September
27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3507.   Public Authority: Administration.
   There shall be a director of the Public Authority, who shall be appointed by
and serve at the pleasure of the Public Authority Board. The Public Authority
Board shall provide for the appointment of all other Public Authority
employees, and may provide that it shall make any such appointments, or may
delegate that authority to the director. Officers, officials, employees, agents
and volunteers of the Public Authority shall not be deemed to be officers,
officials, employees, agents or volunteers of the County for any purpose. (§ 1,
Ord. 1270, eff. September 27, 2001, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1367, eff. February
8, 2008)
Sec. 2-2.3508.   Public Authority Board: Advisory Committee.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors shall appoint an advisory committee for the
Public Authority, which shall consist of eleven (11) individuals, no fewer than
fifty percent (50%) of whom shall be individuals who are current or past users
of personal assistance services paid for through public or private funds or
recipients of services under Article 7 of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare
and Institutions Code.
   (b)   The Yolo County IHSS Advisory Committee shall serve as the advisory
committee described in subsection (a) of this section. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff.
September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3509.   Public Authority: Employment Functions.
   (a)   The Public Authority shall be deemed to be the employer, within the
meaning of Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 3500) of Division 4 of Title 1
of the Government Code, of in-home supportive services personnel referred to
recipients by the Public Authority. The Public Authority shall preserve the
individual provider mode of service for recipients of IHSS and shall ensure
that recipients retain the unconditional and exclusive right to hire, fire and
supervise the work of their providers. In no event shall in-home supportive
services personnel be deemed to be employees of the County for any purpose.
   (b)   Recipients shall retain the right to select, terminate, and direct the
work of any in-home supportive services personnel providing services to them.
In addition, the Public Authority shall have no authority or jurisdiction to
regulate, control, or limit the rights and responsibilities of recipients of
in-home supportive services to recruit, hire, fire or supervise providers. The
right to supervise includes, but is not limited to, the right to determine
matters such as work schedules, tasks and duties, assignment and direction of
work, methods and standards of care and conduct, discipline, provision for
safety and security, control of premises, any in-home living or other
accommodations, and final resolution of concerns, problems and complaints
relating to such supervision. Recipients retain such rights and
responsibilities independent of the Public Authority, just as they held such
rights and responsibilities independent of the County prior to the formation of
the Public Authority. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3510.   State’s Responsibilities.
   The creation and operation of the Public Authority shall not affect the
State’s responsibilities with respect to the State payroll system, unemployment
insurance, or workers’ compensation and other provisions of Welfare and
Institutions Code Section 12302.2 for individual providers of in-home
supportive services. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3511.   County Responsibilities.
   The County shall retain the responsibility to determine recipient
eligibility for IHSS and to determine the number of hours of service each
eligible recipient may receive. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3512.   Recipient Selection.
   Recipients of in-home supportive services may select in-home supportive
services personnel who are not referred to them by the Public Authority. Those
personnel shall nevertheless be referred by the recipients to the Public
Authority for the purposes of wages, benefits, and other terms and conditions
of employment. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3513.   Public Authority: Labor Relations.
   (a)   Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the
Public Authority Board shall adopt such personnel and labor relations rules and
regulations as it deems necessary or appropriate and are consistent with
Federal, State and local laws and regulations.
   (b)   Due to the special and critical health-care services provided through
the IHSS program, the Yolo County Board of Supervisors hereby finds that any
interruption of such services would pose an imminent threat to the health and
safety of the recipients of IHSS services and to the community. In order to
minimize the likelihood of such interruption and thereby protect the health and
safety and to promote harmony and productive labor relations between the Public
Authority and any labor organization which seeks to represent or represents
IHSS providers or Public Authority personnel:
   (1)   The Public Authority shall have a non-strike clause in any and all
collective bargaining agreements with IHSS providers and with personnel of the
Public Authority. The non-strike clause shall continue at least one year beyond
the other provisions of any and all collective bargaining agreements.
   (2)   Any collective bargaining agreement reached between the Public
Authority and any labor organization certified to represent IHSS providers
shall be subject to the limitations of this Article, and to ratification in its
entirety (i.e., all provisions of such agreements shall be subject to the same
vote) by a simple majority of the votes cast in a ballot in which all
providers, as defined by the Public Authority Board, shall be eligible to
participate. Final adoption of any such agreement shall be by a simple majority
vote of the Public Authority Board. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3514.   County Costs.
   The costs and expenses of the County to provide administrative, legal, labor
relations, and other services requested by the Public Authority and agreed to
by the County, and to make payments to or provide benefits for in-home
supportive services providers, shall be charged against the funds of the Public
Authority. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3515.   PublicAuthority-County Agreement.
   Prior to initiating delivery of IHSS through the Public Authority, the
Public Authority shall enter into an agreement with the County specifying the
roles and responsibilities of each party, provide for the County’s provision of
such administrative, legal, labor relations, and other services to the Public
Authority as the parties may deem necessary or appropriate, and including
provisions which ensure compliance with all applicable Federal, State and local
laws and regulations, including but not limited to all statutory and regulatory
provisions applicable to the delivery of IHSS, and Federal and State labor
laws. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3516.   Fiscal Provisions.
   (a)   IHSS services shall not be reduced in order to fund the Public
Authority or implementation of Government Code Sections 3500 et seq.
   (b)   To ensure that the Public Authority’s budget procedures and adoption
are compatible with the County’s budget, the Public Authority Board shall adopt
its budget under the same procedural laws, rules and policies that control the
County budget process.
   (c)   The Public Authority Board shall not agree to or approve any
collective bargaining or other agreement that requires an increase in wages or
benefits unless there is a State or Federal match for such increases.
   (d)   The establishment and operation of the Public Authority or the
application of Government Code Sections 3500 et seq., shall not result in
payments from the County’s general fund beyond the County’s annual
appropriation for the Public Authority, if any, which shall be an absolute
limit on County cost.
   (e)   The maximum amount of County funds available in any given budget year
for the Public Authority’s wage and benefit negotiations, if any, shall be set
by the Board of Supervisors as part of the County’s annual budget as it may be
amended from time to time. While the establishment of this figure shall not
obligate the County, it shall serve as the absolute limit to County costs for
any increases negotiated in collective bargaining taking place that fiscal
year. The absolute cap on annual County spending on wage or benefits increases
shall not be affected by any potential changes in State or Federal
reimbursement rates.
   (f)   The total of all operating costs, wages, and benefits proposed or
established by the Public Authority Board shall be consistent with the
provisions of the County budget. The Public Authority Board shall not establish
a payment rate, including costs of wages, benefits and operation, until the
Public Authority Board determines that the funds necessary for the payment rate
are legally available. The annual appropriation for the Public Authority, if
any, contained in the County’s fiscal budget for any fiscal year shall be an
absolute limit on County cost for that fiscal year. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff.
September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3517.   Limitations of Public Authority Liability.
   (a)   The Public Authority shall not be deemed to be the employer of in-home
supportive services personnel referred to recipients for purposes of liability
due to the negligence or intentional torts of the in-home supportive services
personnel.
   (b)   The Public Authority shall not be held liable for any action or
omission of any in-home supportive services personnel whom the Public Authority
did not list on a registry or otherwise refer to a recipient. (§ 1, Ord. 1270,
eff. September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3518.   Limitations of County Liability.
   (a)   The County shall be immune from any liability resulting from the
implementation of this Article or Welfare and Institutions Code Section
12301.6.
   (b)   The County shall be immune from any liability resulting from the
administration of the IHSS program pursuant to this Article or Welfare and
Institutions Code Section 12301.6.
   (c)   Any obligation of the Public Authority, whether statutory,
contractual, or otherwise, shall be the obligation solely of the Public
Authority and shall not be the obligation of the County. Any and all contracts,
leases, or other agreements of any nature, including collective bargaining
agreements, between the Public Authority and third parties other than the
County shall contain an express provision advising the third party that the
Public Authority is a separate governmental entity and that such agreement does
not bind the County. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3519.   Liability Insurance.
   Without limiting the Public Authority’s indemnification of the County as set
forth below, the Public Authority shall acquire and maintain appropriate
insurance in amounts and coverage as are determined by the County’s Risk
Manager to be adequate, and shall name the County, its elected and appointed
officers, employees and agents as additional insureds on any policies of
insurance maintained by the Public Authority. Evidence of such insurance shall
be provided to the County’s Risk Manager within thirty days of procurement. (§
1, Ord. 1270, eff. September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3520.   Indemnification.
   The Public Authority shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the County,
its elected and appointed officers, employees and agents from and against any
and all liability, including defense costs and legal fees, and claims for
damages of any nature whatsoever, including but not limited to personal injury
or property damages, arising from or connected with any act or omission of any
officer or personnel of the Public Authority. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September
27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3521.   Severability.
   If any provision of this Article, or the application of such provision to
any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remaining provisions of this
Article shall be deemed severable from the invalid provision and shall remain
in full force and effect. (§ 1, Ord. 1270, eff. September 27, 2001)
Sec. 2-2.3522.   Termination: Review.
   No later than February 1, 2004, the Board of Supervisors shall review the
provisions of this Article, including but not limited to the creation of an
independent public authority for the purposes of determining whether to provide
for the appointment of an independent governing board for the Public Authority,
or whether to otherwise modify or repeal the provisions of this Article, and to
take such other actions as the Board of Supervisors may deem appropriate.
Article 36.
Procedures For Advisory Boards, Commissions and Committees Established By The
Board of Supervisors
Sec. 2-2.3601.   Applicability.
   This Article shall apply to any advisory board, commission and committee,
and members thereof, established by the Board of Supervisors by ordinance,
resolution or minute order. The provisions of this Article shall supersede all
conflicting rules except for the Bylaws approved by the Board of Supervisors
for the General Plan Citizens Advisory Committees, unless otherwise required by
State or Federal law, or otherwise expressly provided in a resolution or
ordinance adopted by the Board of Supervisors. (§ 2, Ord. 1309, eff. October
16, 2003, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1394, eff. November 12, 2009)
Sec. 2-2.3602.   Definitions: "advisory board, commission, and committees";
“General Plan Citizens Advisory Committee”; "representational members",
"rotating members".
   As used herein:
   (a)   An "advisory board, commission or committee" shall mean any board,
commission and committee established by the Board of Supervisors by ordinance,
resolution or minute order that does not have the power to take final action on
behalf of the County or any other entity, with the exception of making
recommendations, issuing reports, and taking similar actions that require
further action by this Board or some other person or entity in order to have
binding effect.
   (b)   A “General Plan citizens advisory committee” shall mean any advisory
committee established by the Board of Supervisors by ordinance, resolution or
minute order that has as its primary functions to advise and make
recommendations to the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors on General
Plan policies, zoning and land use applications, and other growth related
issues. Such General Plan citizens advisory committees shall be governed by the
rules established by separate Bylaws approved by the Board of Supervisors, not
by this Article, to the extent that this Article may be inconsistent with those
Bylaws and the attachments thereto. (§ 3, Ord. 1394, eff. November 12, 2009).
   (c)   A "representational member" shall mean a member appointed for no fixed
term, to represent a particular agency, board, commission, committee,
department or other organization as specified by the enabling statute,
ordinance, resolution or minute order.
   (d)   A "rotating member" shall mean a member of a board, commission or
committee appointed for a fixed term. Unless otherwise expressly specified, all
members shall be rotating members and shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors. (§ 2, Ord. 1309, eff. October 16, 2003)
Sec. 2-2.3603.   Membership: Residency; Limitations.
   (a)   Every rotating member of a board, commission or committee shall be a
resident of Yolo County; provided, however, that the foregoing provision shall
not apply if the Board of Supervisors determines that there is no County
resident reasonably available with the qualifications or subject matter
expertise required by the enabling statute, ordinance, resolution or minute
order.
   (b)   County employees may not serve as a constituent member of any board,
commission or committee that makes decisions or recommendations pertaining to
the functional areas in which the employee works; as used herein, "constituent
member" means a member appointed to represent the public or a portion thereof
at large, as opposed to one appointed to represent a particular professional or
technical expertise. Any dispute regarding the application of the foregoing
shall be decided by the Board of Supervisors. (§ 2, Ord. 1309, eff. October 16,
2003)
Sec. 2-2.3604.   Appointment and Removal; Supervisorial District Nomination;
Resignation.
   (a)   A rotating member shall be appointed by majority vote of the Board of
Supervisors, shall serve at the pleasure of the Board, and may be removed at
any time for any reason by majority vote of the Board, and a representational
member shall be appointed by, serve at the pleasure of, and be removed at any
time for any reason by the appointing authority for that member.
   (b)   Whenever any provision of law provides that a member of a board,
commission or committee appointed by the Board of Supervisors shall reside in,
be selected from, or represent a particular supervisorial district, the member
of the Board of Supervisors representing that supervisorial district shall
nominate a qualified person for appointment by the Board.
   (c)   Any member of any board, commission or committee may resign at any
time by submitting a written resignation to the Clerk of the Board. Any such
resignation shall be effective upon submission if no effective date is
specified therein or, if an effective date is specified, upon such later date
as is specified in the resignation if such date is not more than sixty (60)
days after the date of submission or upon the sixtieth (60th) day after
submission if the date specified is more than sixty (60) days after the date of
submission. (§ 2, Ord. 1309, eff. October 16, 2003)
Sec. 2-2.3605.   Terms; Vacancy.
   (a)   The term of any member of a board, commission or committee, shall be
as follows:
   (1)   The terms of a majority of the initial appointments to a board,
commission or committee shall be for two (2) years and the terms of the
remaining members shall be for four (4) years. The initial appointees shall
determine these terms among themselves by drawing lots;
   (2)   Thereafter, the terms shall be four years;
   (3)   A person appointed to fill a vacancy that has been created by the
resignation, removal, disqualification or death of a member shall serve for the
remainder of the existing term.
   (b)   The prescribed terms shall commence February 1 and end January 31;
provided, however, that the term of an incumbent shall not end until a
successor is appointed.
   (c)   A vacancy shall occur upon the death, resignation, removal or
disqualification of any member (including but not limited to the termination of
residency in the County or in any district, city or other area if required, or
the cessation of the status which qualified the member for appointment). (§ 2,
Ord. 1309, eff. October 16, 2003)
Sec. 2-2.3606.   Quorum; Voting; Rules; Permissive Use of Roberts Rules, etc.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided by law, a majority of the appointed members
of any board, commission or committee (i.e., not including vacancies) shall be
required to constitute a quorum. Except for adjournment of the meeting, no
action may be taken by any board, commission or committee unless a quorum is
present.
   (b)   A majority vote of those present and constituting a quorum shall be
required for any action by the board, commission or committee. However, any
member who abstains due to a legal conflict of interest shall not be counted in
determining the existence of a quorum or a majority vote.
   (c)   The board, commission, or committee may adopt such by-laws and other
rules for the conduct of its business as it deems necessary, provided that such
rules shall be consistent with all applicable Federal, State and County laws
and regulations.
   (d)   Roberts Rules of Order, and any other procedural rules that are not
legally binding, shall not govern the proceedings. However, they may be used
for procedural guidance when considered appropriate by the chair unless a
majority vote of the members who are then present decide otherwise. (§ 2, Ord.
1309, eff. October 16, 2003)
Sec. 2-2.3607.   Meetings; Requirements; Officers; Minutes.
   (a)   Regular meetings shall be held at such times and places as may be
specified in the by-laws or order of the board, commission or committee.
Special meetings may be called by the chair or a majority of the appointed
voting members.
   (b)   Every board, commission or committee shall meet at least once each
year, on or before March 31 of each year, and at the first meeting of each year
shall select from among its members the following: a chair to preside over all
meetings; a vice-chair to act in the absence of the chair; a secretary to draft
and keep the minutes and other records of actions by the board, commission or
committee, unless the Board of Supervisors has otherwise provided that such
functions shall be performed and fulfilled by a County staff member; and such
other officers and sub-committees as the board, commission or committee may
deem necessary. The term of all such offices shall be one (1) year or until a
successor is selected, and any vacancy in any such office shall be filled by
the board, commission or committee for the unexpired portion of the term of
such office.
   (c)   Minutes shall include the names of all members who are present and
absent, all reports received, approved or otherwise considered, any formal
actions or votes taken (including but not limited to recommendations adopted)
and the vote of each member who voted thereon, and such additional information
as is deemed necessary and appropriate. Copies of all minutes shall be
transmitted to the Board of Supervisors.
(§ 2, Ord. 1309, eff. October 16, 2003)
Sec. 2-2.3608.   Compliance with Laws.
   All meetings and actions of all boards, commissions and committees and their
members shall comply with the Brown Act (Government Code Section 54950 and
following), the Political Reform Act and other conflict of interest laws
(Government Code Sections 1090 and following and 87100 and following; Yolo
County Code Section
2-6.42 and the Yolo County Conflict of Interest Resolution), and the Public
Records Act (Government Code Section 6250 and following), as well as with all
other applicable laws and regulations as may be adopted or amended from time-
to-time. (§ 2, Ord. 1309, eff. October 16, 2003)
Article 37.
Housing Commission
Sec. 2-2.3701.   Established.
   A separate Housing Commission (Commission) for the Housing Authority of the
County of Yolo under Health and Safety Code § 34240 is hereby established. (§
2, Ord. 1406, eff. April 14, 2011, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1498, eff. June 21,
2018)
Sec. 2-2.3702.   Membership.
   The Commission shall be governed by a Board of Commissioners consisting of
seven members appointed by the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors
hereby expresses its intent to appoint the seven commissioners in the following
manner:
   (a)   Five (5) jurisdictional members, one (1) each from the following
jurisdictions: County of Yolo, City of Davis, City of West Sacramento, City of
Winters, and the City of Woodland. Each jurisdiction shall also have the option
of nominating an alternate member to attend commission meetings when their
principal member would be otherwise unable to attend. The process for
nominating such members is set forth in Section
2-2.3705, below. If any of the five seats reserved for jurisdictional members
cannot be filled by a jurisdictional appointee within 90 days (or longer in the
Board's sole discretion) after the vacancy first occurred despite reasonable
efforts to identify jurisdictional nominees, the Board may fill the seat with
an appointee residing anywhere within the County. Any individual appointed in
such a manner shall hold the seat for one term, at the conclusion of which a
jurisdictional appointee shall again be sought.
   (b)   Two (2) tenant members shall be appointed by the Commission from
amongst Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher recipients of Yolo County Housing and
tenants of Low Income Public Housing of Yolo County Housing, one of whom shall
be over the age of sixty-two (62) years of age if Yolo County Housing has
tenants of such age. (§ 2, Ord. 1406, eff. April 14, 2011, as amended by § 3,
Ord. 1498, eff. June 21, 2018, and by § 2, Ord. 1507, eff. March 21, 2019)
Sec. 2-2.3703.   Qualifications.
   Tenant members shall be existing tenants lawfully residing in Low Income
Public Housing of Yolo County Housing or Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher
recipients of Yolo County Housing. One (1) of the tenant members shall be over
the age of sixty-two (62) years of age if Yolo County Housing has tenants of
such age. An individual is not eligible to serve as a tenant member of the
Housing Commission, however, if he/she is a current Resident Liaison, a current
Resident Advisory Board member or a current Resident Council officer. If a
tenant member ceases to be a tenant of Low Income Public Housing of Yolo County
Housing or a Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher recipient of Yolo County Housing,
s/he shall be disqualified from serving and another tenant shall be appointed
by the Board of Supervisors to fill the unexpired term. (§ 2, Ord. 1406, eff.
April 14, 2011, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1498, eff. June 21, 2018)
Sec. 2-2.3704.   Terms of Office.
   (a)   The term of office for each jurisdictional member of the Housing
Commission is four (4) years or until his or her successor is appointed, except
that at the first meeting of the Housing Commission following the effective
date of Ordinance No. 1498, the Housing Commission shall by lot choose one (1)
jurisdictional member to serve an initial one (1) year term, one (1)
jurisdictional member to serve an initial two-year term, and one (1)
jurisdictional member to serve an initial three-year term with the remaining
two (2) jurisdictional members serving four (4) year terms. Successor
jurisdictional members shall be appointed for four (4) year terms and all
vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
   (b)   The term of office for each tenant member of the Housing Commission is
two (2) years or until his or her successor is appointed, their successors must
be tenants members who shall be appointed for two (2) year terms, and all
vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term. (§ 2, Ord. 1406, eff. April
14, 2011, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1498, eff. June 21, 2018)
Sec. 2-2.3705.   Method of Appointment.
   The Board of Supervisors shall make all appointments to the Housing
Commission. The City Council of each city in which Yolo County Housing operates
a housing program shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to nominate a
jurisdictional member and an alternate member to the Housing Commission for the
Board's consideration. The County Administrator may, but is not required to,
nominate a jurisdictional member and an alternate member to the Housing
Commission for the Board of Supervisors' approval. The Chief Executive Officer
of Yolo County Housing shall nominate tenant members to the Housing Commission
for the Board of Supervisors' approval.
   To the extent the Maddy Act and any similar legal requirements apply to
Commission appointments, the County shall take all necessary steps to ensure
compliance prior to making an appointment. (§ 2, Ord. 1406, eff. April 14,
2011, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1498, eff. June 21, 2018, and by § 3, Ord. 1507,
eff. March 21, 2019)
Sec. 2-2.3706.   Method of Removal.
   All Housing Commission members serve at the pleasure of the Board of
Supervisors. As such, they may be removed at any time, and for any or no cause,
by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors. (§ 2, Ord. 1406, eff. April 14,
2011)
Sec. 2-2.3707.   Resignation.
   Any member of the Housing Commission may resign at any time by submitting a
written resignation to the Clerk of the Board. Any such resignation shall be
effective upon submission, or upon such later date as is specified in the
resignation if such date is not more than sixty (60) days after the date of
submission. (§ 2, Ord. 1406, eff. April 14, 2011)
Sec. 2-2.3708.   Vacancies.
   A vacancy shall exist upon the death, resignation, removal, or termination
of residence within the designated area from which the member was appointed.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Board of Supervisors.
(§ 2, Ord. 1406, eff. April 14, 2011)
Sec. 2-2.3709.   Powers of the Housing Commission.
   The Housing Commission shall have those powers specifically set forth in
Health and Safety Code Section 34310 et seq. and such other powers as may be
delegated to it as provided by law. (§ 2, Ord. 1406, eff. April 14, 2011, as
amended by § 7, Ord. 1498, eff. June 21, 2018)
Sec. 2-2.3710.   Quorum.
   Four (4) members of the Housing Commission constitute a quorum for the
purpose of conducting its business and exercising its powers. Action may be
taken by the Housing Commission upon a vote of a majority of the members
empowered to vote, unless in any case the bylaws of the Housing Commission
require a larger number. (§ 2, Ord. 1406, eff. April 14, 2011)
Sec. 2-2.3711.   Officers.
   The Housing Commission shall annually select a chairperson from its members
and such other officers as are provided for in its bylaws. (§ 2, Ord. 1406,
eff. April 14, 2011)
Sec. 2-2.3712.   Bylaws.
   At the first meeting of the Housing Commission following the effective date
of Ordinance No. 1498, the Housing Commission shall adopt bylaws. Thereafter,
the bylaws of the Housing Commission may be amended only with the approval of
at least four (4) members of the Housing Commission at a regular or special
meeting, and any amendment shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of
this ordinance, applicable Health and Safety Code provisions, or enactments
delegating powers to the Housing Commission. (§ 2, Ord. 1406, eff. April 14,
2011, as amended by § 8, Ord. 1498, eff. June 21, 2018)
Article 38. Financial Oversight Committee
Sec. 2-2.3801.   Creation of Financial Oversight Committee.
   (a)   There shall be created a Financial Oversight Committee to advise the
Board regarding the oversight of financial reporting, audit, the treasury,
budgeting, and tax allocation.
   (b)   The Committee shall, subject to Board approval, adopt and revise a
charter for the Committee setting forth membership criteria and powers
consistent with the County Code of Ordinances.
   (c)   The Committee's charter shall include the following requirements for
members of the Committee:
      (i)   A member shall disclose to the committee at a regular meeting any
activities that directly or indirectly raised money for:
         a.   a candidate for local treasurer; or
         b.   a member of the governing board of any local agency that has
deposited funds in the county treasury while a member of the committee.
   For purposes of this subsection, raising money includes soliciting,
receiving, or controlling campaign funds of a candidate, but not the member's
individual campaign contributions or non-financial support. This section does
not apply to a member raising money for his or her own campaign.
      (ii)   A member shall disclose to the Committee at a regular meeting any
contributions, in the previous three years or during the period that the
employee is a member of the committee, by an employer to:
         a.   the campaign of a candidate for the office of local treasurer; or
         b.   to the campaign of a candidate to be a member of a legislative
body of any local agency that has deposited funds in the county treasury.
      (iii)   A member cannot secure employment with, or be employed by, bond
underwriters, bond counsel, security brokerages or dealers, financial services
firms, financial institutions, and municipal advisors with whom the County is
doing business during the member's Financial Oversight Committee membership
period or for one year after leaving the Financial Oversight Committee. This
subsection only applies to employment or soliciting employment, and not other
relationships with such companies with whom the County is doing business.
      (iv)   A member shall disclose to the Committee any honoraria, gifts, and
gratuities from advisors, brokers, dealers, bankers, or other persons who
conduct business with the County Treasurer while a member of the Committee. All
members shall also comply with the requirements of the Political Reform Act or
any other law or regulation regarding the receipt and disclosure of financial
benefits and conflicts.
(§ 4, Ord. 1450, eff. January 5, 2015, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1471, eff.
October 13, 2016)
Sec. 2-2.3802.   Membership.
   The Financial Oversight Committee shall consist of seven (7) voting members
as follows:
   (a)   Two (2) members of the Committee shall be members of the Board,
appointed by the Board.
   (b)   One (1) member of the Committee shall be the Superintendent of the
Office of Education, or his or her designee.
   (c)   One (1) rotating member of the Committee shall be a City Council
member or employee of any City within the County. Prior to each term, each City
within the County may nominate one (1) individual to serve on the Committee.
The Board shall appoint the member from these nominees.
   (d)   One (1) rotating member of the Committee shall be a board member or
employee of any special district within the County which, in the preceding
twelve (12) months, has had funds on deposit with the County treasury. Prior to
each term, each special district whose jurisdiction includes any portion of the
County may nominate one (1) individual to serve on the Committee. The Board
shall appoint the member from these nominees.
   (e)   Two (2) rotating members of the Committee shall be members of the
public residing in the County of Yolo. The member shall not be a board member
or employee of the County, any City within the County, or any special district
within the County which, in the preceding twelve (12) months, has had funds on
deposit with the County treasury. Any qualifying individual may submit an
application, and any Board member or current Committee member may nominate a
qualifying individual to the Board for consideration. The Board shall appoint
the members from these applicants and nominees. At least one (1) public member
appointed by the Board must have financial expertise as described in the
Committee's charter. (§ 4, Ord. 1450, eff. January 5, 2015)
Sec. 2-2.3803.   Membership: Non-Voting and Alternate Members.
   (a)   The Chief Financial Officer and County Administrative Officer, or
their designees, shall each be non-voting members of the Committee.
   (b)   Except for the public members, each member may designate an alternate
member to have all the power of a voting member in his or her absence.
   (c)   Each member shall be financially literate, as described in the
Committee Charter. (§ 4, Ord. 1450, eff. January 5, 2015)
Sec. 2-2.3804.   Membership: Terms and Termination.
   (a)   The terms of each member shall be three (3) years and shall commence
on March 1 and end on February 28 (or February 29 on leap years).
   (b)   A vacancy shall exist upon the death, resignation, or termination of
the member. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Board of
Supervisors. In the case of members nominated by a City or special district,
the Board of Supervisors shall solicit and receive new nominations prior to
making the appointment. Each member shall serve upon the appointment and
qualification of a successor.
   (c)   A member may be terminated for cause by the Board at any time. The
Committee may, by two-thirds vote, recommend to the Board that a member be
terminated. At a public meeting within 60 days of the Committee's
recommendation, the Board shall decide, in its sole discretion, whether or not
to terminate the member.
   (d)   Any member of the Committee may resign at any time by submitting a
written resignation to the Clerk of the Board. Any such resignation shall be
effective upon submission, or upon such later date as is specified in the
resignation if such date is not more than sixty (60) days after the date of
submission.
   (e)   At least one (1) month prior to the Board's appointment of any voting
member, whether to a new term or to complete an existing term, the Clerk of the
Board or the Chief Financial Officer shall solicit nominations for the
positions. For the member nominated by the cities within the County, the
solicitation shall be mailed to each of the cities. For the member nominated by
the districts, the solicitation shall be mailed to each of the special
districts. For the public member, the solicitation shall be published for three
(3) consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation within the County.
The preceding does not apply to the appointment of Committee members who are
members of the Board or the Superintendent of the Office of Education. (§ 4,
Ord. 1450, eff. January 5, 2015, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1471, eff. October 13,
2016)
Sec. 2-2.3805.   Meetings.
   (a)   Meetings of the Committee shall be held at such regular times as
determined by the Committee. In no event shall the Committee meet less than
once every three (3) months.
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors shall designate a representative of the
County who shall serve as the liaison to the Committee and shall assist in the
administration of all meetings.
   (c)   The Committee shall file a copy of all minutes with the Clerk of the
Board of Supervisors.
   (d)   A quorum for meetings of the Committee shall consist of not less than
one-half (1/2) of the currently appointed members. A majority vote of the
members present shall be required for any motion, resolution, or other action.
   (e)   All meetings shall be held and conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act, Government Code section 54950 et seq. (§
4, Ord. 1450, eff. January 5, 2015, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1471, eff. October
13, 2016)
Sec. 2-2.3806.   Duties and Responsibilities.
   (a)   The Committee shall provide oversight on treasury operations,
leadership and independence over the monitoring, review, and audit of the
County's business activities, and ensure accountability and transparency over
the budgetary and tax distribution process.
   (b)   The Committee shall perform all of its duties in an advisory role to
the Board of Supervisors, and shall have no direct authority over the Chief
Financial Officer or any County officer or staff regarding County financial
operations.
   (c)   The Committee shall not be designated the treasury oversight committee
under Government Code section 27131.
   (d)   The Committee shall advise the Board on the selection of an
independent, qualified, and licensed outside auditor to conduct an annual audit
of the internal controls of the County. The auditor shall report to the
Committee the results of the audit upon completion of the audit report. The
Committee shall review the audit report and make recommendations to the Board
related to the audit's findings.
   (e)   The Committee shall advise the Board on the recruitment, hiring, and
termination of the Chief Financial Officer. (§ 4, Ord. 1450, eff. January 5,
2015, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1471, eff. October 13, 2016)
Article 39: Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council
Sec. 2-2.3901.   Creation and Role of Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council and
Subcommittee.
   As required by Welfare and Institutions Code section 749.22, there is hereby
created a Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council to advise the Probation
Department on a continuum of county-based responses to juvenile crime. As
required by Welfare and Institutions Code section 1995, the County also creates
a Juvenile Justice Realignment Subcommittee of the Council. The Council and
Subcommittee shall carry out all functions described in applicable sections of
the California Welfare and Institutions Code, including but not limited to
sections 749.22 and 1995, as may be amended from time to time. The Council may
also advise the Probation Department on additional juvenile justice matters
referred to the Council for its consideration.
   All meetings of the Council and Subcommittee shall comply with the Ralph M.
Brown Act.
(§ 1, Ord. 1530, eff. January 14, 2021)
Sec. 2-2.3902.   Membership.
   The Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council shall consist of the following
members as set forth in Welfare & Institutions Code section 749.22, with
additional membership necessary to allow it to also function as the
Subcommittee required by Welfare and Institutions Code section 1995:
   (a)   chief probation officer, as chair;
   (b)   one representative each from the district attorney's office, the
public defender's office, the sheriff's department, the board of supervisors,
the department of social services, the department of mental health, a
community-based drug and alcohol program, a city police department, the county
office of education or a school district, and the Superior Court;
   (c)   to satisfy statutory requirements pertaining to community
representatives, a Board-appointed community member from each supervisorial
district, each of which fulfills the position of the at-large community
representative, with qualifications per Welfare and Institutions Code section
1995 ("individuals who have experience providing community-based youth
services, youth justice advocates with expertise and knowledge of the juvenile
justice system, or have been directly involved in the juvenile justice
system"); and
   (d)   no less than two representatives from nonprofit community-based
organizations providing services to minors.
   Statutory positions that are within the responsibilities of the Director of
the Health and Human Services Agency shall be filled by individuals that would
hold such positions if the Agency was not consolidated. By way of example only,
the department of social services position referenced in state law shall be
filled by the Agency branch director with comparable responsibilities.
(§ 1, Ord. 1530, eff. January 14, 2021)
Sec. 2-2.3903.   Appointments, Terms and Removal.
   (a)   The community members of the Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council
shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors for a term of four ( 4) years,
unless earlier removed by the Board of Supervisors in its sole discretion.
Membership shall be effective upon appointment by the Board of Supervisors.
However, all terms shall be deemed to have commenced on February 1 following
the initial appointment, and thereafter all terms shall be aligned to begin on
February 1 and to end on January 31. The Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council
may make recommendations to the Board of qualified persons to serve in the
community member positions described in the preceding sections of this Article.
   (b)   The representatives from the district attorney's office, the public
defender's office, the sheriff’s department, the board of supervisors, the
department of social services and the department of mental health, and the
Superior Court, shall be selected by and serve at the pleasure of their
offices.
   (c)   The representative from a community-based drug and alcohol program
shall be selected by and serve at the pleasure of the chair of the Juvenile
Justice Coordinating Council.
   (d)   The representative from a city police department shall be selected by
and serve at the pleasure of the Yolo County Law Enforcement Agency
Coordinating Council.
   (e)   The representative of the county office of education or a school
district shall be selected by and serve at the pleasure of the Yolo County
Office of Education.
   (f)   Representatives from nonprofit community-based organizations providing
services to minors shall be selected by and serve at the pleasure of the chair
of the Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council.
   The Board of Supervisors shall be informed of the community-based
organizations participating on the Juvenile Justice Coordinating Council, as
required by Welfare and Institutions Code section 749.22.
(§ 1, Ord. 1530, eff. January 14, 2021)
Article 40. Audit Committee
Sec. 2-2.4001.   Creation of Audit Committee.
   (a)   There shall be created an Audit Committee (“Committee”) to provide
independent oversight and direction for the County’s internal audit function
and the County’s fraud reporting and whistleblower program.
   (b)   The Committee shall, subject to Board approval, adopt and revise a
charter for the Committee setting forth membership criteria and powers
consistent with the County Code of Ordinances. The Committee’s charter shall
require provisions addressing member disclosure of potential conflicts of
interest; disclosure of financial interests, employment relationships, and
political contributions related to entities under audit or investigation;
restrictions on employment with auditees during and after service; disclosure
of gifts or honoraria from audited entities; and compliance with applicable
ethics laws and regulations, with an exception for County Supervisors acting in
their official capacity as County officials.
(§ 2, Ord. 1582, eff. January 8, 2026)
Sec. 2-2.4002.   Membership.
   The Audit Committee shall consist of three voting members as follows:
   (a)   Two members of the Committee shall be County Supervisors appointed by
the Board.
   (b)   One member of the Committee shall be a member of the public residing
in the County of Yolo. The public member shall not be an officer or employee of
the County. The public member should possess experience in business, finance,
accounting, or a related field and should demonstrate familiarity with internal
auditing, external auditing, or risk oversight practices. Any qualifying
individual may submit an application, and any Board member or current Committee
member
may nominate a qualifying individual to the Board for consideration. The Board
shall appoint the public member from these applicants and nominees.
   (c)   The Board of Supervisors may designate alternate members to exercise
all the powers of voting members in a member’s absence.
(§ 2, Ord. 1582, eff. January 8, 2026)
Sec. 2-2.4003.   Membership: Terms and Termination.
   (a)   The Supervisor members shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of
Supervisors. The term of the public member shall be three (3) years and shall
commence on March 1 and end on February 28 (or February 29 in leap years) and
shall continue thereafter until a replacement is appointed.
   (b)   A vacancy of the public member shall exist upon the death,
resignation, or termination of the member. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term by the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall
solicit and receive new applications and nominations prior to making the
appointment. The public member shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired
term and thereafter until the appointment and qualification of a successor.
   (c)   The public member may be terminated for cause by the Board at any
time.
   (d)   The public member may resign at any time by submitting a written
resignation to the Clerk of the Board. Any such resignation shall be effective
upon submission, or upon such later date as is specified in the resignation if
such date is not more than sixty (60) days after the date of submission.
(§ 2, Ord. 1582, eff. January 8, 2026)
Sec. 2-2.4004.   Meetings.
   (a)   Meetings of the Committee shall be held at such regular times as
determined by the Committee. In no event shall the Committee meet less than
once every three (3) months.
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors shall designate a staff representative of the
County who shall serve as the liaison to the Committee and shall assist in the
administration of all meetings.
   (c)   The Committee shall file a copy of all minutes with the Clerk of the
Board of Supervisors.
   (d)   A quorum for meetings of the Committee shall consist of no less than
one-half (1/2) of the currently appointed members. A majority vote of the
members present shall be required for any motion, resolution, or other action.
   (e)   All meetings shall be held and conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act, Government Code section 54950 et seq.
(§ 2, Ord. 1582, eff. January 8, 2026)
Sec. 2-2.4005.   Duties and Responsibilities.
   (a)   The Audit Committee shall provide independent oversight of the
County’s internal audit function, with the purpose of promoting transparency,
accountability, and effectiveness in County operations. The Committee shall
support the integrity of the internal audit process by approving the Internal
Audit Charter and the annual risk-based audit plan; monitoring the resolution
of audit findings; receiving regular status updates from the Audit Manager;
inquiring into any restrictions on the scope of audits or on the resources
available to conduct them; and reviewing, in collaboration with the Chief
Financial Officer, the overall effectiveness of the internal audit function,
including whether it is adequately staffed, properly resourced, and aligned
with professional standards and best practices. These responsibilities shall be
exercised in a manner that safeguards the independence of the internal audit
function and aligns with professional auditing standards.
   (b)   The Committee shall ensure the independence and objectivity of the
internal audit function by supporting the Audit Manager’s ability to carry out
audit activities without interference. The Audit Manager shall have
unrestricted access to the Committee and shall be accountable to the Committee.
In collaboration with the County’s Chief Financial Officer and the Director of
Human Resources, the Committee shall participate in the appointment,
evaluation, and, if necessary, removal of the Audit Manager.
   (c)   The Committee shall oversee and provide direction to the internal
audit function, including approving the annual audit plan, guiding audit
priorities, and reviewing significant audit activities and results. While the
Committee does not have operational authority over other County departments or
officers, it may request information necessary to support audit work and
follow-up. The Committee serves in an advisory capacity to the Board of
Supervisors and shall report regularly on audit activities, risks, and
recommendations to support the Board’s governance responsibilities.
   (d)   The Committee shall also provide oversight of the County’s fraud
reporting and whistleblower program. This includes reviewing the adequacy of
the program’s design, receiving periodic reports on program administration, and
monitoring whether reports are addressed and resolved in a timely and
appropriate manner. The Committee shall not review or direct the handling of
individual cases to preserve confidentiality and whistleblower protections.
   (e)   The Committee shall advise the Board of Supervisors on internal
control and governance matters related to audit findings, risks identified
during audit work, or areas requiring corrective action.
(§ 2, Ord. 1582, eff. January 8, 2026)
Chapter 3
JUDICIAL DISTRICT*
Sections:
   
2-3.01   Municipal Court District established.
   
2-3.02   Municipal Court established.
   
2-3.03   Sessions.
*   Sections 2-3.01 through 2-3.07, codified from Ordinance Nos. 236, 237, 346,
and 591, repealed and amended in its entirety by Sections 1 and 2,
respectively, by Ordinance No. 742, effective February 4, 1976, operative
January 1, 1977.
   Please note that pursuant to Government Code §§ 70200 et seq. the Municipal
and Superior Courts of Yolo County have been unified and there is no longer any
Yolo County Municipal Court.
Sec. 2-3.01. Municipal Court District established.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 1040, et seq. of the Government Code
of the State, there is hereby established a Municipal Court District which
embraces the entire territory of the County lying within the exterior
boundaries of the County. (§ 2, Ord. 742, eff. February 4, 1976, operative
January 1, 1977)
Sec. 2-3.02. Municipal Court established.
   A Municipal Court is hereby established within the district. The court shall
be known as the Yolo County Municipal Court. (§ 2, Ord. 742, eff. February 4,
1976, operative January 1, 1977)
Sec. 2-3.03. Sessions.
   Sessions of the Municipal Court shall be held in the City of Woodland
provided, however, that trials of traffic matters and small claims matters
shall be held in the City Council Chambers of the City of Davis and the City of
West Sacramento to the extent that those Chambers are available for such
trials. (§ 2, Ord. 742, eff. February 4, 1976, operative January 1, 1977, as
amended by § 1, Ord. 935, eff. October 21, 1982, and § 1, Ord. 1149, eff.
November 5, 1992)
Chapter 4
JUVENILE HOMES AND CAMPS*
*   Chapter 4 entitled “Juvenile Forestry Camp” consisting of Sections 2-4.01
through 2-4.04, codified from Ordinance No. 366, repealed and amended in its
entirety by Sections 1 and 2, respectively, by Urgency Ordinance No. 665,
effective May 1, 1972.
Sections:
Article 1. Juvenile Forestry Camp
   
2-4.101   Established: Authority.
   
2-4.102   Ownership: Operation: Financing.
   
2-4.103   Board of Directors.
   
2-4.104   Superintendent: Duties.
Article 2. Juvenile Home
   
2-4.201   Established: Authority.
   
2-4.202   Internal affairs.
   
2-4.203   Personnel.
Article 1.
Juvenile Forestry Camp
Sec. 2-4.101. Established: Authority.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 880, et seq. of Article 15 of Chapter
2 of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Welfare and Institutions Code of the State and
Chapter 5 of Division 7 of Title 1 of the Government Code of the State,
commencing with Section 6500 (Joint Exercise of Powers Act), a Juvenile
Forestry Camp is hereby established at Fouts Springs in the County of Colusa.
Such camp shall be known as the Fouts Springs Boys Camp. (§ 2, Urg. Ord. 665,
eff. May 1, 1972)
Sec. 2-4.102. Ownership: Operation: Financing.
   The Juvenile Forestry Camp shall be jointly owned and operated by the
Counties of Solano, Colusa, and Yolo. Any written contracts or agreements
heretofore entered into by such counties respecting the camp are hereby
ratified. The method and procedure of financing such camp, and the details of
the joint operation thereof, shall be established by written contract between
the respective Boards of Supervisors of such counties. (§ 2, Urg. Ord. 665,
eff. May 1, 1972)
Sec. 2-4.103. Board of Directors.
   The internal affairs and administration of the Juvenile Forestry Camp shall
be under the management and control of a Board of Directors consisting of an
equal number of members of the Boards of Supervisors of the Counties of Solano,
Colusa, and Yolo to be selected and hold office by virtue of and during the
term of their official positions. (§ 2, Urg. Ord. 665, eff. May 1, 1972)
Sec. 2-4.104. Superintendent: Duties.
   The Juvenile Forestry Camp shall be in the charge of a superintendent who
shall be selected by the Board of Directors of the camp. The duties of the
superintendent shall be prescribed by, and his activities, orders, rules,
regulations, and administration of the camp shall be subject to, the authority,
approval, and direction of, the Board of Directors of the camp. (§ 2, Urg. Ord.
665, eff. May 1, 1972)
Article 2.
Juvenile Home
Sec. 2-4.201. Established: Authority.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 880, et seq. of Article 15 of Chapter
2 of Part 1 of Divisions 2 of the Welfare and Institutions Code of the State, a
juvenile home is hereby established in the County. Such juvenile home shall be
known as the Juvenile Group Home. (§ 2, Urg. Ord. 665, eff. May 1, 1972)
Sec. 2-4.202. Internal affairs.
   The internal affairs of the Juvenile Group Home shall be under the
management and control of the Probation Officer. The Juvenile Group Home shall
be in the charge of a director who shall be selected and appointed by the
Probation Officer, subject to confirmation by the Board of Supervisors. (§ 2,
Urg. Ord. 665, eff. May 1, 1972)
Sec. 2-4.203. Personnel.
   All other personnel at the Juvenile Group Home shall be subject to the
personnel regulations of the County and shall be selected and appointed by the
Probation Officer. (§ 2, Urg. Ord. 665, eff. May 1, 1972)
Chapter 5
OFFICES AND DEPARTMENTS
Sections:
Article 1. General Provisions
   
2-5.101   Annual reports: Required.
   
2-5.102   Annual reports: Yearly basis. (Repealed).
   
2-5.103   Annual reports: Dates of Submission. (Repealed).
   
2-5.104   Annual reports: Contents. (Repealed).
   
2-5.105   Annual reports: Printing. (Repealed).
   
2-5.106   Office summary reports. (Repealed).
   
2-5.107   Office hours. (Repealed).
   
2-5.108   Office hours: Employees. (Repealed).
   
2-5.109   Office hours: Exceptions. (Repealed)
   
2-5.110   Consolidation of offices: County Clerk and Recorder.
   
2-5.111   Consolidation of offices: Sheriff and Coroner.
   
2-5.112   Consolidation of offices: Treasurer and Tax Collector.
   
2-5.113   Consolidation of Offices: County Auditor-Controller and Treasurer-Tax
Collector.
   
2-5.114   Qualifications for the County Auditor-Controller and Treasurer-Tax
Collector. (Repealed)
   
2-5.114.1   Continuing course of study requirement of County Auditor-Controller
and Treasurer-Tax Collector. (Repealed)
   
2-5.115   Post County Employment Restrictions.
   
2-5.116   Consolidation of Offices: County Clerk-Recorder and Assessor.
   
2-5.117   Consolidation of Offices: Sheriff-Coroner and Public Administrator.
Article 2. County Counsel
   
2-5.201   Position established.
   
2-5.202   Qualifications.
   
2-5.203   Term of office.
   
2-5.204   Duties.
   
2-5.205   Private practice prohibited.
Article 3. County Administrative Officer
   
2-5.301   Purpose.
   
2-5.302   Qualifications.
   
2-5.303   Appointment: Salary.
   
2-5.304   Term of office: Removal.
   
2-5.305   Powers and duties.
Article 4. County Library
   
2-5.401   Established.
Article 5. County Surveyor
   
2-5.501   Appointment: Compensation.
Article 6. Elections
   
2-5.601   Cost of preparing register of voters.
   
2-5.602   Improper distribution of voter registration cards: Misdemeanors.
Article 7. Health Department (Repealed)
Article 8. Medical Director and Staff Physicians
   
2-5.801   Qualifications.
   
2-5.802   Private practice prohibited.
Article 9. Public Guardian
   
2-5.901   Office created.
   
2-5.902   Representation by County Counsel: Employment of private counsel.
   
2-5.903   Public representative payee.
Article 10. Purchasing Department and System
   
2-5.1001   Purchasing Agent: Office established.
   
2-5.1002   Purchasing Agent: General duties.
   
2-5.1003   Purchasing Agent: Specific duties.
   
2-5.1004   Emergency purchases.
   
2-5.1005   Stock Supplies Fund.
   
2-5.1006   Purchasing procedure.
   
2-5.1007   Competitive bidding.
   
2-5.1008   Preference to County vendors.
   
2-5.1009   Notices of sales: Posting.
   
2-5.1010   Notices of sales: Advertising.
   
2-5.1011   Surplus pool.
   
2-5.1012   Standards committees.
Article 11. Social Services
   
2-5.1101   General Assistance Program: Establishment.
   
2-5.1102   General Assistance Program: Implementation.
Article 12. Peace Officers
   
2-5.1201   Declaration.
   
2-5.1202   Adherence.
   
2-5.1203   Compliance.
Article 13. Sheriff-Coroner
   
2-5.1301   Legislative authorization.
   
2-5.1302   Feasibility of the Work Furlough Rehabilitation Law.
   
2-5.1303   Duties of the Sheriff-Coroner.
   
2-5.1304   Delegation of authority to enter into certain agreements.
Article 14. Youth Services Bureau
   
2-5.1401   Created.
   
2-5.1402   Duties.
   
2-5.1403   Appointments.
Article 15. Local Corrections and Probation Officers
   
2-5.1501       Declaration.
   
2-5.1502   Adherence.
   
2-5.1503   Payment of incarceration costs.
   
2-5.1504   Designation of collection officer under Section 1203.1c of the Penal
Code.
   
2-5.1505   Determination of average per day costs of incarceration.
   
2-5.1506   Payment of probation costs.
Article 16. Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
   
2-5.1601   Office created.
   
2-5.1602   Duties.
   
2-5.1603   Ex officio designation.
Article 17. County Director of Transportation
   
2-5.1701   Offices created and abolished.
   
2-5.1702   Duties.
   
2-5.1703   Appointment: Qualifications.
   
2-5.1704   Limitations.
   
2-5.1705   Environmental Health.
Article 18. Department of Alcohol, Drug, and Mental Health Services (Repealed)
Article 19. Department of Child Support Services
   
2-5.1901   Created; Separate Entity.
   
2-5.1902   Definitions.
   
2-5.1903   Departmental Duties and Responsibilities.
   
2-5.1904   Director.
   
2-5.1905   Transfer of Functions.
Article 20. Department of Financial Services
   
2-5.2001   Creation of Department of Financial Services.
   
2-5.2002   Chief Financial Officer.
   
2-5.2003   Qualifications for the Chief Financial Officer.
   
2-5.2004   Continuing course of study requirement of Chief Financial Officer.
Article 21. Health and Human Services Agency
   
2-5.2101   Agency establishment - consolidation of departments.
   
2-5.2102   Purpose and duties.
   
2-5.2103   Director of the Health and Human Services Agency.
   
2-5.2104   Organization of the Health and Human Services Agency.
Article 1.
General Provisions
Sec. 2-5.101. Annual reports: Required.
   The County Administrative Officer shall submit an annual summary report for
each fiscal year that shall reflect an overview of the operations and financial
condition of the county government and include such special items as the Board
may require.(§ 1, Ord. 511, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1362, eff. November 23,
2007)
Sec. 2-5.102. Annual reports: Yearly basis.
(§ 2, Ord. 511; repealed by § 2, Ord. 1362, eff. November 23, 2007)
Sec. 2-5.103. Annual reports: Dates of submission.
(§ 3, Ord. 511; repealed by § 2, Ord. 1362, eff. November 23, 2007)
Sec. 2-5.104. Annual reports: Contents.
(§ 4, Ord. 511; repealed by § 2, Ord. 1362, eff. November 23, 2007)
Sec. 2-5.105. Annual reports: Printing.
(§ 6, Ord. 511; repealed by § 2, Ord. 1362, eff. November 23, 2007)
Sec. 2-5.106. Annual summary reports.
(§ 5, Ord. 5 11; repealed by § 2, Ord. 1362, eff. November 23, 2007)
Sec. 2-5.107. Office hours.
(§§ 1 and 2, Ord. 425; repealed by § 1, Ord. 790, eff. January 15, 1978)
Sec. 2-5.108. Office hours: Employees.
(§ 3, Ord. 425; repealed by § 1, Ord. 790, eff. January 15, 1978)
Sec. 2-5.109. Office hours: Exceptions.
(§ 4, Ord. 425; repealed by § 1, Ord. 790, eff. January 15, 1978)
Sec. 2-5.110. Consolidation of offices: County Clerk and Recorder.
   The County elective offices of County Clerk and Recorder and the statutory
duties and responsibilities of such offices are hereby united and consolidated,
and such office shall be known as County Clerk-Recorder.
   The provisions of this section shall not affect the present incumbents of
such elective offices. (§§ 1 and 3, Ord. 423)
Sec. 2-5.111. Consolidation of offices: Sheriff and Coroner.
   The County elective offices of Sheriff and Coroner and the statutory duties
and responsibilities of such offices are hereby united and consolidated, and
such office shall be known as Sheriff-Coroner.
   The provisions of this section shall not affect the present incumbents of
such elective offices. (§§ 1 and 3, Ord. 428)
Sec. 2-5.112. Consolidation of offices: Treasurer and Tax Collector.
   The County offices of Treasurer and Tax Collector and the statutory duties
and responsibilities of such offices are hereby united and consolidated. (§ 1,
Ord. 407, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1450, eff. January 5, 2015).
Sec. 2-5.113 Consolidation of Offices: County Auditor-Controller and Treasurer-
Tax Collector.
   The County offices of Auditor-Controller and Treasurer-Tax Collector are
hereby consolidated. Further, the statutory duties, responsibilities and
budgets of these offices are consolidated. The consolidated office shall be
known as the Chief Financial Officer. (§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. September 26, 1973,
as amended by § 1, Ord. 1194, eff. December 5, 1996, as amended by § 2, Ord.
1336, eff. June 23, 2005, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1360, eff. June 22, 2007, as
amended by § 1, Ord. 1450, eff. January 5, 2015)
Sec. 2-5.114 Qualifications for the County Auditor-Controller and Treasurer-Tax
Collector.
(§ 1, Ord. 1203, eff. January 16, 1997, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1336, eff. June
23, 2005; repealed by § 2, Ord. 1450, eff. January 5, 2015)
Sec. 2-5.114.1 Continuing course of study requirement of County Auditor-
Controller and Treasurer-Tax Collector.
(§ 2, Ord. 1203, eff. January 16, 1997, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1336, eff. June
23, 2005; repealed by § 2, Ord. 1450, eff. January 5, 2015)
Sec. 2-5.115 Post County Employment Restrictions.
   (a)   Scope. This section regulates the employment of any designated person
after leaving any County office or employment. Designated persons consist of
any appointed County officer or employee.
   (b)   Limited term broad regulation. No designated person, for a period of
one year after leaving office or employment, shall for compensation other than
reimbursed expenses, without the approval of the Board of Supervisors or its
designee, act as agent or attorney for, or otherwise represent, any other
person by making any formal or informal appearance, or by making any oral or
written communication, before the Board of Supervisors, any committee or
subcommittee thereof, any board, committee, or commission of the County, or any
officer except a member of the Board of Supervisors or employee of the County,
if the appearance or communication is made for the purpose of influencing
legislative action, administrative action, or the issuance, amendment,
awarding, or revocation of a permit, license, grant, contract, or the sale or
purchase of goods or property.
   (c)   Penalty. Violation of any provision of this section is an infraction
punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation; (2) a fine
not exceeding $200 for a second violation within one year; (3) a fine not
exceeding $500 for each additional violation within one year. A court may also
impose a civil penalty of not to exceed $2,500, or an amount equal to the
compensation received by the violator, whichever is higher. (§ 1, Ord. 1222,
eff. April 1, 1998)
Sec. 2-5.116 Consolidation of Offices: County Clerk-Recorder and Assessor.
   (a)   The County elective offices of County Clerk-Recorder and Assessor are
hereby consolidated. Further, the statutory duties, responsibilities and
budgets of these offices are consolidated. The consolidated office shall be
known as County Clerk- Assessor-Recorder.
   (b)   The provisions of this section shall not affect the present incumbents
of such elective offices.
(§ 2, Ord. 1436, eff. December 5, 2013)
Sec. 2-5.117. Consolidation of Offices: Sheriff-Coroner and Public
Administrator.
   (a)   The County elective offices of Sheriff and Coroner and Public
Administrator are consolidated into a single office. Such office shall be known
as Sheriff-Coroner-Public Administrator.
   (b)   The person filling the consolidated office shall be the current
Sheriff-Coroner and shall be known as the Sheriff-Coroner-Public Administrator.
Any reference in this Code to Sheriff or Coroner or Public Administrator shall
mean Sheriff-Coroner-Public Administrator.
(§ II, Ord. 1482, eff. January 12, 2017)
Article 2.
County Counsel
Sec. 2-5.201. Position established.
   There is hereby established the position of County Counsel. (§ 1, Ord. 448)
Sec. 2-5.202. Qualifications.
   The County Counsel shall be a member of the State Bar, shall be licensed to
practice before all courts of the State, and shall be an elector of the County.
(§ 3, Ord. 448)
Sec. 2-5.203. Term of office.
   The County Counsel shall serve for four (4) years from the time of his
appointment and until his successor is appointed, subject to the provisions of
Section 27641 of the Government Code of the State. (§ 4, Ord. 448)
Sec. 2-5.204. Duties.
   The County Counsel shall discharge all the duties vested by law in the
District Attorney, other than those of a public prosecutor, as follows: Those
duties set forth in Chapter 12 of Part 3 of Division 2 of Title 3 of the
Government Code of the State, except the duties set forth in Sections 27642 and
27643 of the Government Code of the State. (§ 2, Ord. 448)
Sec. 2-5.205. Private practice prohibited.
   The County Counsel shall not engage in the private practice of the law. (§
2, Ord. 448)
Article 3.
County Administrative Officer*
*   The title of Article 3, formerly entitled County Executive”, amended by
Section 1, Ordinance No. 782, effective September 1, 1977.
Sec. 2-5.301. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to establish the position of County
Administrative Officer and to define the nature, duties, and responsibilities
of the position. (§ 1, Ord. 406, as amended by § 1, Ord. 782, eff. September 1,
1977)
Sec. 2-5.302. Qualifications.
   The County Administrative Officer shall be a graduate of a college or
university with a bachelors degree in public administration, business
administration, government, political science or a closely related field. A
masters degree in public administration is desirable. The County Administrative
Officer shall have seven (7) years of increasingly responsible experience in
City or County government with at least three (3) years experience in a county
at a senior management level. The County Administrative Officer shall possess
the following knowledge and abilities: thorough knowledge of modern principles
of public administration, organization, and management; thorough knowledge of
administrative survey principles and techniques; wide knowledge of the
principles and practices of governmental budgeting; knowledge of the powers,
limitations, organization, methods, and financial problems of County
government; wide knowledge of the principles of personnel management; wide
knowledge of the principles of effective public relations; knowledge of the
Federal and State programs applicable to local government; ability to analyze
and make recommendations on administrative and technical problems; ability to
interpret, explain, and apply applicable laws, rules, and regulations; ability
to plan, organize, direct, and evaluate the work of others; ability to prepare
and present comprehensive reports and recommendations; ability to establish and
maintain effective relationships with public officials, administrators,
employees, and the public; and skills in coordinating the activities of
administrative officials while encouraging their development and administrative
ability. (§ 3, Ord. 406, as amended by § 1, Ord. 782, eff. September 1, 1977,
and § 1, Ord. 1090, eff. March 23, 1989)
Sec. 2-5.303. Appointment: Salary.
   The County Administrative Officer shall be appointed by a majority of the
members of the Board at a salary to be determined by the Board. (§ 3, Ord. 406,
as amended by § 1, Ord. 782, eff. September 1, 1977)
Sec. 2-5.304. Term of office: Removal.
   The County Administrative Officer shall serve at the pleasure of the Board.
He or she may be removed by a majority vote of the Board at any regular meeting
of the Board, except that during the first three (3) months after any change in
membership of the Board, the County Administrative Officer may only be removed
by a four-fifths (4/5) majority vote of the Board. The County Administrative
Officer shall have at least 180 days notice of the Board’s intention to remove
him or her before such removal shall become final. (§ 3, Ord. 406, as amended
by § 1, Ord. 782, eff. September 1, 1977, and § 1, Ord. 1098, eff. October 5,
1989)
Sec. 2-5.305. Powers and duties.
   The County Administrative Officer shall supervise for the Board the
administration of all County offices, departments, and institutions over which
the Board has responsibility and control through its power of appointment. In
addition, the County Administrative Officer shall act as the Administrative
Officer for the Board to enforce all the rules and regulations of the Board
which it has the power to apply to elective and appointive County offices,
departments, and institutions.
   The County Administrative Officer’s duties, powers, and responsibilities
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
   (a)   The County Administrative Officer shall be responsible to the Board
for the administration of County offices, departments, and institutions as set
forth in the first paragraph of this section. He or she shall be responsible
for the coordination of the work of all elective and appointive County offices,
departments, and institutions in such matters which are the concern and
responsibility of the Board. He or she may make such studies and investigations
which he or she believes are necessary or desirable and shall make any study or
investigation the Board requests. He or she shall make recommendations to the
Board which he or she believes will result in greater efficiency and economy in
the administration of County affairs. To enable the County Administrative
Officer to carry out such responsibilities, he or she may require reports from
any officer, department head, or institutional head.
   (b)   Unless otherwise prescribed by statute, the County Administrative
Officer shall appoint appointed department heads, subject to the approval of
the Board of Supervisors. The County Administrative Officer may recommend that
the Board suspend or remove any person holding an administrative position where
the Board has the power to appoint and remove. Whenever the County
Administrative Officer makes such a recommendation, the person involved shall
have the right to be heard by the Board.
   (c)   The County Administrative Officer shall maintain and direct central
administrative services which are approved and placed in his or her charge by
the Board, such as building and property management, insurance, the use of
office appliances and duplicating, the control and assignment of extra help,
and the maintenance of automotive or other major equipment and control over its
use.
   (d)   (Repealed by § 3, Ord. 1090, eff. March 23, 1989)
   (e)   The County Administrative Officer shall, in collaboration with the
Chief Financial Officer, recommend an annual County budget, review departmental
budget requests with the persons filing the requests, and enter recommendations
for each departmental budget along with the requests. The County Administrative
Officer and Chief Financial Officer shall review the revenue estimates of the
Department of Financial Services. After the County Administrative Officer has
submitted the recommended budget to the Board, the Board shall review the
recommendations and the departmental requests, make any changes believed to be
advisable, and adopt the preliminary budget in the manner provided for by law.
   (f)   After the final County budget has been adopted by the Board, the
County Administrative Officer shall administer the budget and exercise
continuous budgetary control. He or she shall review all requests for
appropriation transfers, and none shall be approved or disapproved by the Board
until he or she makes a recommendation to the Board. He or she shall supervise
expenditures of all elective and appointive offices, departments, and
institutions. He or she may disapprove proposed expenditures whether or not
they have been included in the budget. The County Administrative Officer or
Chief Financial Officer may recommend to the Board the establishment of a
budgetary allotment system and such other expenditure controls which they
believe to be necessary or desirable.
   (g)   The County Administrative Officer shall review all requests for new
positions and classifications or reclassifications, and none shall be approved
or disapproved by the Board until the County Administrative Officer had made a
recommendation to the Board on the position involved. The County Administrative
Officer shall recommend to the Board procedures which he or she believes will
result in a more efficient personnel program.
   (h)   The County Administrative Officer shall attend the meetings of the
Board and may participate in the discussion of any matter but shall have no
vote.
   (i)   The County Administrative Officer shall represent the Board in the
County's intergovernmental relationships in accordance with Board policies and
instructions. When directed, the County Administrative Officer shall represent
the Board in dealing with individuals or groups concerned with County affairs.
   (j)   The County Administrative Officer shall evaluate the on-the-job
performance of each department head (except for elected officers, appointed
officers with fixed terms of office, and members of boards and commissions) at
least once annually and prepare a written record of the review. The County
Administrative Officer shall discuss the draft evaluation with the department
head. If the final report indicates unsatisfactory performance, the report
shall be discussed with the Board and the department head.
   (k)   The County Administrative Officer shall be responsible for the labor
relations program of the County.
   (l)   The County Administrative Officer shall coordinate the planning for
the design and construction of physical facilities and the assignment of space
required for County services. He or she shall prepare, and keep current, a
capital improvement plan, including recommended methods for financing, for
adoption by the Board.
   (m)   Provide oversight and supervision to the Division of Environmental
Health insofar as Environmental Health functions as the Local Enforcement
Agency (LEA) for solid waste. (§§ 2 and 4, Ord. 406, as amended by § 1, Ord.
782, eff. September 1, 1977,§§ 2, 3, Ord. 1090, eff. March 23, 1989,§ 1, Ord.
1444, eff. August 14, 2014, and § 5, Ord. 1450, eff. January 5, 2015)
Article 4.
County Library
Sec. 2-5.401. Established.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 27151 et seq. of Chapter 2 of
Division 20 of Part 4 of the Education Code of the State, the Board hereby
establishes a County Free Library. (Res. of October 4, 1915)
Article 5.
County Surveyor
Sec. 2-5.501. Appointment: Compensation.
   On or after the first Monday of January, 1955, the County Surveyor shall be
an officer appointed by the Board and shall receive compensation as determined
by the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 263)
Article 6.
Elections
Sec. 2-5.601. Cost of preparing register of voters.
   When a new great register of voters is required by law to be made, the
County Clerk-Recorder shall receive his actual expense in making such register,
and the index thereto, and ten (10¢) cents per name for every name registered.
(§ 13, Ord. 231)
Sec. 2-5.602. Improper distribution of voter registration cards: Misdemeanors.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to do any of
the following:
   (1)   To obtain fifty (50) or more Post Card Registration Forms from the
County Clerk without filing an approved plan with the County Clerk;
   (2)   To obtain Post Card Registration Forms for the purpose of distribution
to prospective voters and to neglect or refuse to give such a form to any
elector requesting one for the purpose of registering to vote;
   (3)   To obtain Post Card Registration Forms for the purpose of distribution
to prospective voters and to fail to return all unused Post Card Registration
Forms within thirty (30) days or, after that time, to report to the County
Clerk the purpose in retaining any unused forms; and
   (4)   For any person or group of persons distributing Post Card Registration
Forms, and who receives completed voter registration cards from voters, to fail
to return the completed cards to the County Clerk or to fail to deposit such
cards in the postal service within three (3) days, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, and State holidays, after receipt from a voter.
   (b)   Any person violating any provision of subsection (a) of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under
the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment in the County
Jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each
and every individual violation of the provisions of this section, and each such
separate violation shall be punishable accordingly. (§ 1, Ord. 795, eff. May
11, 1978)
Article 7.
Health Department*
*   Article 7 of Chapter 5, Title 2 repealed by Ordinance No. 1455, effective
August 27, 2015.
Article 8.
Medical Director and Staff Physicians
Sec. 2-5.801. Qualifications.
   The Medical Director and Staff Physicians employed at the Yolo County
General Hospital shall be licensed to practice medicine in the State. They
shall, at the date of their employment or within thirty (30) days thereafter,
possess a valid California license to administer and prescribe narcotics. Such
licenses shall at all times be maintained in good standing.
   The Medical Director and Staff Physicians shall become active members of the
organized medical staff of the Yolo County General Hospital, subject to all
bylaws which have been approved by the Board. (§ 2, Ord. 499)
Sec. 2-5.802. Private practice prohibited.
   The Medical Director and Staff Physicians employed on a full-time basis
shall not be permitted to engage in the private practice of medicine or receive
fees for any service performed by them at the Yolo County General Hospital. (§
2, Ord. 499)
Article 9.
Public Guardian
Sec. 2-5.901. Office created.
   There is hereby created in the County the office of Public Guardian.
(§ I, Ord. 336, as amended by § II, Ord. 1481, eff. January 12, 2017)
Sec. 2-5.902. Representation by District Attorney: Employment of private
counsel.
   The County Counsel shall represent the Public Guardian; provided, however,
the Public Guardian may, in his/her discretion, employ private counsel when the
cost thereof can be defrayed from guardianship or conservatorship estate funds.
(§ II, Ord. 336, as amended by § II, Ord. 1481, eff. January 12, 2017)
Sec. 2-5.903. Public representative payee.
   The Public Guardian is authorized to be the public representative payee and
may discharge all duties as set forth in Government Code section 27436.
(§ II, Ord. 1481, eff. January 12, 2017)
Article 10.
Purchasing Department and System
Sec. 2-5.1001. Purchasing Agent: Office established.
   Pursuant to the provision of Sections 25500 et seq. of the Government Code
of the State, the office of Purchasing Agent of the County is hereby
established. The Purchasing Agent and the Purchasing Department shall serve
under the supervision and direction of the Director of General Services within
the General Services Department. (§ 2, Ord. 1551, eff. September 29, 2022, as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1553, eff. October 27, 2022)
Sec. 2-5.1002. Purchasing Agent: General duties.
   The Purchasing Agent shall have the duties and powers prescribed by the laws
of the State relating to County purchasing agents, the provisions of this
article, and resolutions of the Board. The Purchasing Agent shall be the head
of the Purchasing Department of the County and shall appoint such deputies,
assistants, and other employees as from time to time shall be authorized. The
Purchasing Agent shall furnish the Board with such reports and information as
the Board from time to time may require and shall establish the methods and
procedures necessary for the proper functioning of the Purchasing Department in
an efficient and economical manner. (§ 2, Ord. 1551, eff. September 29, 2022)
Sec. 2-5.1003. Purchasing Agent: Specific duties.
   The Purchasing Agent shall:
   (a)   Let personal service contracts identified by Government Code section
31000; provided, however, that the amount of any such contract shall not exceed
the amount prescribed by Government Code section 25502.5 as it may be amended.
   (b)   Purchase for the County and its offices all materials, supplies,
furnishings, equipment, livestock, and other personal property of whatever kind
and nature, and, except in cases of emergency, as provided in Section
2-5.1004 of this article, no purchase of personal property by any persons other
than the Purchasing Agent shall be binding upon the County or constitute a
lawful charge against any County fund;
   (c)   Rent for County and its offices furnishings, equipment, and livestock,
except, however, road equipment which the Director of Public Works is
authorized by law to rent;
   (d)   Negotiate and execute in the name of the County all equipment service
contracts and lease purchase agreements of personal property;
   (e)   By direct sale or otherwise, sell, lease, or dispose of any personal
property belonging to the County which the Purchasing Agent finds not to be
required for public use, or when purchasing personal property, to accept
advantageous trade-in allowances for such property not further required for
public use. The Purchasing Agent shall pay the proceeds into the County
Treasury for the use of the County. Where the property is exchanged or traded,
the Purchasing Agent shall secure its value on behalf of the County;
   (f)   Engage independent contractors to perform services, including special
services enumerated in Government Code section 31000, for the County or County
officers, with or without the furnishing of materials, when the aggregate cost
does not exceed the amount prescribed by Government Code section 25502.5 as it
may be amended.
   (g)   Employ state-licensed independent contractors and purchase materials,
furnishings, and supplies used in the construction or repair of public works as
provided for, but not exceeding the amount authorized, in Public Contract Code
section 20122 as it may be amended without the formality of obtaining bids,
letting contracts, preparing specifications, and the other things required;
   (h)   Lease real property as provided in Sections
2-7.101 et seq. of this Code;
   (i)   When specifically authorized by law, purchase for the Superintendent
of Schools or other public officers or agencies personal property;
   (j)   When specifically authorized by law, sell or dispose of personal
property of any special district and pay the proceeds thereof into the treasury
of the district or, if an exchange or trade is made, return the proceeds to the
special district as provided for in Government Code section 25505 as it may be
amended; and
   (k)   Perform such other services as the Board from time to time by
resolution may require. (§ 2, Ord. 1551, eff. September 29, 2022)
Sec. 2-5.1004. Emergency purchases.
   (a)   Emergency purchases may be made by any person or official authorized
to sign requisitions when the Purchasing Agent or any of his assistants in the
Purchasing Department authorized to make purchases are not immediately
available and the item or items so purchased are immediately necessary for the
continued operation of the office or department involved or are immediately
necessary for the preservation of life or property. Such emergency purchases
shall be subsequently approved and confirmed by the Purchasing Agent, or, if
the Purchasing Agent refuses such confirmation, the Board may subsequently
approve and confirm such purchases by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire
Board. Unless such purchases are so approved and confirmed by either the
Purchasing Agent or the Board, the costs thereof shall not constitute a legal
charge against the County.
   (b)   When the Board of Supervisors proclaims a local emergency pursuant to
Government Code section 8630, the Purchasing Agent may engage independent
contractors to perform services related to the local emergency for the County
and officers thereof as provided in Government Code section 25502.7. (§ 2, Ord.
1551, eff. September 29, 2022)
Sec. 2-5.1005. Stock Supplies Fund.
   There is hereby established from the unappropriated funds of the County a
Stock Supplies Fund in such an amount as the Board may from time to time, by
resolution, establish. Such fund shall be known as the Purchasing Department
Stock Supplies Fund. The Purchasing Agent may purchase supplies, materials, and
equipment in quantities to be issued to the several offices and departments of
the County as needed and shall make payments therefor from the funds of the
Stock Supplies Fund. (§ 2, Ord. 1551, eff. September 29, 2022)
Sec. 2-5.1006. Purchasing procedure.
   Except for purchases from the Stock Supplies Fund, all purchases, rentals,
and contracts shall be made only upon proper written requisitions, the form of
which shall be supplied by the Purchasing Agent to the several offices of the
County. No purchase order shall be issued until the Chief Financial Officer
shall have certified that sufficient money is available in the proper budgeted
fund of the department to pay for the purchase. The head of any County office,
department, or institution, or his duly designated assistant, is hereby
authorized to draw requisitions for purchases for such office, department, or
institution in accordance with current budget accounts. Such head may delegate
such authority to one or more of his deputies, assistants, or employees within
the department by filing a written authorization therefor with the Purchasing
Agent and the Chief Financial Officer. (§ 2, Ord. 1551, eff. September 29,
2022)
Sec. 2-5.1007. Competitive bidding.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, the Purchasing Agent may, without
notice, advertisement, or the securing of competitive bids or quotations, make
any purchase of personal property or do any other thing which the Purchasing
Agent is authorized to do by the provisions of this article; provided, however,
in the event the Purchasing Agent purchases any individual items (as distinct
from the total contract) costing more than Five Thousand and no/100ths
($5,000.00) Dollars without securing competitive bids or quotations thereon,
the Purchasing Agent shall report such action to the Board with his reasons
therefor; and provided, further, if the Purchasing Agent does call for
competitive bids or quotations and accepts any bid or quotation other than the
lowest upon any individual item costing more than Five Hundred and no/100ths
($500.00) Dollars, the Purchasing Agent shall likewise report such fact to the
Board. (§ 2, Ord. 1551, eff. September 29, 2022)
Sec. 2-5.1008. Preference to County vendors.
   In any purchase authorized by the provisions of this article, the Purchasing
Agent may allow a three (3%) percent preference to vendors located in the
County. (§ 2, Ord. 1551, eff. September 29, 2022)
Sec. 2-5.1009. Notices of sales: Posting.
   (a)   Notices of sales or other dispositions of surplus personal property
shall be posted for not less than five (5) business days preceding the day of
sale in the County Courthouse, in the office of the Purchasing Agent, and in
such other places within the County as the Purchasing Agent may deem advisable,
and as required by law.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section and
Section
2-5.1010 of this article, if the Purchasing Agent determines that surplus
personal property is valuable only as scrap material, and thus potential buyers
are limited, the Purchasing Agent may sell the material without posting any
notice of sale and without advertising. Such determination shall be based upon
the Purchasing Agent's estimate that such a sale without posting or advertising
would be financially beneficial to the County, and, having so determined, the
Purchasing Agent may consummate the sale to appropriate buyers. (§ 2, Ord.
1551, eff. September 29, 2022)
Sec. 2-5.1010. Notices of sales: Advertising.
   In the disposition of any surplus personal property and upon the approval of
the Board, the Purchasing Agent may purchase advertising space and may
advertise the proposed sale or other disposition of the personal property in
such newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals as, in his judgment, will
best publicize the proposed sale or other disposition to those persons most
likely to bid for or purchase the personal property. Within the Iimitations of
the order of the Board approving the advertising, the Purchasing Agent shall
decide upon the amount, nature, makeup, and contents of the advertising. (§ 2,
Ord. 1551, eff. September 29, 2022)
Sec. 2-5.1011. Surplus pool.
   Whenever any item of personal property is no longer needed by the office,
department, or institution in possession thereof, such fact shall be reported
to the Purchasing Agent who, with the approval of the Board, may transfer such
item to a surplus pool to be maintained under the supervision of the Purchasing
Agent, and whenever any office, department, or institution is in need of an
article which has been placed in such surplus pool or has requisitioned the
purchase of a similar article, the Purchasing Agent, upon a properly drawn
request for a transfer or requisition approved by the Board, may transfer the
article to such department. (§ 2, Ord. 1551, eff. September 29, 2022)
Sec. 2-5.1012. Standards committees.
   The Purchasing Agent may organize standards committees as needed to
establish standards with respect to the type, design, quality, or brand of a
certain article or group of related articles or services purchased by the
County. The membership of a standards committee shall be the Purchasing Agent,
who shall be the chairperson, and the heads of each County office, department,
or institution which is a primary user of the item or group of items for which
the committee is appointed. Any member of the committee may act through a
representative appointed by him. (§ 2, Ord. 1551, eff. September 29, 2022)
Article 11.
Social Services*
*   Article 11 entitled “Welfare Department”, commencing of Sections
2-5.1101 through 205.1102, codified from Ordinance No. 462, repealed by Section
1, Ordinance No. 886, effective August 21, 1980.
Sec. 2-5.1101.   General Assistance Program: Establishment.
   The Board, by resolution, shall from time to time adopt standards of aid and
care for the indigent and dependent poor of the County constituting the General
Assistance Program of the County. (§ 2, Ord. 886, eff. August 21, 1980)
Sec. 2-5.1102.   General Assistance Program: Implementation.
   The Director of Social Services shall implement the General Assistance
Program and shall do so by the adoption of administrative resolutions to
implement the program established pursuant to Section
2-5.1101 of this article. (§ 2, Ord. 886, eff. August 21, 1980).
Article 12.
Peace Officers
Sec. 2-5.1201.   Declaration.
   The County hereby declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from
the State of California under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1 of
Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code, for training of peace officer
personnel employed by the Sheriff’s Department, the District Attorney’s Office,
and the Health and Human Services Agency Special Investigations Unit. (§ 1,
Ord. 664, eff. April 5, 1972, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1230, eff. February 4,
1999, § 2, Ord. 1567, eff. May 9, 2024)
Sec. 2-5.1202.   Adherence.
   Pursuant to Sections 13510.1, 13512 and 13522 of the California Penal Code,
all peace officer personnel employed in the Sheriff’s Department, the District
Attorney’s Office, and the Health and Human Services Agency Special
Investigations Unit will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training
established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (§ 1,
Ord. 664, eff. April 5, 1972, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1230, eff. February 4,
1999, § 2, Ord. 1567, eff. May 9, 2024)
Sec. 2-5.1203.   Compliance.
   The Commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed
necessary and as authorized by law to ascertain that the peace officer
personnel employed by the Sheriff’s Department, the District Attorney’s Office,
and the Health and Human Services Agency Special Investigations Unit adhere to
the standards for recruitment and training established by the California
Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (§ 3, Ord. 1230, eff.
February 4, 1999, § 2, Ord. 1567, eff. May 9, 2024)
Article 13.
Sheriff-Coroner
Sec. 2-5.1301. Legislative authorization.
   The provisions of this article are adopted pursuant to the provisions of
Section 1208 of the Penal Code of the State. All words used in this article
which also are used in said Section 1208 are used in the same sense and mean
the same as the respective words used in said Section 1208. (§ 1, Ord. 674,
eff. October 11, 1972)
Sec. 2-5.1302. Feasibility of the Work Furlough Rehabilitation Law.
   The Board hereby finds, on the basis of employment conditions, the state of
the County Jail facilities, and other pertinent circumstances, that the
operation of the Work Furlough Rehabilitation Law is feasible in the County. (§
1, Ord. 674, eff. October 11, 1972)
Sec. 2-5.1303. Duties of the Sheriff-Coroner.
   The Sheriff-Coroner shall perform the functions of the Work Furlough
Administrator. (§ 1, Ord. 674, eff. October 11, 1972)
Sec. 2-5.1304. Delegation of authority to enter into certain agreements.
   The Board, pursuant to the provisions of Section 1208.5 of the Penal Code of
the State, hereby delegates the authority to enter into agreements for the
transfer of prisoners between counties under work furlough programs to the Work
Furlough Administrator. (§ 1, Ord. 761, eff. August 12, 1976)
Article 14.
Youth Services Bureau
Sec. 2-5.1401. Created.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 535 and 535.6 of the Welfare and
Institutions Code of the State, there is hereby created in the County a Youth
Services Bureau. (§ 3, Ord. 723, eff. July 1, 1975)
Sec. 2-5.1402. Duties.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Youth Services Bureau shall be as
follows:
   (a)   To cooperate with and assist in coordinating on a County-wide basis
the work of those community agencies engaged in activities designed to prevent
juvenile delinquency;
   (b)   To cooperate with any such public or community committees, agencies,
or councils at their invitation; and
   (c)   To engage in activities designed to prevent juvenile delinquency,
including rendering direct and indirect services to persons in the community.
(§ 3, Ord. 723, eff. July 1, 1975)
Sec. 2-5.1403. Appointments.
   The staff of the Youth Services Bureau, including the Director, supervisory
employees, and non-supervisory employees, shall be appointed by the Board,
County Administrative Officer and department head, respectively, in accordance
with the provisions of the Personnel Regulations of the County. (§ 3, Ord. 723,
eff. July 1, 1975)
Article 15.
Local Corrections and Probation Officers*
*   The title of Article 15, formerly entitled “Probation Department,” amended
by Section 1, Ordinance No. 902, effective January 29, 1981.
Sec. 2-5.1501. Declaration.
   The County hereby declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from
the State pursuant to the provisions of Article 3 of Chapter 5 of Title 7 of
Part 3 of the Penal Code of the State. (§ 2, Ord. 896, eff. November 13, 1980)
Sec. 2-5.1502. Adherence.
   Pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b) of Section 6035 of Article 2 of
said Chapter 5 of said Penal Code, while receiving any State aid pursuant to
said Article 3, commencing with Section 6040 of the Penal Code of the State,
the County will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training
established by the Board of Corrections. (§ 3, Ord. 896, eff. November 13,
1980)
Sec. 2-5.1503. Payment of incarceration costs.
   The provisions of Section 1203.1c of the Penal Code of the State, relative
to payments by inmates of their costs of incarceration, shall be operative
within the County. (§ 1, Ord. 948, eff. April 21, 1983)
Sec. 2-5.1504. Designation of collection officer under Section 1203.1c of the
Penal Code.
   The Treasurer/Tax Collector is designated as the County officer responsible
for the collection of moneys ordered pursuant to Section 1203.1c of the Penal
Code of the State. (§ 2, Ord. 948, eff. April 21, 1983, as amended by § 1, Ord.
1171, eff. July 7, 1994)
Sec. 2-5.1505. Determination of average per day costs of incarceration.
   The average per day costs of incarceration in the County Jail are determined
to be, pursuant to Section 1203.1c of the Penal Code of the State, Thirty and
no/100ths ($30.00) Dollars. Such amount shall be reviewed annually by the Board
at the time of the adoption of the County budget and may be revised by
resolution of the Board. (§ 3, Ord. 948, eff. April 21, 1983)
Sec. 2-5.1506. Payment of probation costs.
   The provisions of Section 1203.1b of the Penal Code of the State, relative
to the payment of probation costs by persons granted probation, shall be
operative within the County. (§ 2, Ord. 947, eff. April 21, 1983)
Article 16.
Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
Sec. 2-5.1601. Office created.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 25100.5 of the Government Code of the
State, there is hereby created in the County the office of Clerk of the Board
of Supervisors. (§ 1, Ord. 914, eff. July 23, 1981)
Sec. 2-5.1602. Duties.
   The duties of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall be to:
   (a)   Perform those duties prescribed by law for the County Clerk as ex
officio Clerk of the Board of Supervisors or for the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors;
   (b)   Attend each session of the Board and attend committee meetings when
requested so to do;
   (c)   Keep and enter in the minute book of the Board a full and complete
record of the proceedings of the Board at all regular and special meetings,
including the entry of all decisions on questions concerning the allowance of
accounts. The vote of each member on every question shall be recorded;
   (d)   In lieu of entering resolutions, ordinances, and agreements in full in
the minute book, the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall keep a resolution
book, ordinance book, and agreement book in which he shall enter all
resolutions, ordinances, and agreements in full. In such case, references in
the minute book to resolutions, ordinances, and agreements shall be made by
number and subject reference;
   (e)   Immediately after each meeting of the Board, the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors shall deliver to and leave with the County Auditor-Controller all
demands allowed for the payment of money;
   (f)   File and preserve, or dispose of pursuant to law, all petitions,
applications, and other papers and records deposited with him;
   (g)   Authenticate with his signature and the seal of the Board and file
each ordinance, resolution, and agreement passed by the Board;
   (h)   Take acknowledgments and administer and certify oaths in the
performance of his official duties;
   (i)   Perform all duties vested in the County Clerk other than those vested
in the County Clerk as Ex Officio Clerk of the Superior Court or Registrar of
Voters or Recorder; and
   (j)   Maintain unsecured roll corrections and the cancellation book and
secured roll corrections and the cancellation book. (§ 1, Ord. 914, eff. July
23, 1981)
Sec. 2-5.1603. Ex officio designation.
   The County Administrative Officer is hereby designated as ex officio Clerk
of the Board of Supervisors. (§ 1, Ord. 914, eff. July 23, 1981, as amended by
§ 1, Ord. 1030, eff. July 1, 1986)
Article 17.
County Director of Transportation
Sec. 2-5.1701. Offices created and abolished.
   (a)   Pursuant to Section 65084 of the Government Code of the State, there
is hereby created in the County the office of County Director of Transportation
and pursuant to Section 2006.1 of the Streets and Highways Code of the State;
and the office of road commissioner, which as been consolidated with the
appointive office of county surveyor under the title of Director of Public
Works, is hereby abolished.
   (b)   The delivery of services provided by the Department of Public Works
and Transportation, the Community Development Agency, and the Division of
Environmental Health are hereby consolidated and integrated Into a department
to be known as the Department of Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services (PPWES). The County Director of Transportation shall be the Director
of PPWES and shall be known by the working title of Director of PPWES. (§ 2,
Ord. 1205, eff. January 13, 1997, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1206, eff. February
27, 1997, § 1, Ord. 1214, eff. February 5, 1998,§ 1, Ord. 1215, eff. February
26, 1998, and § 3, Ord. 1444, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 2-5.1702. Duties.
   The duties of the Director of Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services (PPWES) are as follows:
   (a)   The duties of the road commissioner are hereby transferred to the
Director of PPWES; provided, however, that any civil engineering functions
which are required to be performed by the road commissioner shall be performed
by a registered civil engineer acting under the authority of the Director of
PPWES.
   (b)   The duties shall include the coordinated planning, development, and
operation of transportation systems of all types and modes, including the
County's relationship with other local agencies with whom the County shares
these functions.
   (c)   The duties of the County Surveyor are integrated within PPWES,
organized as a unit of that Department, and the County Surveyor shall perform
the duties of that office under the administrative direction of the Director of
PPWES.
   (d)   The duties of the Director of Community Development are hereby
transferred to the Director of PPWES. The duties shall include, under
administrative direction, the organization, coordination, and direction of the
various functions of the Community Development Services, which Includes advance
planning/current planning, zoning administration and ordinance development,
housing code enforcement, and building inspection.
   (e)   The Director of PPWES shall act to provide administration and
coordination with respect to the Division of Environmental Health with the
exception of the responsibilities of the Division of Environmental Health
functioning as the Local Enforcement Agency (LEA) for solid waste. (§ 2, Ord.
1205, eff. January 13, 1997, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1206, eff. February 27,
1997, § 2, Ord. 1214, effective February 5, 1998,§ 2, Ord. 1215, eff. February
26, 1998, and § 4, Ord. 1444, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 2-5.1703. Appointment: Qualifications.
   The Director of PPWES shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
Board of Supervisors and shall not be required to have any special permit,
registration or license. (§ 2, Ord. 1205, eff. January 13, 1997, as amended by
§ 1, Ord. 1206, eff. February 27, 1997, and § 5, Ord. 1444, eff. August 14,
2014)
Sec. 2-5.1704. Limitations.
   All personnel of PPWES acting under the authority of the Director of PPWES
shall be subject to the following limitations:
   (a)   There shall at all times be a registered civil engineer acting under
the authority of the Director of PPWES to perform any civil engineering
functions which are required to be performed by the Road Commissioner for which
a license, permit, or registration is required.
   (b)   This article shall not permit the occupant of a consolidated,
integrated, or separated office to practice any profession or trade for the
practice of which a license, permit, or registration is required, without that
license, permit, or registration.
   (c)   All personnel acting under authority of the Director of PPWES,
including the heads of units within departments and formed from units of County
departments (including but not limited to the County Surveyor), shall possess
the particular qualifications required by the statutes governing the provision
of services provided by those departments, including standards of education and
experience that assure competence appropriate for the direction of the
departments or the local administration of County functions.
   (d)   Employees who perform Local Enforcement Agency (LEA) functions as
designated by the California Public Resources Code (PRC) 43200 et seq. will not
be considered within the Department of PPWES, but will instead be within the
oversight and supervision of the Director of Environmental Health and the
County Administrator (CAO). The Director of PPWES shall not conduct a
performance review, discipline or terminate any employees of the Division of
Environmental Health who are assigned LEA functions and responsibilities. The
Director of PPWES shall not be involved in any enforcement responsibilities of
the LEA. Should any LEA employee have job duties split between a position
within the Department of PPWES and LEA, he or she shall only discuss LEA issues
with other LEA employees, employees of the CAO's Office, the Director of
Environmental Health or the CAO and shall not discuss LEA issues with the
Director of PPWES. (§ 2, Ord. 1205, eff. January 13, 1997, as amended by § 1,
Ord. 1206, eff. February 27, 1997, and § 6, Ord. 1444, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 2-5.1705. Environmental Health.
   Pursuant to 17 California Code of Regulations, Subchapter 2, Article 2,
Subsection 1355, there shall at all times be a full-time Director of
Environmental Health who shall be responsible for the administration of the
Division of Environmental Health within PPWES. In the absence of the Director
of Environmental Health, only a qualified Registered Environmental Health
Specialist may act on the behalf of the Director of Environmental Health
regarding the programs and matters of environmental health and sanitation. The
Director of Environmental Health shall plan, direct, supervise and coordinate
all programs of the Division of Environmental Health including implementation
and enforcement of the LEA program for solid waste; however, general
administrative direction related to the LEA Program shall be conducted by the
CAO rather than the Director of PPWES. Neither the Director of PPWES nor any
division head within PPWES, other than the Director of Environmental Health,
may direct, control, hire or fire any employees of the LEA or those employees
who are performing split duties between the LEA and PPWES. The Director of
PPWES shall not evaluate or contribute to the evaluation of the Director of
Environmental Health regarding the performance of the functions of the LEA. The
Director of PPWES is authorized to conduct a performance evaluation on all
other aspects of the Director of Environmental Health's duties that are not
related to LEA functions.
(§ 6, Ord. 1444, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 18.
Department of Alcohol, Drug, and Mental Health Services*
*   Article 18 of Chapter 5, Title 2 repealed by Ordinance No. 1455, effective
August 27, 2015.
Article 19.
Department of Child Support Services
Sec. 2-5.1901.   Created; Separate Entity.
   (a)   Pursuant to California Family Code Section 17304, there is hereby
created the Yolo County Department of Child Support Services.
   (b)   The Yolo County Department of Child Support Services shall be separate
and independent from any other county department and shall be responsible for
promptly and effectively establishing, modifying, and enforcing child support
obligations, including medical support, enforcing spousal support orders
established by a court of competent jurisdiction, and determining paternity in
the case of a child born out of wedlock. (§ 1, Ord. 1279, eff. April 18, 2002)
Sec. 2-5.1902.   Definitions.
   (a)   “Department” shall mean the Yolo County Department of Child Support
Services.
   (b)   “Director” shall mean the Director of the Yolo County Department of
Child Support Services.
   (c)   “Board of Supervisors” shall mean the Yolo County Board of
Supervisors. (§ 1, Ord. 1279, eff. April 18, 2002)
Sec. 2-5.1903.   Departmental Duties and Responsibilities.
   The Yolo County Department of Child Support Services shall perform such
duties and responsibilities as are required and authorized by Section 17000 et
seq. of the California Family Code, other applicable provisions of state law,
and such other duties and responsibilities as are directed by the Board of
Supervisors. (§ 1, Ord. 1279, eff. April 18, 2002)
Sec. 2-5.1904.   Director.
   The administrator of the local child support agency referenced in Section
17304(f)   of the California Family Code shall be known as the Director of the
Yolo County Department of Child Support Services. The department shall be under
the direction and management of the director, who shall be appointed by and
serve at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors. The director shall appoint
all employees of the Department to fulfill the functions required by the
department. (§ 1, Ord. 1279, eff. April 18, 2002)
Sec. 2-5.1905.   Transfer of Functions.
   All Yolo County employees and other personnel who perform child support
collection and enforcement services, and assets bought or purchased with child
support funding shall be transferred from the Yolo County District Attorney’s
Office to the Yolo County Department of Child Support Services as provided in
California Family Code Section 17304 and 17305. The transfer of programs, staff
and assets shall be effective upon approval of the Director of the California
Department of Child Support Services. (§ 1, Ord. 1279, eff. April 18, 2002)
Article 20. Department of Financial Services
Sec. 2-5.2001.   Creation of Department of Financial Services.
   (a)   There is hereby established the Department of Financial Services, to
consolidate and perform all functions of the offices of Auditor, Controller,
Tax Collector, and Treasurer, and any other county-wide fiscal functions
directed by the Board.
   (b)   The Department of Financial Services shall be under the control and
direction, and managed and administrated by, the Chief Financial Officer. (§ 3,
Ord. 1450, eff. January 5, 2015)
Sec. 2-5.2002.   Chief Financial Officer.
   (a)   The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by a majority of the
members of the Board at a salary to be determined by the Board.
   (b)   The Chief Financial Officer shall be responsible for the management
and monitoring of the County's finances, including policy and planning,
treasury and finance, tax and fee collections, accounting and financial
reporting, and audits.
   (c)   The Chief Financial Officer shall, in collaboration with the County
Administrative Officer, be responsible for the annual budget and financial
planning of the County and its Departments.
   (d)   The Chief Financial Officer shall serve at the pleasure of the Board.
He or she may be removed by a majority vote of the Board at any regular meeting
of the Board, except that during the first three (3) months after any change in
membership of the Board, the Chief Financial Officer may only be removed by a
four-fifths (4/5) majority vote of the Board. The Chief Financial Officer shall
have at least 90 days' notice of the Board's intention to remove him or her
before such removal shall become final. The Board shall seek the advice of the
Financial Oversight Committee prior to voting on whether to remove the Chief
Financial Officer. (§ 3, Ord. 1450, eff. January 5, 2015, as amended by § 3,
Ord. 1553, eff. October 27, 2022)
Sec. 2-5.2003.   Qualifications for the Chief Financial Officer.
   No person shall hereafter serve as the Chief Financial Officer unless the
person meets at least one (1) of the following criteria:
   (a)   The person possesses a valid certificate issued by the California
State Board of Accountancy under Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 5000) of
Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code showing that person to be, and
a permit authorizing that person to practice as, a certified public accountant;
or
   (b)   The person possesses a baccalaureate degree from an accredited
university, college or other four (4) year institution, with a major in
accounting or its equivalent, as described in subdivision (a) of Section 5081.1
of the Business and Professions Code, and has served within the last five (5)
years in a senior fiscal management position in a county, city, or other public
agency, a private firm, or a nonprofit organization, dealing with similar
fiscal responsibilities, for a continuous period of not less than three (3)
years. (§ 3, Ord. 1450, eff. January 5, 2015)
Sec. 2-5.2004.   Continuing course of study requirement of Chief Financial
Officer.
   After the appointment of the Chief Financial Officer, that person shall
complete a valid continuing course of study as prescribed in this section, and
shall, on or before June 30 of each two (2) year period, render to the State
Controller a certification indicating that the Chief Financial Officer has
successfully completed a continuing education program consisting of, at a
minimum, forty (40) hours or an equivalent amount of continuing education units
within the discipline of governmental accounting offered by a recognized state
or national association, institute, or accredited college or university, or the
California Debt and Investment Advisory Commission, that provides the requisite
educational programs prescribed in this section. The willful or negligent
failure of any Chief Financial Officer to comply with the requirements of this
section shall be deemed a violation of this section. (§ 3, Ord. 1450, eff.
January 5, 2015)
Article 21. Health and Human Services Agency
Sec. 2-5.2101.   Agency establishment - consolidation of departments.
   Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 24308 and 33200 and Welfare
and Institutions Code Section 18986.86, the Yolo County Health and Human
Services Agency is hereby established. The services and functions of the former
Health Department, Department of Alcohol, Drug, and Mental Health Services, and
the Department of Employment and Social Services are hereby integrated and
consolidated into the Yolo County Health and Human Services Agency.
   Any reference in this Code to the Health Department, Department of Alcohol,
Drug, and Mental Health Services, Department of Employment and Social Services,
and any departments or other existing organizations units referenced in
substantially similar terms shall be understood to refer to the Health and
Human Services Agency.
(§ 2, Ord. 1455, eff. August 27, 2015)
Sec. 2-5.2102.   Purpose and duties.
   The Health and Human Services Agency is created for the delivery of services
through an integrated and comprehensive County health and human services
system. By operation of law, the Agency succeeds to and assumes all duties and
responsibilities of the Departments referenced in Section
2-5.2101, above, for the administration of the various functions and services
concerning public health, mental health, substance use disorders, employment,
social services, and community services.
(§ 2, Ord. 1455, eff. August 27, 2015)
Sec. 2-5.2103.   Director of the Health and Human Services Agency.
   (a)   Under the general direction of the County Administrative Officer and
the Board of Supervisors, the Director of the Health and Human Services Agency
shall plan, organize, and direct all activities of the agency in accordance
with applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. The Director of
the Health and Human Services Agency shall be appointed and serve at the will
of the County Administrator.
   (b)   The responsibilities, authorities, and duties of the following
positions are consolidated with the position of the Health and Human Services
Agency Director:
   (1)   Director of Employment and Social Services
   (2)   Director of Social Services
   (3)   Health Director
   (4)   Welfare Director
   (5)   Public Guardian
   (c)   In addition, if the Director possesses all of the necessary
qualifications and is appointed bythe Board of Supervisors (or County
Administrator, in the case of the Drug and Alcohol Administrator position), he
or she may hold the following positions included within the organizational
structure of Agency: The consolidation of positions set forth above shall not
apply to Community Corrections Partnership membership. The branch director with
primary responsibility for each program area listed in Penal Code section 1230
(b)(2)(G)-(J) shall be deemed the department or program head for purposes of
Community Corrections Partnership membership.
   (1)   Behavioral Health Director, with qualifications subject to any
regulations promulgated by the California Department of Health Care Services in
accordance with Sections 5607, 5608, and 5751.1 of the Welfare and Institutions
Code.
   (2)   County Health Officer, with qualifications subject to Health and
Safety Code Section 101000 et seq.
   (3)   Drug and Alcohol Administrator, with qualifications set forth in
Section 11800 of the Health and Safety Code.
   (4)   Director of Public Health Nursing, with qualifications set forth in
Section 101110 of the Health and Safety Code.
   If the Director is not qualified to hold or elects not to hold any or all of
the foregoing positions, such position(s) shall be filled in the manner
required by law and shall remain within the organizational structure of the
agency. To the extent the Board of Supervisors has the power to appoint and
remove an individual holding a position within the agency, the Director may
recommend that the Board suspend or remove any such appointee. (§ 2, Ord. 1455,
eff. August 27, 2015, as amended by § II, Ord. 1481, eff. January 12, 2017,§ 1,
Ord. 1535, eff. August 12, 2021, and § 3, Ord. 1573, eff. May 8, 2025)
Sec. 2-5.2104.   Organization of the Health and Human Services Agency.
   (a)   The Director of the Health and Human Services Agency shall have the
discretion to organize and administer functions within the agency to ensure
services and benefits are provided to the public through an integrated and
comprehensive health and human services system. Such discretion shall be
exercised in accordance with then existing federal, state, and local laws, as
well as County policies established by ordinance or resolution concerning any
reorganization or restructuring of the functions and operations of a county
department or division of a county department.
   Notwithstanding anything in this chapter, however, the Director of the
Health and Human Services shall not impede the Health Officer from carrying out
the duties, services, or functions required by state law or other provisions of
this code. Additionally, the Director shall allow the final determination
regarding issues of professional nursing practice shall be made by a person who
is licensed as a registered nurse and certified as a public health nurse.
   (b)   The Director has authority to sign contracts binding on the County on
matters within the purview of the agency, consistent with and subject to all
County contracting policies. Such authority may be delegated in writing by the
Director to other personnel that report directly to the Director.
   (c)   Functions and responsibilities described in federal, state, and local
laws relating to the positions identified in Section
2-5.2103, above, shall be performed by the Director or, for positions
identified in Section
2-5.2103(c), by the appointee to each such position (if other than the
Director) under the general oversight of the Director. As necessary or
appropriate, such functions and responsibilities may be delegated to
appropriately qualified personnel within the agency. These functions and
responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
   (1)   For behavioral health issues and the County alcohol and drug program,
those matters described in Government Code Sections 24308 and 33200, Health and
Safety Code Section 11800, and Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 5607,
5608, and 18966.86. The County alcohol and drug program shall be placed at the
same administrative level and have responsibilities similar to other major
health programs in the County.
   (2)   For public health issues within the statutory purview of the County
Health Officer, those matters described in Government Code Sections 101025
through 101070. For all other public health issues, including public health and
indigent health functions and operations, those matters described in Government
Code Section 33201, and Health and Safety Code Section 101115.
   (3)   For social services, those matters described in Welfare and
Institutions Code Section 10800 et seq.
   (4)   As Public Guardian, shall have all of the authority now or hereafter
conferred on public guardians by law, and shall discharge all the duties now or
hereafter imposed on public guardians by law.
   (d)   The Board of Supervisors, by ordinance or resolution, may create such
subordinate positions in the agency established pursuant to this article, and
set the salaries thereof, as may be necessary. (§ 2, Ord. 1455, eff. August 27,
2015, as amended by § II, Ord. 1481, eff. January 12, 2017, and § 3, Ord. 1573,
eff. May 8, 2025)
Chapter 6
PERSONNEL MERIT SYSTEM
*   Chapter 6 entitled "Personnel Merit System", consisting of Sections 2-6.01
through 2-6.50, codified from Ordinance No. 513, repealed in its entirety by §
1, Ord. 1525, eff. October 29, 2020.
Chapter 7
PROPERTY
Sections:
Article 1. Leasing of Real Property
   
2-7.101   Lease of County Property: Alternative procedures.
   
2-7.102   Lease of Property for County: Purchasing Agent.
   
2-7.103   Execution. (Repealed).
Article 2. Prisoner Labor on Public Property
   
2-7.201   Supervision.
Article 3. Unclaimed Property
   
2-7.301   Purpose.
   
2-7.302   Retention.
   
2-7.303   Sale at public auction: Proceeds: Non-Sale: Disposition.
   
2-7.304   Sale at public auction: Notices.
   
2-7.305   Sale at public auction: Receipts.
   
2-7.306   Restoration to owners.
   
2-7.307   Destruction and other disposition.
Article 1.
Leasing of Real Property
Sec. 2-7.101.   Lease of County Property: Alternative Procedures.
   (a)   Subject to the requirements of this Section, any real property owned
or leased by the County, together with any or all improvements thereon, may be
leased or licensed for a duration not exceeding ten (10) years, and an
estimated monthly rental not exceeding Ten Thousand and no/100ths ($10,000.00)
Dollars, without compliance with the formal bidding procedures required by the
provisions of Government Code Sections 25526 through 25535.
   (b)   Before the execution of any lease pursuant to this Section, the
Purchasing Agent shall publish notice pursuant to Government Code Section 6061
in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the County, post
notice in the Office of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors, and, if the
lease or license involves residential property, give notice to the housing
sponsors as defined by Health and Safety Code Sections 50074 and 50074.5. The
notice shall describe the property proposed to be leased or licensed, the terms
of the lease or license, the location where offers to lease or license the
property will be accepted, the location where leases or licenses will be
executed, and any county officer authorized to execute the lease or license,
and shall set forth the address and time within which inquiries may be made to
the Purchasing Agent and such other matters as may be expressly required by
law.
   (c)   If a lease or license is excluded from the bidding procedure pursuant
to this Section, the actual monthly rent in the executed lease or license shall
not exceed Ten Thousand and no/100ths Dollars ($10,000.00), the term of the
executed lease shall not exceed ten (10) years, and the lease shall not be
renewable.
   (d)   The Purchasing Agent is authorized to execute leases pursuant to this
Section for a term, including options, of five (5) years or less. The Board is
authorized to execute leases pursuant to this section for a term, including
options, exceeding five (5) years. (§ 1, Ord. 515, as amended by § 1, Ord.
1046, eff. December 12, 1986, § 1, Ord. 1177, eff. March 23, 1995, and § 3,
Ord. 1326, eff. October 14, 2004)
Sec. 2-7.102.   Lease of Property for County: Purchasing Agent.
   The Purchasing Agent is authorized to lease real property for use by the
County, obtain the use of real property for the county by license, or amend
such leases or licenses pursuant to Government Code section 25350.51 as it may
be amended. (§ 2, Ord. 515; repealed by § 2, Ord. 1046, eff. December 12, 1986,
as amended by § 3, Ord. 1326, eff. October 14, 2004, and § 3, Ord. 1551, eff.
September 29, 2022)
Sec. 2-7.103. Execution.
   Repealed* (§ 3, Ord. 515; * § 2, Ord. 1046, eff. December 12, 1986)
Article 2.
Prisoner Labor on Public Property
Sec. 2-7.201. Supervision.
   (a)   It is hereby made the duty of the Sheriff-Coroner, whenever there are
in the County Jail three (3) or more prisoners under judgment of conviction of
misdemeanor, to appoint some responsible person for the working of such
prisoners upon public grounds, roads, streets, alleys, highways, or buildings
or in such other places as may be deemed advisable for the benefit of the
County.
   (b)   Such person appointed by the Sheriff-Coroner shall be under the
supervision and control of the Sheriff-Coroner and shall work the prisoners
upon the public grounds, roads, streets, alleys, highways, or buildings or in
such other public places as the Sheriff-Coroner may direct and deem advisable
for the benefit and best interests of the County.
   (c)   Such person, when appointed, shall keep such prisoners, when working,
together as nearly as possible and practicable and shall keep close and careful
supervision over them to prevent escape. (§§ 1, 2, and 3, Ord. 99, as amended
by § 1, Ord. 692, eff. November 14, 1973)
Article 3.
Unclaimed Property
Sec. 2-7.301.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this article shall be to provide for the care, restitution,
sale, or destruction of unclaimed property in the possession of the Sheriff-
Coroner. (§ 1, Ord. 561)
Sec. 2-7.302.   Retention.
   (a)   Bicycles. Unclaimed bicycles shall be held by the Sheriff-Coroner for
a period of at least three (3) months.
   (b)   Other property. Unclaimed property, except unclaimed bicycles, shall
be held by the Sheriff-Coroner for a period of at least six (6) months. (§§ 2
and 3, Ord. 561)
Sec. 2-7.303.   Sale at public auction: Proceeds: Non-sale: Disposition.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b)of this section, at the end of the
periods set forth in Section
2-7.302 of this article, such unclaimed property shall be sold at public
auction to the highest bidder, and the proceeds therefrom shall be deposited in
the General Fund.
   (b)   Pursuant to Section 217 of the Welfare and Institutions Code of the
State, at the end of the periods set forth in Section
2-7.302 of this article, unclaimed bicycles and toys may be turned over to the
Probation Officer or to the Department of Social Services at the request of
either of such agencies for use in any program of activities designed to
prevent juvenile delinquency. (§ 4, Ord. 561, as amended by § 1, Ord. 933, eff.
June 24, 1982)
Sec. 2-7.304.   Sale at public auction: Notices.
   Notice of such sales of unclaimed property at public auction shall be given
by the Sheriff-Coroner by publication once in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the County at least five (5) days before the time
fixed for such sales. (§ 6, Ord. 561)
Sec. 2-7.305.   Sale at public auction: Receipts.
   The receipt for the sale price signed by the Sheriff-Coroner shall be a
valid title to the purchaser of unclaimed property sold at public auction. (§
7, Ord. 561)
Sec. 2-7.306.   Restoration to owners.
   Upon demand, prior to the sale of property at public auction, accompanied by
such proof of ownership as the Sheriff-Coroner may require, the Sheriff-Coroner
shall restore such property to the owner. (§ 5, Ord. 561)
Sec. 2-7.307.   Destruction and other disposition.
   Unclaimed property in the possession of the Sheriff-Coroner remaining unsold
after being offered at public auction may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of
by the Sheriff-Coroner. (§ 8, Ord. 561)
Chapter 8
USE OF VEHICLES ON COUNTY BUSINESS
Sections:
Article 1. General
   
2-8.101   Policy and purpose.
   
2-8.102   Application.
Article 2. General Rules and Regulations
   
2-8.201   Limitations.
   
2-8.202   Vehicle operation.
   
2-8.203   Accessory equipment.
   
2-8.204   Credit cards.
Article 3. Use of Private Vehicles on County Business
   
2-8.301   Special vehicle allowances.
   
2-8.302   Mileage rates.
Article 4. Use of County Vehicles on County Business
   
2-8.401   General.
   
2-8.402   Assignments.
   
2-8.403   Parking.
Article 5. Overnight Retention
   
2-8.501   General.
   
2-8.502   Exemption criteria.
   
2-8.503   Procedure.
Article 6. Enforcement
   
2-8.601   Enforcement.
Article 1.
General
Sec. 2-8.101.   Policy and purpose.
   The Board hereby expresses its policy and purpose in the enactment of this
chapter to be as follows:
   (a)   To provide uniform rules and regulations governing the use and
operation of vehicles used on County business;
   (b)   To establish a uniform policy on transportation for officials and
employees in the conduct of official County business; and
   (c)   To authorize by resolution of the Board detailed rules governing
specific aspects of certain matters referred to in this chapter. (§ 1, Ord.
910, eff. June 25, 1981)
Sec. 2-8.102.   Application.
   The rules and regulations set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to
the use of County-owned and County-leased passenger vehicles, patrol cars, and
trucks by all County officers, employees, and volunteers, including elected and
appointed department heads. Such rules and regulations shall also apply to all
vehicles used, owned, or operated by special districts (excluding fire
districts) governed by the Board.
   Under the regulations set forth in this chapter, elected and appointed
department heads have the basic responsibility for the proper use of vehicles
assigned to their departments.
   In setting forth such rules and regulations, the Board directly and
specifically charges each agency or department head with the responsibility of
insuring that all officials, officers, and employees of their agency or
department who operate vehicles on County business are thoroughly aware of the
contents of this chapter and that they comply with such rules and regulations
at all times. (§ 1, Ord. 910, eff. June 25, 1981)
Article 2.
General Rules and Regulations
Sec. 2-8.201.   Limitations.
   (a)   The use of a County vehicle for any purpose other than County business
shall be prohibited.
   (b)   The transportation of members of any employee’s family or of any other
person not connected with County business shall be prohibited, except for
members of families accompanying employees on officially authorized trips at no
expense to the County.
   (c)   The use of a County vehicle other than during an employee’s regular
working day and/or officially assigned duties shall be prohibited, except as
permitted under Article 5 of this chapter.
   (d)   The use of a County vehicle to travel to and from an employee’s home
shall be prohibited, except as permitted under Article 5 of this chapter.
   (e)   The use of a County vehicle for transportation to a home or restaurant
for meals shall be prohibited, unless enroute while on field duty or attending
a meeting on official County business. (§ 1, Ord. 910, eff. June 25, 1981)
Sec. 2-8.202.   Vehicle operation.
   (a)   County officers, including elected officials and department heads,
shall be responsible for the proper use of vehicles by departmental personnel
in accordance with the rules set forth in this chapter.
   (b)   Employees shall be prohibited from carrying passengers in County
vehicles who are not a party to County business. An employee with an assigned
vehicle which has been exempted in accordance with Article 5 of this chapter
may transport other County employees to and from work provided the passenger’s
work location is at or near the normal route to work.
   (c)   Employees shall be required to observe all traffic laws at all times.
Fines and penalties imposed by a court for a violation while on County business
shall be the personal responsibility of the driver.
   (d)   Parking citations issued to a County vehicle shall be the
responsibility of the employee who parked the vehicle.
   (e)   Employees shall operate County vehicles in an ordinary, reasonable
manner consistent with the intended use of the vehicle. Except for vehicles
engaged in law enforcement work, they shall not be used in activities which may
damage the vehicle.
   (f)   All County-owned vehicles shall be maintained under a preventative
maintenance program to insure safe vehicle operation and to reduce unscheduled
downtime.
   Vehicles are therefore scheduled for service at regular intervals as
indicated on the dash of each vehicle. It shall be the responsibility of the
using department to arrange for the maintenance of the vehicle at the time so
indicated.
   (g)   The use of seat belts shall be mandatory.
   (h)   It shall be the driver’s responsibility to report all mechanical
defects to County garage personnel.
   (i)   In case of an accident, the driver of a County vehicle shall
immediately complete an accident report on the forms provided in the vehicle.
The completed forms shall be submitted to the employee’s immediate supervisor
for further processing.
   If the driver is injured and unable to complete the report, it should be
completed by the driver’s immediate supervisor.
   (j)   The driver may not admit fault nor discuss the accident with anyone
except the police, the driver’s supervisor, the County’s Risk Manager, or
others authorized by the Risk Manager.
   (k)   The costs of repairing damages to County vehicles resulting from
negligence, abuse, or willful misconduct by the employee having the custody of
the vehicle shall be recoverable from the employee. (§ 1, Ord. 910, eff. June
25, 1981)
Sec. 2-8.203.   Accessory equipment.
   No County employee shall install or cause to be installed in or on a County
vehicle any article of personal property without the prior approval of the
department head. (§ 1, Ord. 910, eff. June 25, 1981)
Sec. 2-8.204.   Credit cards.
   (a)   Credit cards may be issued by the department head upon the approval of
the Director of General Services. It is intended that such credit cards be used
by employees who do not routinely report to County facilities with fuel pumps
or who work irregular hours. Employees shall use credit cards only when it is
impractical to utilize County pumping stations. Credit cards may also be issued
for authorized out-of-County trips. The employee shall return the receipt for
any credit card purchase to the department fiscal officer.
   (b)   Except for use in purchasing other items which may be needed on an
emergency basis, credit cards shall only be used for required purchases of
gasoline and oil.
   (c)   The cost of items purchased which are not in compliance with this
section shall be recoverable from the employee. (§ 1, Ord. 910, eff. June 25,
1981)
Article 3.
Use of Private Vehicles on County Business
Sec. 2-8.301.   Special vehicle allowances.
   The Board, by resolution, may designate an automobile allowance of a
specified sum to certain County officials and employees in lieu of the payment
of designated mileage and in lieu of a County provided vehicle. An allowance so
authorized shall be permissive and not mandatory upon those to whom it applies.
(§ 1, Ord. 910, eff. June 25, 1981)
Sec. 2-8.302.   Mileage rates.
   Mileage rates shall be paid monthly, based on amounts established from time
to time by the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 910, eff. June 25, 1981)
Article 4.
Use of County Vehicles on County Business
Sec. 2-8.401.   General.
   All County vehicles are assigned to specific departments. It shall be the
responsibility of the department head to effectively utilize vehicles assigned.
Vehicles assigned to departments shall be considered “pool” vehicles and may be
used by any authorized employee. (§ 1, Ord. 910, eff. June 25, 1981)
Sec. 2-8.402.   Assignments.
   A department head may make specific assignments to individual employees,
subject to any of the following conditions:
   (a)   The employee is regularly required, as documented by daily trip sheets
or other appropriate records, to drive in excess of an average of 800 miles per
month on County business;
   (b)   The employee’s duties require, as documented by daily trip sheets or
other appropriate records, that the employee be away from a permanent work
station a minimum of fifty (50%) percent of the normal workday at least three
(3) days a week;
   (c)   The position requires the continuous availability of a specific
equipped vehicle;
   (d)   The vehicle may be subjected to unusual abuse or wear and tear; and
   (e)   A vehicle not being used by the employee to whom it has been assigned
shall be available to others within the department. (§ 1, Ord. 910, eff. June
25,1981)
Sec. 2-8.403.   Parking.
   When not in use on County business, County vehicles shall at all times be
kept at designated locations on County property, including leased or rented
property. Exemptions from such parking requirement shall be in accordance with
Article 5 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 910, eff. June 25, 1981)
Article 5.
Overnight Retention
Sec. 2-8.501.   General.
   When not in use on County business, County vehicles shall at all times be
kept on County property, including leased or rented property. Upon the
recommendation of the County Administrative Officer, and approval by the Board,
any vehicle may be granted an exemption from this requirement. (§ 1, Ord. 910,
eff. June 25, 1981)
Sec. 2-8.502.   Exemption criteria.
   Justification for overnight retention shall be based on the following
criteria:
   (a)   A vehicle is assigned to a County officer or department head who is
required to participate regularly in official County business after normal
business hours;
   (b)   The employee must respond to emergencies which require immediate
attention during off-duty hours for the protection of persons or property
specifically requiring the presence of the employee in a supervisory or
technical capacity to reduce the emergency.
   Such emergencies shall require immediate travel to the emergency scene. A
six (6) month average of at least three (3) emergency calls per month requiring
travel shall be documented by payroll or other acceptable records;
   (c)   The employee’s working hours are typically irregular and require the
continuous availability and use of a vehicle during hours other than normal
business hours;
   (d)   The employee’s duties are such that the checkout of a County vehicle
from a County facility at the start of a normal workday would be both
impractical and uneconomical due to lost time and increased County
transportation costs. This includes those who frequently travel directly from
home to the field or directly from the field to home without reporting directly
to the main office. In such cases, it shall be determined that the employee’s
productive working hours would be reduced by travel time if the vehicle were
not parked at the residence;
   (e)   The employee’s assigned County storage facility for the County vehicle
is not adequate due to a lack of security or space, and there is no other
County storage facility available. Overnight retention under such circumstances
shall be limited until such time as secure storage can be provided by the
County;
   (f)   The availability of off-street parking is a criterion;
   (g)   Temporary overnight retention shall be permitted:
   (1)   When an employee is returning from an officially authorized trip after
regular working hours or leaving before working hours;
   (2)   When an employee is scheduled for standby duty outside of normal
working hours;
   (3)   When an employee is working on a special assignment, such as a
criminal or civil investigation, requiring the continuous availability of a
County vehicle. Such authorization shall only extend over the span of the
special assignment; and
   (4)   When an employee requires the use of a County vehicle to attend a
meeting and/or a training session in or out of the County, and such an
assignment is to the benefit of the County; and
   (h)   When the need for after hours’ availability no longer exists, the
employee shall arrange for the vehicle to be parked at a location designated by
the County. Such requirement shall apply to, but not be limited to, the
following periods:
   (1)   When the employee is on vacation, sick leave, or otherwise off duty
for more than three (3) days; and
   (2)   When the required conditions which justified overnight retention are
interrupted for more than three (3) days. (§ 1, Ord. 910, eff. June 25, 1981)
Sec. 2-8.503.   Procedure.
   (a)   Permanent overnight storage. Requests for the approval of the
permanent home storage of County vehicles shall be submitted to the County
Administrative Officer by the department head once each year with his budget
requests. Such requests shall be on a form prepared by the County
Administrative Officer and shall include a letter of justification for each
vehicle for which home storage is requested.
   The County Administrative Officer shall then transmit the requests, along
with his recommendations, to the Board for approval.
   Unless otherwise stated on the approval request, or terminated earlier for
any reason, all approved home storage requests shall automatically terminate on
the succeeding September first.
   In cases where the submission of an individual name is not possible on the
stated date, department heads shall submit individual requests to the County
Administrative Officer. The County Administrative Officer shall be authorized
to approve or disapprove such requests for a period not to go beyond September
1. The County Administrative Officer shall make a written report to the Board
of all authorization requests which are granted.
   (b)   Temporary overnight storage. Department heads shall be authorized to
grant the temporary overnight retention of vehicles to individuals. Such
permission shall not exceed a total of seven (7) consecutive nights or ten (10)
nights in any one month. Where it is necessary to grant an extended time caused
by duty assignments, a request shall be submitted by the department head to the
County Administrative Officer for approval on forms provided for such purpose.
(§ 1, Ord. 910, eff. June 25, 1981)
Article 6.
Enforcement
Sec. 2-8.601.   Enforcement.
   A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a cause for
disciplinary action under the Personnel Merit System of the County; however,
such violation shall not be a criminal offense under this Code. (§ 1, Ord. 910,
eff. June 25, 1981)
Chapter 9
INFORMAL BIDDING PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC PROJECTS
Sections:
   
2-9.01   Informal Bidding Procedures: Purpose, Authority
   
2-9.02   Informal Bidding Procedures: Contractor List
   
2-9.03   Informal Bidding Procedures: Notice Inviting Informal Bids
   
2-9.04   Informal Bidding Procedures: Contract Award; Changes
   
2-9.05   Informal Bidding Procedures: Compliance with Laws
Sec. 2-9.01.   Informal Bidding Procedures: Purpose, Authority.
   Public projects, as defined by the California Uniform Public Construction
Cost Accounting Act and in accordance with the limits listed in section 22032
of the Public Contract Code as it may be amended, may be let to contract by
informal procedures set forth in Section 22032, et seq. of the Public Contract
Code. (§ 4, Ord. 1551, eff. September 29, 2022)
Sec. 2-9.02.   Informal Bidding Procedures: Contractor List.
   The County shall comply with the requirements of Public Contract Code
Section 22034, as it may be amended, in maintaining a list of qualified
contractors. (§ 4, Ord. 1551, eff. September 29, 2022)
Sec. 2-9.03.   Informal Bidding Procedures: Notice Inviting Informal Bids.
   Where a public project is to be performed which is subject to the provisions
of Section
2-9.01, a notice inviting informal bids shall be circulated using one or both
of the following alternatives:
   (a)   Notices inviting informal bids may be mailed, faxed, or emailed to all
contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed
in accordance with section 2-9.02,
   (b)   Notices inviting informal bids may be mailed to all construction trade
journals as specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting
Commission in accordance with section 22036 of the Public Contract Code.
Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at
the discretion of the department soliciting bids, provided however:
   (1)   If the product or service is property in nature such that it can be
obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting
informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. (§ 4,
Ord. 1551, eff. September 29, 2022)
Sec. 2-9.04.   Informal Bidding Procedures: Contract Award; Changes.
   The Purchasing Agent is authorized to award informal contracts pursuant to
this Chapter and the California Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting
Act. (§ 4, Ord. 1551, eff. September 29, 2022)
Sec. 2-9.05.   Informal Bidding Procedures: Compliance with Laws.
   In seeking, awarding and administering contracts pursuant to this Chapter,
the awarding authority shall comply with all other applicable requirements of
law and County general conditions and procedures, including but not limited to
those pertaining to bonds, prevailing wages, subcontractors, notices to proceed
and notice of completion, and insurance. (§ 4, Ord. 1551, eff. September 29,
2022)
Chapter 10
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION
Sections:
   
2-10.01   Authorization to Implement a Community Choice Aggregation Program.
Sec. 2-10.01. Authorization to Implement a Community Choice Aggregation
Program.
   In order to provide businesses and residents within unincorporated Yolo
County with a choice of power providers, the County of Yolo hereby elects to
implement a community choice aggregation program within the jurisdiction of
unincorporated Yolo County by participating in the Community Choice Aggregation
Program of the Valley Clean Energy Alliance, as described in its Joint Powers
Agreement.
(§ 2, Ord. 1475, eff. December 8, 2016)
Title 3
FINANCE
Chapters:
1.   Budget
2.   Documentary Transfer Taxes
3.   Peddlers, Vendors, and Traveling Merchants (Repealed)
4.   Property Taxes
5.   Reissuance of Warrants
6.   Sales and Use Taxes
7.   Transient Occupancy Taxes
8.   Service Charges for County Service Areas
9.   Parcel Charges: Rolling Acres Permanent Road Division (Repealed)
10.   Weights and Measures
11.   Extended Service Charges: North Davis Meadows County Service Area
(Repealed)
12.   Criminal Justice Administrative Fee
13.   Property Tax Administrative Costs
14.   County Facilities Authorization and Fee
15.   Extended Service Charges: Dunnigan County Service Area (Repealed)
16.   Fire District Development Impact Mitigation Fees
17.   Clerk/Recorder Fees
18.   Cannabis Business Tax
Chapter 1
BUDGET
Sections:
   
3-1.01   Monthly expenditure reports.
   
3-1.02   Monthly revenue reports.
   
3-1.03   Budget proceedings.
   
3-1.04   Budget administration: Extra help and overtime.
   
3-1.05   Policy on fund balances and financial reserves.
Sec. 3-1.01.   Monthly expenditure reports.
   (a)   On or before the fifteenth day of each calendar month, the County
Auditor-Controller shall submit a report on expenditures in the prior month by
department budget classification to the County Administrative Officer, and,
within the same time limitation, the appropriate budget expenditure reports for
each department shall be made available to each department of the County.
   (b)   The consolidated expenditure reports to the County Administrative
Officer and the individual reports to the respective County departments shall
set forth the following information as a minimum:
   (1)   The description of the account;
   (2)   The account number;
   (3)   The total amount of the budget for such account;
   (4)   The total encumbrances to date;
   (5)   The total expenditures to date; and
   (6)   The unencumbered balance for each account. (§ 1, Ord. 451, as amended
by § 1, Ord. 793, eff. February 9, 1978)
Sec. 3-1.02.   Monthly revenue reports.
   (a)   On or before the fifteenth day of each calendar month, the County
Auditor-Controller shall submit a report of revenues received in the immediate
prior month to the County Administrative Officer and, within the same time
limitation, the appropriate revenue reports for each department shall be made
available to each department in the County.
   (b)   The monthly revenue report shall indicate revenue by budget revenue
classification and shall set forth the following information as a minimum:
   (1)   The estimated amount of revenue anticipated to be collected during the
current budget year for each account; and
   (2)   The total revenue received to the end of the preceding month during
the fiscal year. (§ 2, Ord. 451, as amended by § 2, Ord. 793, eff. February 9,
1978)
Sec. 3-1.03.   Budget proceedings.
   (a)   Budget procedures: Extent. All County officials and districts for whom
or for which the Board is required to adopt and annual budget, as provided for
in Sections 29000 et seq. of the Government Code of the State, shall be
governed by the provisions of this section.
   (b)   Budget forms: Transmission.
   (1)   On or before the first day of January of each year, the County
Administrative Officer shall transmit to each official in charge of any budget
unit budget forms prepared by the County Administrative Officer on which such
official shall prepare estimates of the anticipated revenues and expenditures
for the next ensuing fiscal year.
   (2)   On or before the first day of April of each year, the County Auditor-
Controller shall transmit to each district in charge of any budget unit budget
forms prepared by the County Auditor-Controller on which such district shall
prepare estimates of the anticipated revenues and expenditures for the next
ensuing fiscal year.
   (c)   Budget forms: Submission.
   (1)   On or before the first day of March of each year, each official in
charge of any budget unit shall file with the County Administrative Officer, on
the forms furnished, itemized estimates of:
   (i)   Revenues and appropriations, with an explanatory statement of the
requested changes from the budget of the current fiscal year; and
   (ii)   Such additional information thereon as may be required by the County
Administrative Officer or County Auditor-Controller.
   (2)   On the dates requested by the County Auditor-Controller, each district
official in charge of any district budget shall file with the County Auditor-
Controller on the forms furnished itemized estimates of:
   (i)   Revenues and appropriations, with an explanatory statement of the
requested changes from the budget of the current fiscal year; and
   (ii)   Such additional information thereon as may be required by the County
Auditor-Controller.
   (d)   Supplemental requests. Changes in the estimates of expenditures as
originally submitted under the provisions of this section shall be submitted in
writing to the County Administrative Officer, with a copy to the County
Auditor-Controller.
   (e)   Filing of statements of justification with the County Administrative
Officer. At the time of filing such estimates of appropriations and revenues
with the County Administrative Officer, each official or person in charge of
any budget unit shall also file with the County Administrative Officer a
complete statement of justification providing a formal and comprehensive
explanation of the expenditure program and estimates and including such
detailed information as may be required by the County Administrative Officer.
   (f)   Investigations and conferences by the County Administrative Officer.
The County Administrative Officer, upon the receipt of the budget estimates,
shall immediately proceed to examine the same and to make such investigations
and studies in regard thereto as he may deem necessary and to hold conferences
with the County officers and department heads to examine such budget estimates,
which conferences and examinations shall be concluded on or before the first
day of May of each year.
   (g)   Submission of the budget message of the County Administrative Officer
to the Board. After the conclusion of such departmental conferences and
examinations, and on or before the second Tuesday of May of each year, the
County Administrative Officer shall present to the
   Board his recommendations with respect to the budget estimates in the form
of an annual budget message. Such budget message shall be a complete and
comprehensive report embodying an outline of the County’s experience during the
past year and its present financial status, including estimated revenues other
than property taxes for the ensuing fiscal year, the recommendations of the
County Administrative Officer regarding the budget estimates for the ensuing
fiscal year, and such other matters as may be pertinent or the Board may
require. Any differences between the recommendations of the County
Administrative Officer and the estimates as submitted with which the official
or person who submitted the estimates does not concur shall be clearly
indicated in the recommendations and comments of the County Administrative
Officer.
   (h)   Proposed budget hearings. As soon as practicable after the conclusion
of such budget hearings as hereinbefore set forth, the Board shall cause to be
made such revisions, reductions, or additions in the items shown in the
recommendations of the County Administrative Officer as deemed advisable and,
after such revisions, reductions, or additions shall have been made therein,
the Board shall adopt a resolution approving the same, and such tabulation with
such revisions, reductions, or additions shall constitute the County proposed
budget for the next ensuing fiscal year.
   (i)   Printing of proposed budget. The proposed budget, as approved, shall
be transmitted to the County Administrative Officer, and the County
Administrative Officer shall cause to be printed, or otherwise reproduced, a
sufficient number of copies so that each taxpayer who desires may obtain one.
The printing or other reproduction of the proposed budget shall be completed
and the copies thereof delivered by the County Administrative Officer to the
Board on or before the tenth day of June of each year. A copy shall immediately
be forwarded to the State Controller.
   (j)   Notices of distribution of proposed budget. On or before June 10 of
each year, the Clerk of the Board shall publish a notice once in a newspaper of
general circulation throughout the County in conformance with the provisions of
Section 29066 of the Government Code of the State. The notice shall state that
the proposed budget documents are available to taxpayers requesting them, the
time and place the Board will meet to conduct a public hearing, and the fact
that any taxpayer may appear thereat and be heard.
   (k)   Budget hearings. On or before June 20 of each year, but not less than
ten (10) days after the date the proposed budget is available to the taxpayers
desiring a copy, the Board shall meet at the time and place designated in the
published notice for the purpose of conducting a public hearing on the proposed
budget. At such hearing any taxpayer may appear and be heard regarding the
increase, decrease, or omission of any item in the proposed budget or for the
inclusion of additional items which shall be submitted in writing to the Clerk
of the Board before the close of the public hearing.
   (l)   Departmental hearings by the Board. The Board shall proceed to examine
the proposed budget and the recommendations of the County Administrative
Officer thereon and to permit any officer, board, or commission whose estimates
are recommended for increase or reduction by the County Administrative Officer
to have a hearing thereon.
   (m)   Duration of hearings. The hearing may be continued from day to day
until concluded, but not to exceed a total of ten (10) calendar days, and shall
be concluded before the expiration of ten (10) calendar days if there are no
requests or applications on file with the Board for further hearings.
   (n)   Adoption of budget. After the conclusion of the hearings, and not
later than June 30 of each year, and after making any revisions of, deductions
from, or increases or additions to the proposed budget it deems advisable
during or after the public hearings, the Board shall by resolution adopt the
budget as finally determined.
   The resolution of adoption shall conform to the provisions of Section 29089
of the Government Code of the State.
   (o)   Changes after adoption: Duty of County Administrative Officer. After
the adoption of the final budget by the Board, the County Administrative
Officer shall examine, review, and make recommendations in writing pertaining
to all departmental requests for changes in the annual budget.
   (p)   Continuous reviews and recommendations. The County Administrative
Officer shall continuously review expenditures under all departmental budgets
and recommend to the Board the addition or increase or decrease by cancellation
or transfer of any item in the final budget adopted by the Board which the
County Administrative Officer and the County Auditor-Controller may deem
advisable. (§ 3, Ord. 793, eff. February 9, 1978)
Sec. 3-1.04.   Budget administration: Extra help and overtime.
   (a)   The Board declares its intent to monitor and, pursuant to Section
29090 of the Government Code of the State, to provide for the administrative
control of appropriations for extra help and overtime so that expenditures
therefor by County officials and persons do not exceed the amounts
appropriated. Any budget adopted by the Board for the County shall be subject
to the administrative controls set forth in this section.
   (b)   The County Administrative Officer is authorized and directed to
monitor expenditures from appropriations for extra help and overtime allowed by
the County budget or as thereafter revised by addition, cancellation, or
transfer and to review and deny such expenditures where County officials or
persons are in danger of exceeding their authorized appropriations. The County
Administrative Officer is hereby authorized to establish procedures for the
administrative controls imposed by this section.
   (c)   All County officials and persons shall be limited in the making of
expenditures or the incurring of liabilities to the amount of the
appropriations for extra help and overtime allowed by the budget or as
thereafter revised by addition, cancellation, or transfer and granted prior
approval under the administrative controls provided for in this section. No
County official or person shall authorize expenditures or incur liabilities for
extra help or overtime in excess of the appropriations therefor or in excess of
the approvals granted under the administrative controls provided for in this
section. (§ 1, Ord. 1014, eff. August 15, 1985)
Sec. 3-1.05.   Policy on fund balances and financial reserves.
   (a)   The Yolo County Board of Supervisors shall adopt a policy on fund
balances and financial reserves, as recommended by the Chief Financial Officer
and the County Administrator. The policy shall be in accordance with accounting
and financial reporting standards as promulgated by the Governmental Accounting
Standards Board and best practices as defined by the Government Finance
Officers Association for purposes relating to the classification and use of
fund balances and financial reserves to support the strategic goal of financial
sustainability in county government.
   (b)   The policy on fund balances and financial reserves shall establish a
general reserve, the purpose of which is to protect the County's essential
services from the potential impacts of unanticipated events and circumstances
not occurring during the normal course of operations, for example:
   i.   Severe economic downturn such as when the National Bureau of Economic
Research declares a recession;
   ii.   Severe funding reductions from funding agencies necessitating
significant decreases in essential health and safety services even after other
mitigating options have been implemented;
   iii.   Severe state budget impact necessitating significant decreases in
essential health and safety services even after other mitigating options have
been implemented;
   iv.   Disasters resulting in a declared state of emergency by either or both
the Governor and the President requiring significant expenditure of local
resources.
   (c)   The target balance in the reserve shall be set at ten percent of the
average total expenditures reported by the General Fund and the Public Safety
Fund in the County annual financial report of the preceding three fiscal years.
A ten percent reserve is considered a prudent amount that could fund essential
health and safely services for approximately two months. The County Chief
Financial Officer shall calculate the annual required contribution and provide
this information to the County Administrator during the annual budget
development.
   (d)   Drawdown on the General Reserve shall only be authorized by the Board
of Supervisors in a four-fifth vote resolution or during the adoption of the
annual budget. The General Reserve shall be funded and replenished according to
a plan recommended by the County Chief Financial Officer and the County
Administrator and adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
(§ 2, Ord. 1503, eff. November 8, 2018)
Chapter 2
DOCUMENTARY TRANSFER TAXES
Sections:
   
3-2.01   Title.
   
3-2.02   Administration.
   
3-2.03   Administration: Interpretation.
   
3-2.04   Imposed: Rate.
   
3-2.05   Payment.
   
3-2.06   Payment prerequisite to recordation.
   
3-2.06.1   Requirement of tax roll parcel numbers.
   
3-2.07   Nonpayment.
   
3-2.08   Exceptions: Debt security instruments.
   
3-2.09   Exemptions: Governmental agencies.
   
3-2.10   Exemptions: Bankruptcies, receiverships, and reorganizations.
   
3-2.11   Exemptions: Securities and Exchange Commission orders.
   
3-2.12   Exemptions: Partnerships.
   
3-2.13   Credits to cities.
   
3-2.14   Stamps.
   
3-2.15   Claims for refunds.
   
3-2.16   Operative Date.
   
3-2.17   Violations.
Sec. 3-2.01.   Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Law of the
County of Yolo”. It is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Part 6.7
(commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code
of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 578)
Sec. 3-2.02.   Administration.
   The County Recorder shall administer the provisions of this chapter and
shall also administer any ordinance adopted by any city in the County pursuant
to the provisions of Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of
the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, which ordinance imposes a tax for
which a credit is allowed by the provisions of this chapter.
   On or before the fifteenth day of each month, the County Clerk-Recorder
shall report to the County Auditor-Controller the amounts of taxes collected
during the preceding month pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and each
such city ordinance.
   The Auditor-Controller shall allocate and distribute monthly such taxes as
follows:
   (a)   All moneys which relate to transfers of real property located in the
unincorporated territory of the County shall be allocated to the County.
   (b)   All moneys which relate to transfers of real property located in a
city in the County, which city has imposed a tax pursuant to the provisions of
said Part 6.7, shall be allocated one-half (1/2) to such city and one-half (1/
2) to the County.
   (c)   All moneys which relate to transfers of real property located in a
city in the County, which city imposes a tax on transfers of real property not
in conformity with the provisions of said Part 6.7, shall be allocated to the
County.
   (d)   All moneys which relate to transfers of real property in a city in the
County, which city does not impose a tax on transfers of real property, shall
be allocated to the County. (§ 11, Ord. 578, as amended by § 3, Ord. 590)
Sec. 3-2.03.   Administration: Interpretation.
   In the administration of the provisions of this chapter, the County Clerk-
Recorder shall interpret its provisions consistently with the Documentary Stamp
Tax Regulations adopted by the Internal Revenue Service of the Treasury
Department of the United States, which regulations relate to the tax on
conveyances and identified as Sections 47.4361-1, 47.4361-2, and 47.4362-1 of
Part 47 of Title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as the same existed on
November 8, 1967; provided, however, for the purposes of this chapter, the
determination of what constitutes “realty” shall be determined by the
definition or scope of such term under State law. (§ 14, Ord. 578, as
renumbered by § 5, Ord. 590)
Sec. 3-2.04.   Imposed: Rate.
   There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any
lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the County shall be granted,
assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or
purchasers or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the
consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the
value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars, a tax at the rate of
fifty-five (55¢) cents for each Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars,
or fractional part thereof. (§ 2, Ord. 578)
Sec. 3-2.05.   Payment.
   The tax imposed by the provisions of Section
3-2.04 of this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues
any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the
same is made, signed, or issued. (§ 3, Ord. 578)
Sec. 3-2.06.   Payment prerequisite to recordation.
   The County Clerk-Recorder shall not record any deed, instrument, or writing
subject to the tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter unless the tax is
paid. If the person submitting the document so requests, the amount of tax due
shall be shown on a separate paper which shall be affixed to the document by
the County Clerk-Recorder after the permanent record is made and before the
original is returned as specified in Section 27321 of the Government Code of
the State.
   Every document subject to such tax, which document is submitted for
recordation, shall show on the face of the document, or in a separate document,
the amount of taxes due pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and the
County Clerk-Recorder may rely thereon.
   Every document subject to such tax, which document is submitted for
recordation, shall show on the face of the document, or in a separate document,
the location of the lands, tenements, or other realty described in the
document. If such lands, tenements, or other realty is located within a city in
the County, the name of the city shall be set forth. If such lands, tenements,
or other realty is located in the unincorporated area of the County, such fact
shall be set forth. (§ 12, Ord. 578, as amended by § 4, Ord. 590)
Sec. 3-2.06.1.   Requirement of tax roll parcel numbers.
   (a)   Every document subject to tax under the provisions of this chapter and
every similar document, whether or not exempt from the tax, which is submitted
for recordation shall show at the end of each legal description contained in
the document the tax roll parcel number of the property affected by the
document.
   (b)   The validity of such a document shall not be affected by the fact that
such parcel number is erroneous or omitted, and there shall be no liability
attaching to any person for an error in such number or for the omission of such
number.
   (c)   The County Clerk-Recorder shall not record any deed, instrument, or
writing subject to the provisions of this section unless the tax roll parcel
number has been noted upon it. (§ 1, Ord. 855, eff. August 30, 1979)
Sec. 3-2.07.   Nonpayment.
   Whenever the County Clerk-Recorder has reason to believe that the full
amount of tax due pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has not been paid,
he may, by notice served upon any person liable therefor, require such person
to furnish a true copy of his records relevant to the amount of the
consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed. (§ 15, Ord. 578,
as renumbered by § 5, Ord. 590)
Sec. 3-2.08.   Exemptions: Debt security instruments.
   The tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (§ 4, Ord. 578)
Sec. 3-2.09.   Exemptions: Governmental agencies.
   The United States, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or
territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall
not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but
the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor. (§
5, Ord. 578)
Sec. 3-2.10.   Exemptions: Bankruptcies, receiverships, and reorganizations.
   The tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to the making, delivering, or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan
or reorganization or adjustment:
   (a)   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
   (b)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
railroad corporation, as defined in subsection (m)of Section 205 of Title 11 of
the United States Code, as amended;
   (c)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
corporation, as defined in subsection (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the
United States Code, as amended; or
   (d)   Whereby a mere change in identity, form, or place or organization is
effected.
   The provisions of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery, or
filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years
from the date of such confirmation, approval, or change. (§ 6, Ord. 578)
Sec. 3-2.11.   Exemptions: Securities and Exchange Commission orders.
   The tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the
Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subsection (a)of Section 1083
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if:
   (a)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to
which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the
United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;
   (b)   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; and
   (c)   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (§ 7, Ord. 578)
Sec. 3-2.12.   Exemptions: Partnerships.
   (a)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no tax shall be
imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter by reason of any transfer of
an interest in the partnership or otherwise if:
   (1)   Such partnership (or other partnership) is considered a continuing
partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954; and
   (2)   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
   (b)   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of
Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for the purposes of this
chapter such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument
whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of
any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership
at the time of such termination.
   (c)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection (b)of this
section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by
such partnership at the time of such termination. (§ 8, Ord. 578)
Sec. 3-2.13.   Credits to cities.
   If the legislative body of any city in the County imposes a tax pursuant to
the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of
the State equal to one-half (1/2) the amount specified in Section
3-2.04 of this chapter, a credit shall be granted against the taxes due
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in the amount of the city’s tax. (§
9, Ord. 578)
Sec. 3-2.14.   Stamps.
   The County Clerk-Recorder shall repurchase any unused documentary tax stamps
sold by him prior to July 1, 1968. The County Clerk-Recorder shall accept in
payment of the tax any such stamps affixed to a document offered for
recordation and shall cancel the stamps so affixed. (§ 10, Ord. 578, as amended
by § 2, Ord. 590)
Sec. 3-2.15.   Claims for refunds.
   Claims for refunds of taxes imposed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with
Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the
State. (§ 13, Ord. 578, as renumbered by § 5, Ord. 590)
Sec. 3-2.16.   Operative date.
   The provisions of this chapter shall become operative at 12:01 a.m. on
January 1, 1968. (§ 17, Ord. 578, as renumbered by § 5, Ord. 590)
Sec. 3-2.17.   Violations.
   Any person who makes, signs, issues, or accepts, or causes to be made,
signed, issued, or accepted, and who submits, or causes to be submitted, for
recordation any deed, instrument, or writing subject to the tax imposed by the
provisions of this chapter and makes any material misrepresentation of fact for
the purpose of avoiding all or any part of such tax shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   No person shall be liable criminally for any unintentional error made in
designating the location of the lands, tenements, or other realty described in
a document subject to such tax. (§ 16, Ord. 578, as renumbered by § 5, Ord.
590)
Chapter 3
PEDDLERS, VENDORS, AND TRAVELING MERCHANTS
* Sections 3-3.01 through 3-3.05, codified from Ordinance No. 126, repealed by
§ 5, Ord. No. 1275, eff. December 6, 2001
Chapter 4
PROPERTY TAXES
Sections:
   
3-4.01   Collection on unsecured property.
   
3-4.02   Reassessments of damaged or destroyed property.
   
3-4.03   Low Value Assessments.
Sec. 3-4.01.   Collection on unsecured property.
   (a)   From and after July 1, 1962, the Treasurer-Tax Collector shall collect
taxes on unsecured property within the County pursuant to the provisions of
Chapters 4 and 5 of Part 5 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of
the State and as otherwise may hereafter be provided by appropriate statutes of
the State.
   (b)   The Treasurer-Tax Collector shall continue to collect such taxes as
provided in subsection (a)of this section until ordered to discontinue the
collection thereof by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the Board. (§§ 1 and 2, Ord.
443)
Sec. 3-4.02.   Reassessments of damaged or destroyed property.
   (a)   Every assessee of any taxable property, or any person liable for the
taxes thereon, whose property was damaged or destroyed without his fault, may
apply for the reassessment of that property if the damage or destruction to the
property was caused by any of the following:
   (1)   A major misfortune or calamity in an area or region subsequently
proclaimed by the Governor to be in a state of disaster if that property was
damaged or destroyed by the major misfortune or calamity that caused the
Governor to proclaim the area or region to be in a state of disaster. As used
in this paragraph, “damage” includes a diminution in the value of property as a
result of restricted access to the property where that restricted access was
caused by the major misfortune or calamity;
   (2)   A misfortune or calamity; or
   (3)   A misfortune or calamity that, with respect to a possessory interest
in land owned by the State or Federal government, has caused the permit or
other right to enter upon the land to be suspended or restricted. As used in
this paragraph, “misfortune or calamity” includes a drought condition such as
existed in the State in 1976 and 1977.
   As used in this section, a “misfortune or calamity” shall be limited to
accidental, unpredictable, and unforeseen occurrences which adversely affect
the value of the affected property in a manner which was not previously
considered, in whole or in part, by the Assessor in determining the actual or
assessed value of the property.
   (b)   An application for the reassessment of such property pursuant to this
section shall be filed with the Assessor in accordance with Section 170 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code of the State no later than twelve (12) months after
such misfortune or calamity.
   (c)   Upon receiving a timely and proper application for reassessment as
provided in said Section 170, the Assessor shall appraise and reassess the
property and otherwise carry out the provisions of said Section 170.
   (d)   Intercounty transfers of base year values following disaster
      (1)   Any person owning property which is substantially damaged or
destroyed following a disaster may transfer, subject to the conditions and
limitations provided in Section 69.3 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the base
year value of that property, provided that the property is located in the state
of California, to any replacement dwelling of equal or lesser value which is
located within Yolo County and is purchased or newly constructed by that person
within three years after the date of the loss by that person of the original
property.
      (2)   All claims for transfers of base year value from original property
located in another county in California shall be granted, if the claims meet
the applicable requirements of both subdivision (e) of Section 2 of Article
XIIIA of the California Constitution and Section 69.3 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code. All claims for transfers of base year value shall be filed with
the assessor, on forms prescribed by the State Board of Equalization for this
purpose.
      (3)   In determining the base year valuation of original property located
in another county, the base year valuation as determined by the assessor of
such other county shall be accepted by the assessor of this county, in
connection with the granting of claims for transfers of base year value.
      (4)   The provisions of this Section shall be applicable to all
replacement dwellings which are purchased or newly constructed on or after
January 1, 2017.
(§ 1, Ord. 1051, eff. April 23, 1987; and as amended by § 1, Ord. 1302, eff.
July 24, 2003, and § 2, Ord. 1534, eff. May 6, 2021)
Sec. 3-4.03.   Low Value Assessments.
   (a)   Subject to the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code section 75.55,
the assessor may cancel any supplemental assessment where that assessment would
result in an amount of taxes of twenty dollars ($20) or less.
   (b)   Subject to the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code section 155.20,
all real property with a base year value, and all personal property with a full
value, of five thousand dollars ($5,000) or less may be exempted from property
taxation except that this limitation is increased to fifty thousand dollars
($50,000) in the case of a possessory interest for a temporary and transitory
use in a publicly owned fairground, fairground facility, conventional facility,
or cultural facility.
   (c)   Subject to the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code section 531.9,
the assessor shall not make an escape assessment of any appraisal unit where
that assessment would result in an amount of taxes of fifty dollars ($50) or
less.
   (d)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the 2012/13 fiscal year
and each year thereafter. (§ 1, Ord. 1293, eff. December 26, 2002, as amended
by § 1, Ord. 1417, eff. January 1, 2012)
Chapter 5
REISSUANCE OF WARRANTS
Sections:
   
3-5.01   Lost payroll warrants.
   
3-5.02   Lost public assistance warrants.
Sec. 3-5.01.   Lost payroll warrants.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 29853 of the Government Code of the
State, the period of time after which a County payroll warrant is considered
lost if it has been mailed and has not been received by the addressee is
established at seven (7) days after the date of mailing. (§ 1, Ord. 588, as
amended by § 1, Ord. 1035, eff. June 26, 1986)
Sec. 3-5.02.Lost public assistance warrants.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 29853.5 of the Government Code of the
State, the period of time after which a County public assistance warrant is
considered lost if it has been mailed and has not been received by the
addressee is established at five (5) days after the date of mailing. (§ 1, Ord.
1035, eff. June 26, 1986)
Chapter 6
SALES AND USE TAXES
Sections:
   
3-6.01   Short title of chapter.
   
3-6.02   Purpose.
   
3-6.03   Operative date.
   
3-6.04   Sales tax.
   
3-6.05   Use tax.
   
3-6.06   Credits.
   
3-6.06.5   Credits.
   
3-6.07   Enjoining collection forbidden.
   
3-6.08   Amendments.
   
3-6.08.1   Exclusions and exemptions: Operative dates.
   
3-6.09   Amendments: Nullification.
   
3-6.10   Repeals.
Sec. 3-6.01.   Short title of chapter.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law” of
the County. (§ 1, Ord. 334)
Sec. 3-6.02.   Purpose.
   The Board hereby declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the
following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
   (a)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which complies with the requirements
and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code of the State;
   (b)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State insofar as these
provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained
in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code;
   (c)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which imposes a one and one-quarter
(1 1/4%) percent tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered
and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself
as fully as practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the
existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of
Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use
Taxes; and
   (d)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which can be administered in a manner
that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of
Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of
collecting County sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden
of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this
chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 334, as amended by § 1, Ord. 417, and § 1, Ord. 667, eff.
May 15, 1972, tax operative July 1, 1972)
Sec. 3-6.03.   Operative date.
   This chapter shall become operative October 1, 1957, and prior thereto the
County shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all
functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use
tax law. (§ 3, Ord. 334)
Sec. 3-6.04.   Sales tax.
   (a)   (1)   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at
retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the County at the rate of
one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible
personal property sold at retail in the County on and after the operative date
of this chapter to and including June 30, 1972, and at the rate of one and one-
quarter (1 1/4%) percent thereafter.
   (2)   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at
the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property
sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-State destination
or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross
receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are
subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.
   (b)   (1)   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of
said Code, as amended and in force and effect on October 1, 1957, applicable to
sales taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully
set forth herein.
   (2)   Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, the State is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the County shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection
shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the County for the
word “State” when that word is used as part of the title of the State
Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of
Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury or of the Constitution of the
State; nor shall the name of the County be substituted for that of the State in
any section when the results of that substitution would require action to be
taken by or against the County, or any agency thereof, rather than by or
against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident
to the administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the
substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not
necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the
State, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption
from such tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not otherwise
be exempt from such tax while those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the
State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation
Code; nor to impose such tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would
not be subject to tax by the State under the said provisions of said Code; and,
in addition, the name of the County shall not be substituted for that of the
State in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715,
6737, 6797, and 6828 of said Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted.
   (3)   If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067
of said Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be
required by reason of this section.
   (4)   There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is
measured:
   (i)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a
retailer or consumer; and
   (ii)   Eighty (80%) percent of the gross receipts from the sale of property
to operators of common carriers and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed
in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally
outside the County.
   (4.5) (Operative January 1, 1984) There shall be excluded from the gross
receipts by which the tax is measured:
   (i)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a
retailer or consumer; and
   (ii)   Eighty (80%) percent of the gross receipts from the sale of tangible
personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally
outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in
the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the
authority of the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign
government.
   (4.5) (Operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the
State which amends or repeals and reenacts Sections 7202 and 7203 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code of the State to provide an exemption for operators of
waterborne vessels in the same or substantially the same language as that
existing in said sections as they read on October 1, 1983) There shall be
excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured:
   (i)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a
retailer or consumer;
   (ii)   Eighty (80%) percent of the gross receipts from the sale of tangible
personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed
principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and
exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for
commercial purposes; and
   (iii)   Eighty (80%) percent of the gross receipts from the sale of tangible
personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally
outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in
the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the
authority of the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign
government. (§ 4, Ord. 334, as amended by §§ 2, 3, and 4, Ord. 417, § 2, 3, and
4, Ord. 667, eff. May 15, 1972, tax operative July 1, 1972, § 1, Ord. 691, eff.
January 1, 1974, and §§ 1 and 4, Ord. 969, eff. December 6, 1983)
Sec. 3-6.05.   Use tax.
   (a)   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other
consumption in the County of tangible personal property purchased from any
retailer on or after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use, or
other consumption in the County at the rate of one percent of the sales price
of the property to and including June 30, 1972, and at the rate of one and one-
fourth (1 1/4%) percent thereafter. The sales price shall include delivery
charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax, regardless of
the place to which delivery is made.
   (b)   (1)   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of
said Code, as amended and in force and effect on October 1, 1957, applicable to
use taxes are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully
set forth herein.
   (2)   Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, the State is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the County shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection
shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the County for the
word “State” when that word is used as part of the title of the State
Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of
Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution of the
state; nor shall the name of the County be substituted for that of the State in
any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be
taken by or against the County, or any agency thereof, rather than by or
against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident
to the administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the
substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not
necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of this
State where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption
from this tax with respect to certain storage, use, or other consumption of
tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax
while such storage, use, or other consumption remains subject to tax by the
State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and
Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use, or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the State under the said provisions of that Code; and in addition, the
name of the County shall not be substituted for that of the State in Sections
6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, and
6828 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted, and the name of the
County shall not be substituted for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer
engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 nor in the definition of
that phrase in Section 6203.
   (3)   There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:
   (i)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a
retailer or consumer; and
   (ii)   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under
a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2
of the said Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city
in the State; provided, however, the storage or use of tangible personal
property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property, or
communications, or in the generation, transmission, or distribution of
electricity, or in the manufacture, transmission, or distribution of gas in
intrastate, interstate, or foreign commerce by public utilities which are
regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the State shall be exempt from
eighty (80%) percent of the tax due under this section.
   (3.5)   (Operative January 1, 1984) There shall be exempt from the tax due
under this section:
   (i)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a
retailer or consumer;
   (ii)   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under
a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2
of said Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in
the State, shall be exempt from the tax due under the provisions of this
chapter; and
   (iii)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1
of said Revenue and Taxation code, the storage, use, or other consumption of
tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or
consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a
certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of
the State, the United States, or any foreign government shall be exempt from
eighty (80%) percent of the tax.
   (3.5)   (Operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of
the State which amends or repeals and reenacts Sections 7202 and 7203 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code of the State to provide an exemption for operators of
waterborne vessels in the same or substantially the same language as that
existing in said sections as they read on October 1, 1983) There shall be
exempt from the tax due under this section:
   (i)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a
retailer or consumer;
   (ii)   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under
a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2
of said Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in
the State, shall be exempt from the tax due under the provisions of this
chapter;
   (iii)   Provided, however, the storage, use, or other consumption of
tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and
used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of
persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes shall be exempted
from eighty (80%) percent of the tax; and
   (iv)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of
said Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of
tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or
consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a
certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of
the State, the United States, or any foreign government shall be exempt from
eighty (80%) percent of the tax. (§ 5, Ord. 334, as amended by §§ 5 and 6, Ord.
417, §§ 5 and 6, Ord. 667, eff. May 15, 1972, tax operative July 1, 1972, § 2,
Ord. 691, eff. January. 1, 1974, and §§ 2 and 5, Ord. 969, eff. December 6,
1983)
Sec. 3-6.06. Credits.
   Any person subject to a sales or use tax or required to collect a use tax
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be entitled to credit against
the payment of such taxes due the amount of sales and use tax due any city in
the County provided the city sales and use tax is levied pursuant to an
ordinance including provisions substantially conforming to the provisions of
subsections (1) through (8) of subsection (h)of Section 7202 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State and other applicable provisions of Part 1.5 of
Division 2 of said Code. (§ 6, Ord. 334, as amended by § 7, Ord. 417, and § 3,
Ord. 969, eff. December 6, 1983, operative January 1, 1984)
Sec. 3-6.06.5.   Credits.
   Any person subject to a sales or use tax or required to collect a use tax
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be entitled to credit against
the payment of such taxes due the amount of sales and use tax due any city in
the County provided the city sales and use tax is levied pursuant to an
ordinance including provisions substantially conforming to the provisions of
subsections (1) through (10) of subsection (i)of Section 7202 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code of the State and other applicable provisions of Part 1.5 of
Division 2 of said Code. (§ 3, Ord. 691, eff. January 1, 1974, and § 6, Ord.
969, eff. December 6, 1983, operative on the operative date of any act of the
Legislature of the State which amends or repeals and reenacts Sections 7202 and
7203 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State to provide an exemption for
operators of waterborne vessels in the same or substantially the same language
as that existing in said sections as they read on October 1, 1983)
Sec. 3-6.07.   Enjoining collection forbidden.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the State or the
County, or against any officer of the State or the County, to prevent or enjoin
the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be
collected. (§ 7, Ord. 334)
Sec. 3-6.08.   Amendments.
   All amendments to the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State enacted
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter which relate to the sales and
use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of said
Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (§
8, Ord. 334)
Sec. 3-6.08.1.   Exclusions and exemptions: Operative dates.
   The provisions of subsection (4.5) of subsection (b)of Section
3-6.04, subsection (3.5) of subsection (b)of Section
3-6.05, and Section
3-6.06.5 of this chapter shall become operative on January 1 of the year
following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an
assessment ratio for State-assessed property which ratio is identical to the
ratio which is required for local assessments by the provisions of Section 401
of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, at which time the provisions of
subsection (4) of subsection (b)of Section 3- 6.04, subsection (3) of
subsection (b)of Section
3-6.05, and Section
3-6.06 of this chapter shall become inoperative.
   (b)   In the event the provisions of subsection (4.5) of subsection (b)of
Section
3-6.04, subsection (3.5) of subsection (b)of Section
3-6.05, and Section
3-6.06.5 of this chapter become operative, and the State Board of Equalization
subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the State-assessed property, which
ratio is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by the
provisions of said Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the provisions
of subsection (4) of subsection (b)of Section
3-6.04, subsection (3) of subsection (b)of Section
3-6.05, and Section
3-6.06 of this chapter shall become operative on the first day of the month
next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time
the provisions of subsection (4.5) of subsection (b)of Section
3-6.04, subsection (3.5) of subsection (b)of Section
3-6.05, and Section
3-6.06.5 of this chapter shall be inoperative until the first day of the month
following the month in which said Board again adopts an assessment ratio for
State-assessed property, which ratio is identical to the ratio required for
local assessments by the provisions of said Section 401, at which time the
provisions of subsection (4.5) of subsection (b)of Section
3-6.04, subsection (3.5) of subsection (b)of Section
3-6.05, and Section
3-6.06.5 of this chapter shall again become operative and the provisions of
subsection (4) of subsection (b)of Section
3-6.04, subsection (3) of subsection (b)of Section
3-6.05, and Section
3-6.06 shall become inoperative. (§ 4, Ord. 691, eff. January 1, 1974)
Sec. 3-6.09.   Amendments: Nullification.
   The amendments to the provisions of Sections
3-6.02,
3-6.04, and
3-6.05 of this chapter, as made by the provisions of Ordinance No. 667, adopted
May 15, 1972, may be made inoperative not less than sixty (60) days, but not
earlier than the first day of the calendar quarter, following the County’s lack
of compliance with the provisions of Article II (commencing with Section 29530)
of Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the Government Code of the State. (§
7, Ord. 667, eff. May 15, 1972)
Sec. 3-6.10.   Repeals.
   The provisions of this chapter may, by a subsequent ordinance, be made
inoperative not less than sixty (60) days, but not earlier than the first day
of the calendar quarter, following an increase by any city within the County of
the rate of its sales or use tax above the rate in effect on August 28, 1957.
(§ 9, Ord. 334)
Chapter 7
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAXES
Sections:
   
3-7.01   Title of provisions.
   
3-7.02   Definitions.
   
3-7.03   Tax imposed.
   
3-7.04   Exemptions from provisions.
   
3-7.05   Operator’s duties.
   
3-7.06   Registration.
   
3-7.07   Reporting and remitting.
   
3-7.08   Penalties and interest.
   
3-7.09   Failure to collect and report tax: Determination by Treasurer-Tax
Collector.
   
3-7.10   Appeals.
   
3-7.11   Records.
   
3-7.12   Refunds.
   
3-7.13   Actions to collect.
   
3-7.14   Violations.
Sec. 3-7.01.   Title of provisions.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law” of
the County. (§ 1, Ord. 525)
Sec. 3-7.02.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Calendar quarter” shall mean a period of three (3) consecutive
calendar months commencing on the first day of each January, April, July, and
October.
   (b)   “Hotel” shall mean any structure, or any portion of any structure,
which is occupied, or intended or designed for occupancy, by transients for
dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes and shall include any hotel, inn,
tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house,
rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home
or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure, or portion
thereof.
   (c)   “Occupancy” shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use
or possession, of any room, or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling,
lodging, or sleeping purposes.
   (d)   “Operator” shall mean the person who is the proprietor of the hotel,
whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession,
licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions
through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the
managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this
chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal.
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the
managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
   (e)   “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or
any other group or combination acting as a unit.
   (f)   “Rent” shall mean the consideration charged, whether or not received,
for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received
in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits,
property, and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom
whatsoever.
   (g)   “Transient” shall mean any person who exercises occupancy or is
entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access,
license, or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar
days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person
so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the
period of thirty (30) days has expired, unless there is an agreement in writing
between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of
occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted
periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of
this chapter may be considered. (§ 2, Ord. 525)
Sec. 3-7.03.   Tax Imposed
   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel within the unincorporated area
of the County, each transient shall be subject to and shall pay a tax in the
amount of eight (8%) percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax
shall constitute a debt owed by the transient to the County, which debt shall
be extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the County. The transient
shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If
the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be
paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s
ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid
to the operator of the hotel, the Treasurer-Tax Collector may require that such
tax shall be paid directly to the Treasurer-Tax Collector. (§ 3, Ord. 525, as
amended by § 1, Ord. 607, § 1, Ord. 806, eff. June 30, 1978, § 1, Ord. 967,
eff. December 1, 1983, § 1, Ord. 1005, eff. May 1, 1985, and § 1, Ord. 1006,
eff. May 14, 1985)
Sec. 3-7.04.   Exemptions from provisions.
   No tax shall be imposed upon:
   (a)   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the
power of the County to impose the tax provided for in this chapter; or
   (b)   Any officer or employee of a foreign government, which officer or
employee is exempt by reason of express provision of Federal law or
international treaty.
   No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time
the rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by
the Treasurer-Tax Collector. (§ 4, Ord. 525, as amended by §§ 1 and 2, Ord.
807, eff. June 29, 1978)
Sec. 3-7.05.   Operator’s duties.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by the provisions of this
chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from
every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount
of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment
from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any
manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax, or any part thereof, will
be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the
rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner
provided in this chapter. (§ 5, Ord. 525)
Sec. 3-7.06.   Registration.
   On or before May 26, 1965, or within thirty (30) days after commencing
business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting an occupancy
to transients shall register such hotel with the Treasurer-Tax Collector and
obtain from him a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate” which shall at
all times be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate
shall, among other things, set forth the following information:
   (a)   The name of the operator;
   (b)   The address of the hotel;
   (c)   The date upon which the certificate was issued; and
   (d)   A statement as follows: “This Transient Occupancy Registration
Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled
the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law by registering with
the Treasurer-Tax Collector for the purpose of collecting from transients the
Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting such tax to the Treasurer-Tax Collector.
This certificate shall not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful
business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to
operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws,
including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board,
commission, department, or office of this County. This certificate shall not
constitute a permit.”
   Such certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be
surrendered immediately to the Treasurer-Tax Collector upon the cessation of
business at the location named upon its sale or transfer. (§ 6, Ord. 525)
Sec. 3-7.07.   Reporting and remitting.
   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the
close of each calendar quarter, make a return to the Treasurer-Tax Collector,
on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the
amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is
filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the Treasurer-
Tax Collector. Returns and payments shall be due immediately upon cessation of
business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the County
until payment thereof is made to the Treasurer-Tax Collector. (§ 6, Ord. 525)
Sec. 3-7.08.   Penalties and interest.
   (a)   Original delinquency. Any operator who shall fail to remit any tax
imposed by the provisions of this chapter within the time required shall pay a
penalty in the amount of ten (10%) percent of the tax in addition to the amount
of the tax.
   (b)   Continued delinquency. Any operator who shall fail to remit any
delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the
date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second
delinquency penalty in the amount of ten (10%) percent of the tax in addition
to the amount of the tax and the ten (10%) percent penalty first imposed.
   (c)   Fraud. If the Treasurer-Tax Collector shall determine that the
nonpayment of any remittance due pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is
due to fraud, a penalty in the amount of twenty-five (25%) percent of the
amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties set forth
in subsections (a)and (b)of this section.
   (d)   Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who shall
fail to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall pay
interest at the rate of one-half (.5%) of one percent per month, or fraction
thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on
which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.
   (e)   Penalties and interest merged with tax. Every penalty imposed, and
such interest as accrues, pursuant to the provisions of this section shall
become a part of the tax required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 8, Ord. 525)
Sec. 3-7.09.   Failure to collect and report tax: Determination by Treasurer-
Tax Collector.
   If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect such tax and to make, within
the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax, or
any portion thereof, required by the provisions of this chapter, the Treasurer-
Tax Collector shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain the
facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as
the Treasurer-Tax Collector shall procure such facts and information as he is
able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any such tax imposed and
payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to
make such report and remittance, the Treasurer-Tax Collector shall proceed to
determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties
provided for by the provisions of this chapter. In the event such determination
is made, the Treasurer-Tax Collector shall give notice of the amount so
assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known
place of address. Such operator may, within ten (10) days after the service or
mailing of such notice, make an application in writing to the Treasurer-Tax
Collector for a hearing on the amount assessed. If an application by the
operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax,
interest, and penalties, if any, determined by the Treasurer-Tax Collector
shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such an
application is made, the Treasurer-Tax Collector shall give not less than five
(5) days’ written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the
operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why the amount
specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest, and penalties. At
such hearing the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax,
interest, and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the
Treasurer-Tax Collector shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall
thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this
section of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest, and
penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15)
days unless an appeal is filed as provided in Section
3-7.10 of this chapter. (§ 9, Ord. 525)
Sec. 3-7.10.   Appeals.
   Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Treasurer-Tax Collector with
respect to the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties, if any, may appeal
to the Board by filing a notice of appeal with the County Clerk-Recorder within
fifteen (15) days after the service or mailing of the determination of the tax
due. The Board shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the
County Clerk-Recorder shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last
known place of address. The findings of the Board shall be final and conclusive
and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in this chapter
for the service of a notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be
immediately due and payable upon the service of notice.(§ 10, Ord. 525)
Sec. 3-7.11.   Records.
   It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment
to the County of any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter to keep and
preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to
determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection
of and payment to the County, which records the Treasurer-Tax Collector shall
have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (§ 11, Ord. 525)
Sec. 3-7.12.   Refunds.
   (a)   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been
overpaid, or paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the County pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, such amount
may be refunded as provided in subsections (b)and (c)of this section provided a
claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific
grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Treasurer-Tax
Collector within three (3) years after the date of payment. The claim shall be
on forms furnished by the Treasurer-Tax Collector.
   (b)   An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously
or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner
prescribed by the Treasurer-Tax Collector that the person from whom the tax has
been collected was not a transient; provided, however, neither a refund nor a
credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either
been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the
transient to the operator.
   (c)   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, paid more than
once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the County by filing
a claim in the manner provided in subsection (a)of this section but only when
the tax was paid by the transient directly to the Treasurer-Tax Collector, or
when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the
satisfaction of the Treasurer-Tax Collector that the transient has been unable
to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.
   (d)   No refund shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of this section
unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto. (§ 12, Ord. 525)
Sec. 3-7.13.   Actions to collect.
   Any tax required to be paid by any transient pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the County. Any
such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the County shall
be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the County. Any person owing money to
the County pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an
action brought in the name of the County for the recovery of such amount. (§
13, Ord. 525)
Sec. 3-7.14.   Violations.
   Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required,
or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to
furnish a supplement return or claim shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. Any person
required to make, render, sign, or verify any report or claim and who makes any
false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the
determination of any amount due required by the provisions of this chapter to
be made shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as provided in this
section. (§ 14, Ord. 525)
Chapter 8
SERVICE CHARGES FOR COUNTY SERVICE AREAS
Sections:
   
3-8.01   Purpose.
   
3-8.02   Fixing Charges.
   
3-8.03   Written reports.
   
3-8.04   Hearing procedure.
   
3-8.05   Hearings: Confirmation.
   
3-8.06   Collection on the tax roll.
Sec. 3-8.01.   Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to exercise the authority conferred upon
the County by Section 25210.77a of the Government Code of the State to fix and
collect charges for any particular extended miscellaneous service authorized to
be provided by a county service area in this County (referred to in this
chapter as “service or services”). (§ 1, Ord. 766, eff. October 5, 1976, as
amended by § 1, Ord. 817, eff. October 3, 1978 and by § 2, Ord. 1209, eff.
October 16, 1997)
Sec. 3-8.02.   Fixing charges.
   For any county service area or zone thereof located therein, the Board of
Supervisors may fix and collect charges for a particular extended service
authorized pursuant to Title 3, Division 2, Chapter 2.2, Article 7 of the
Government Code (commencing with Section 25210.70) to pay, in whole or in part,
for the cost thereof. The revenue obtained thereby may be in lieu of, or
supplemental to, revenue obtained by the levy of taxes. The charges may vary by
reason of the nature of the use or the month in which the service is rendered
to correspond to the cost and the value of the service. The charges may be
determined by apportioning the total cost, not otherwise offset by other
available revenue, of the extended service area to each parcel therein in
proportion to the estimated benefits from such service to be received by each
parcel. In the case of the El Macero County Service Area the amount of each
charge shall be determined by apportioning the revenue to be obtained between
occupied parcels and unoccupied parcels, excluding public rights of way, and
then by dividing the revenue to be obtained from each respective class of
parcels by the total number of parcels in that respective class; provided,
however, that the charges for all services provided to parcels devoted to
country club use shall be twenty (20) times that fixed for other parcels. (§ 1,
Ord. 766, eff. October 5, 1976, as amended by § 2, Ord. 817, eff. October 3,
1978, § 1, Ord. 1107, eff. July 19, 1990, and § 2, Ord. 1209, eff. October 16,
1997)
Sec. 3-8.03.   Written reports.
   Once each year the Board shall cause to be prepared a written report which
shall contain a description of each parcel of real property receiving extended
service or services and the amount of the charge for each parcel for such year
computed in conformity with this chapter. Such report shall be filed with the
Clerk of the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 766, eff. October 5, 1976, as amended by § 3,
Ord. 817, eff. October 3, 1978 and by § 2, Ord. 1209, eff. October 16, 1997)
Sec. 3-8.04.   Hearing procedure.
   Upon the filing of such report, the Clerk of the Board shall fix a time,
date, and place for a hearing thereon and for filing objections or protests
thereto. The Clerk of the Board shall publish a notice of such hearing, as
provided in Section 6066 of the Government Code of the State, prior to the date
set for the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and
published in the County. (§ 1, Ord. 766, eff. October 5, 1976, as amended by §
2, Ord. 1209, eff. October 16, 1997)
Sec. 3-8.05.   Hearings: Confirmation.
   At the time, date, and place stated in the notice, the Board shall hear and
consider all objections or protests, if any, to the report and may continue the
hearing from time to time. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Board may
adopt, revise, change, reduce, or modify any charge, and shall make its
determination upon each charge as described in the report, and thereafter, by
resolution, shall confirm the report. (§ 1, Ord. 766, eff. October 5, 1976, as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1209, eff. October 16, 1997)
Sec. 3-8.06.   Collection on the tax roll.
   The charges set forth in the report, as confirmed, shall appear as a
separate item on the tax bill. The charges shall be collected at the same time
and in the same manner as ordinary County ad valorem property taxes are
collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and
sale in cases of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to
the levy, collection, and enforcement of County ad valorem property taxes shall
be applicable to such charges, except that if the real property to which such
charges relate has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for
value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer or value has been created and
attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of such
taxes would become delinquent, then the charge conformed pursuant this chapter
shall not result in a lien against such real property but, instead, shall be
transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. (§ 1, Ord. 766, eff. October
5, 1976, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1209, eff. October 16, 1997)
Chapter 9
PARCEL CHARGES: ROLLING ACRES PERMANENT ROAD DIVISION*
*   Chapter 9 repealed in its entirety by Ord. 1517, eff. January 16, 2020.
Chapter 10
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES*
*   Chapter 9, as added by Ordinance No. 1065, effective December 24, 1987,
renumbered to Chapter 10 by codifier because Chapter 9 is in use: Article 3
added by Ordinance No. 1300, effective June 12, 2003.
Sections:
Article 1. Definitions
   
3-10.101   Definitions.
Article 2.   Commercial Weighing and Measuring Devices
   
3-10.201   Authority: Date of enforcement.
   
3-10.202   Registration certificates: Required.
   
3-10.203   Registration certificates: Applications.
   
3-10.204   Registration certificates: Term.
   
3-10.205   Fees.
   
3-10.206   Registration certificates: Corporations: Fictitious names.
   
3-10.207   Registration certificates: Transferability.
   
3-10.208   Registration certificates: Replacement.
Article 3.   Automated Point of Sale Inspection Program.
   
3-10.301   Definitions.
   
3-10.302   Inspection Requirement.
   
3-10.303   Follow-up Inspection.
   
3-10.304   Fees.
   
3-10.305   Failure to Pay Inspection Fees and Follow-up Inspection Fees.
   
3-10.306   Violations.
   
3-10.307   Penalties.
   
3-10.308   Notice to Consumer.
   
3-10.309   Posting of Price Accuracy Compliance: Public Notification.
Article 1.
Definitions
Sec. 3-10.101.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Weighing and measuring instrument” and “weighing and measuring
device” are used interchangeably, and shall have the same meaning, and shall
mean “weighing instruments” and “measuring instruments” as defined by Section
12500 of the Business and Professions Code of the State, excepting any retail
scale used primarily for the purposes of weighing feed and seed.
   (b)   “Commercial purpose” shall have the meaning assigned to it by Section
12500 of the Business and Professions Code of the State.
   (c)   “Sealer” shall mean the Agricultural Commissioner/Sealer of the
County. (§ 1, Ord. 1065, eff. December 24, 1987)
Article 2.
Commercial Weighing and Measuring Devices
Sec. 3-10.201. Authority: Date of enforcement.
   This article is enacted pursuant to Section 12240 of the Business and
Professions Code of the State to establish a system for registering commercial
weighing and measuring devices and to recover the costs of inspecting and
testing such instruments pursuant to Section 12210 of said Business and
Professions Code.
   The provisions of this article shall be enforced on and after January 1,
1988. (§ 1, Ord. 1065, eff. December 24, 1987)
Sec. 3-10.202. Registration certificates: Required.
   No person shall use any weighing or measuring instrument for commercial
purposes without having a current registration certificate for such instrument
issued pursuant to this article. Such certificate shall be in addition to any
other certificate, license, permit, or other entitlement which may be required
by the State, County, or any other public entity. (§ 1, Ord. 1065, eff.
December 24, 1987)
Sec. 3-10.203.   Registration certificates: Applications.
   An application for a registration certificate shall be submitted to the
Sealer in the form prescribed by the Sealer. The Sealer shall issue the
registration certificate upon the receipt of a properly completed application
and the payment of the applicable fee as set forth in Section
3-10.205 of this article. (§ 1, Ord. 1065, eff. December 24, 1987)
Sec. 3-10.204. Registration certificates: Term.
   A registration certificate shall expire on January 31 next following the
date of its issuance and may thereafter be renewed on an annual basis upon the
payment of the applicable fees and the submission of a properly completed and
current application. (§ 1, Ord. 1065, eff. December 24, 1987)
Sec. 3-10.205.   Fees.
   (a)   An annual registration fee shall be charged for the calendar year, or
any part thereof, for all weighing and measuring instruments requiring a
registration certificate as provided for in California Business and Professions
Code Section 12240. The annual registration fee shall be set at the amount
necessary to recover the costs incurred in inspecting or testing the devices.
The fee amounts shall not exceed the County's total cost of actually inspecting
or testing the devices as required by law, up to the maximum amounts set in
California Business and Professions Code Section 12240 as may be amended from
time to time.
   (b)   Any person failing to obtain a registration certificate before using
any weighing or measuring instrument for commercial purposes, or to renew a
certificate on or before March 31 of each year, shall be required to pay, in
addition to the registration fee, fifty dollars ($50.00) to reimburse the
Department for its costs to obtain payment of the required registration fee. If
the Department is required to refer collection of the delinquent fee to the
County Office of Revenue and Reimbursement, then a twenty-five dollar ($25.00)
administrative fee shall also be paid by the person failing to timely pay the
required annual device registration fee in order to reimburse the Department
for its costs incurred for this referral. (§ 1, Ord. 1065, eff. December 24,
1987, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1277, eff. February 7, 2002, as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1341, eff. February 9, 2006, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1440, eff. May 29,
2014)
Sec. 3-10.206.   Registration certificates: Corporations: Fictitious names.
   A registration certificate may be issued to a corporation duly authorized to
transact business in the State or to any person operating under a fictitious
name who has complied with the provisions of Chapter 5 of Part 3 of Division 7
of the Business and Professions Code of the State. A certificate issued to a
corporation shall designate such corporation by the exact name which appears on
the Articles of Incorporation of such corporation. Except as otherwise provided
in this section, all registration certificates shall be issued in the true name
of the applicant. (§ 1, Ord. 1065, eff. December 24, 1987)
Sec. 3-10.207.   Registration certificates: Transferability.
   Registration certificates shall not be transferable from one person to valid
only for another. A registration certificate shall be the particular
instruments specified therein and, if the instruments are to be used at a fixed
location, for the specific location for which the registration certificate is
issued. (§ 1, Ord. 1065, eff. December 24, 1987)
Sec. 3-10.208.   Registration certificates: Replacement.
   If a current registration certificate has been lost, mutilated, or
destroyed, the person to whom it was issued may obtain a replacement from the
Sealer upon the payment of a replacement fee of Two and no/100ths ($2.00)
Dollars. (§ 1, Ord. 1065, eff. December 24, 1987)
Article 3: Automated Point of Sale Inspection Program
Sec. 3-10.301.   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Article, the following words and phrases are defined
and shall be construed as having the following meaning:
   (a)   ”Advertise” means a notice to attract public attention.
   (b)   "Commercial purpose" includes the selling of any commodity by a person
to a consumer.
   (c)   "Commodity" means one or more products, merchandise, goods, articles
of commerce, wares, materials, or any consumer items that are bought or sold.
   (d)   “Consumer” means a customer, purchaser, or buyer.
   (e)   "Department" means the Yolo County Department of Agriculture/Sealer of
Weights and Measures.
   (f)   "Location" means a premise on which a single business operates one or
more point of sale stations.
   (g)   "Person" means any person, firm, corporation, business or association.
   (h)   “Point of sale station” mean individual and separate equipment that is
capable of recovering electrically stored price information that is used to
charge consumers for the purchase of commodities. "Point of sale stations"
shall include, but is not limited to, equipment that uses Universal Product
Code scanners, price look-up codes, or any other system that relies on the
retrieval of electronically stored information to complete a transaction of
commerce between a retailer and consumer.
   (i)   “Scanner” means an automated system for retail commodity price
charging.
   (j)   “Sell” includes barter, exchange, trade, keep for sale, offer for sale
or expose for sale in any of their variant forms. (§ 2, Ord. 1300, eff. June
12, 2003)
Sec. 3-10.302.   Inspection Requirement.
   Any location that utilizes a scanner in Yolo County, at a point of sale
station, is subject to annual inspection and cost recovery as authorized by
this Article. Nothing in this Article shall require an annual inspection if the
Department does not have the resources necessary to complete such annual
inspections. Nothing in this Article shall prohibit more frequent inspections
and follow-up inspections if the Department deems such additional inspections
to be necessary. Other than annual or follow up inspections for which the Board
of Supervisors has set a fee, the Department, consistent with guidelines
established by Board Resolution, may waive any additional inspection fees. (§
2, Ord. 1300, eff. June 12, 2003)
Sec. 3-10.303.   Follow-up Inspection.
   For the purposes of defraying additional inspection costs incurred by the
Department when a point of sale station used by a person fails an inspection,
the Department may charge a follow-up inspection fee to the person upon return
to verify that corrective actions have been taken and no additional violations
are occurring. (§ 2, Ord. 1300, eff. June 12, 2003)
Sec. 3-10.304.   Fees.
   The inspection fee and follow-up inspection fee for any person utilizing a
scanner shall be established, from time to time, by the Board of Supervisors by
resolution, in accordance with the applicable law. (§ 2, Ord. 1300, eff. June
12, 2003)
Sec. 3-10.305.   Failure to Pay Inspection Fees and Follow-up Inspection Fees.
   Any inspection fee or follow-up inspection fee is due and payable upon
receipt and if not paid within 60 days of receipt, there shall be added a late
fee as follows:
   (a)   For any inspection fee or follow-up inspection fee paid within 30 days
following the due date, there shall be added a penalty fee of $50.
   (b)   For any inspection or follow-up inspection fee paid more than 30 days
after the due date, but within 90 days following the due date, there shall be
added a penalty fee in the amount of the sum equal to 50% of the inspection fee
or $100, whichever is greater.
   (c)   For any inspection fee or follow-up inspection fee paid more than 90
days following the due date, there shall be added a penalty fee in the amount
of the sum equal to the inspection fee or $200, whichever is greater. (§ 2,
Ord. 1300, eff. June 12, 2003)
Sec. 3-10.306.   Violations.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to charge, at the time of sale, a price that is
more than the price that is advertised or posted.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, employee or agent thereof to:
   (1)   Fail to post the telephone number as specified in Section
3-10.308.
   (2)   Fail to submit to any reasonable inspection as required by Sections
3-10.302 and
3-10.303.
   (3)   Fail to pay any fee as required by Section
3-10.305. (§ 2, Ord. 1300, eff. June 12, 2003)
Sec. 3-10.307.   Penalties.
   (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
1-2.01 of the Yolo County Code or any other section of this Code, and with the
exception of the fourth and subsequent violations of this Article within one
year as provided in subsection (c)of this Section, the violation of any of the
provisions of this Article is an infraction subject to the procedures set forth
in Penal Code sections 19.6 and 19.7.
   (b)   Every violation of any provision of this Chapter constituting an
infraction is punishable as follows:
   (i)   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) and not less than
fifty dollars ($50) for a first offense;
   (ii)   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200) and not less than one
hundred dollars ($100) for a second offense;
   (iii)   A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) for a third
violation of this Chapter within one year.
   (c)   The fourth and each subsequent violation of this Chapter within one
year shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding one
thousand dollars ($1000) and not less than five hundred dollars ($500) or any
other penalty imposed by a court, or both.
   (d)   Payment of any fine or other penalty imposed by a court shall not
relieve a person from the responsibility of paying the inspection fee or
follow-up inspection fee for a point of sale station audit.
   (e)   In addition to all other remedies provided by this Article or State
law, in the event of continuing violation of the provisions of this Article,
the Department may seek civil injunctive relief to restrain further violations.
   (f)   In lieu of the other remedies provided by this Article, the Department
may pursue civil penalties pursuant to Section 12015.3 of the California
Business and Professions Code or criminal prosecution pursuant to Section
12024.2 of the California Business and Professions Code, as those sections may
be amended from time to time. (§ 2, Ord. 1300, eff. June 12, 2003)
Sec. 3-10.308.   Notice to Consumer.
   In addition to the inspection fee requirements of this Article, every person
who uses a point of sale station for commercial purposes shall post, at a
location clearly visible to the general public, a notice which will be provided
by the Department and which will contain at least the following information:
      “Attention Consumer: You are entitled to the lowest advertised or posted
price offered at this location. For information or complaints, you may call the
Yolo County Agricultural Commissioner/Sealer of Weights and Measures at 530-
666-8140.” (§ 2, Ord. 1300, eff. June 12, 2003)
Sec. 3-10.309.   Posting of Price Accuracy Compliance: Public Notification.
   Upon the completion of an inspection as provided for in this Article, the
inspected location involved may request the Department to provide a notice of
compliance that will be in a format suitable for posting and which will
indicate that the location is in compliance with the provisions of this
Article. Presentation of a notice of compliance by the Department is not
intended to be, and shall not be construed as, an endorsement or recommendation
of the location by the Department or the County. (§ 2, Ord. 1300, eff. June 12,
2003)
Chapter 11
EXTENDED SERVICE CHARGES: NORTH DAVIS MEADOWS COUNTY SERVICE AREA*
*   Sections 3-11.01 through 3-11.06 as added by Urgency Ordinance No. 1078,
effective June 28, 1988, renumbered to Chapter 11 by codifier because Chapter
10 is in use. Chapter 11 repealed in its entirety by Ord. 1209, eff. October
16, 1997.
Chapter 12
CRIMINAL JUSTICE ADMINISTRATIVE FEE
Sections:
   
3-12.01   Fee ratified and imposed.
   
3-12.02   Modification
Sec. 3-12.01.   Fee ratified and imposed.
   There is hereby ratified and imposed upon every city, special district,
school district, community college district, college, or university, a criminal
justice administrative fee in the amount of Ninety-one and 47/100ths ($91.47)
Dollars with respect to the booking or other processing of each person arrested
by an employee of that city, special district, school district, community
college district, college, or university, where the person arrested is brought
to a county jail for booking or detention, all as set forth in Resolution No.
91-18 of this Board of Supervisors. (§ 1, Ord. 1118, eff. March 7, 1991)
Sec. 3-12.02.   Modification.
   The fee ratified and imposed herein may be modified by resolution of this
Board. (§ 1, Ord. 1118, eff. March 7, 1991)
Chapter 13
PROPERTY TAX ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS
Sections:
   
3-13.01   Costs attributable.
   
3-13.02   City costs.
   
3-13.03   Costs of other jurisdictions.
   
3-13.04   Future determinations.
Sec. 3-13.01.   Costs attributable.
   The determination is hereby ratified and made that the 1990-91 fiscal year
property tax related costs of the Assessor, Treasurer-Tax Collector, and
Auditor-Controller of the County, including overhead costs as permitted by
Federal Circular A-87 standards Property Tax Costs, are One Million Two Hundred
Fifty-Four Thousand Six Hundred Sixteen and no/100ths ($1,254,616.00) Dollars.
(§ 1, Ord. 1117, eff. March 7, 1991, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1142, eff. June 4,
1992)
Sec. 3-13.02.   City costs.
   The determination is hereby ratified and made that the property tax costs
proportionately attributable to incorporated cities are Three Hundred Thousand
Three Hundred Fifty-Five and no/100ths ($300,355.00) Dollars. (§ 1, Ord. 1117,
eff. March 7, 1991, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1142, eff. June 4, 1992)
Sec. 3-13.03.   Costs of other jurisdictions.
   The determination is hereby ratified and made that the 1990-91 fiscal year
property tax administration costs proportionately attributable to local
jurisdictions in this County other than the County and cities are as set forth
in Resolution No. 92-51 of this Board, and the Auditor-Controller is directed
to submit invoices and otherwise carry out the duties set forth in that
resolution and authorized or imposed by Section 97 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code. (Ord. 1117, eff. March 7, 1991, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1142, eff. June
4, 1992)
Sec. 3-13.04.   Future determinations.
   The determinations made herein may be modified by resolution of this Board.
(§ 1, Ord. 1117, eff. March 7, 1991, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1142, eff. June 4,
1992)
Chapter 14
COUNTY FACILITIES AUTHORIZATION AND FEE*
*   Chapter 12, added by Ordinance No. 1119, was renumbered to Chapter 14 by
codifier as Chapter 12 is already in use.
Sections:
   
3-14.01   Findings.
   
3-14.02   Definitions.
   
3-14.03   Authorization required.
   
3-14.04   Terms of payment to obtain authorization.
   
3-14.05   City election to administer.
   
3-14.06   Use of fees.
   
3-14.07   Administration.
   
3-14.08   Enforcement.
Sec. 3-14.01.   Findings.
   (a)   The California Mitigation Fee Act, Section 66000 et seq. of the
Government Code, establishes a process that allows public agencies to implement
a fee program for new development to address government facility needs and
associated costs directly related to the population growth associated with
development.
   (b)   County facility needs grow commensurate with the growth in population.
New residents and employees are likely to require as much service as the County
provides to existing residents and employees. Increased demand on services
increases space needs.
   (c)   All or a portion of the costs associated with facilities needs may be
recovered through the establishment, increase, or imposition of development
fees.
   (d)   The California Mitigation Fee Act requires that all public agencies
satisfy certain requirements when establishing, increasing, or imposing a fee
as a condition of approval for a development project.
   (e)   This chapter properly limits use of all fees collected to public
facilities and improvements attributable to new development, and further limits
use of fees to specific categories of facilities and improvements until and
unless subsequent evidence justifies reallocation.
   (f)   Fees collected under this chapter will fund facilities for County-wide
services. Development within incorporated cities will cause more than ninety
(90%) percent of the demand for new facilities in the identified categories.
Substantially greater development outside the existing cities would cause
unacceptable loss of productive agricultural land.
   (g)   The cities do not and cannot provide the identified facilities and the
related services, while the County is required to do so.
   (h)   Development within the cities should pay a fair share toward the new
facilities which it requires. Otherwise, the costs of those facilities will be
disproportionately and unfairly borne by other County taxpayers, or will
unfairly reduce the level of service provided to present County residents.
   (i)   In order to recover its costs resulting from development within
cities, the County must exercise authority over that development, solely to the
extent of requiring payment of a fee.
   (j)   Residential projects and commercial improvements bring additional
residents and employees into the County. Those residents and employees require
social, health, probation, traffic, parks and open space, sheriff, criminal
justice, County administrative services, and libraries. The purpose of the fees
required by this chapter is to pay for costs of additional facilities used to
provide Countywide public protection, health and human services, libraries,
sheriff’s patrol and investigation services, traffic, parks and open space,
County administration, information technology, planning, and public works, and
facility planning. The fees received pursuant to this chapter are to be used to
assess the need for, plan, design, construct, develop, lease and acquire
facilities for such services.
(§ 1, Ord. 1119, eff. May 30, 1991, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1533, eff. February
11, 2021)
Sec. 3-14.02.   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall
have the following meanings:
   (a)   ”Accessory Dwelling Unit” or “ADU” shall mean a small permanent
Dwelling Unit that may be established in addition to the primary dwelling on a
parcel zoned for residential use. ADUs may be attached or detached from the
primary dwelling and comply with Government Code 65852.2 requirements.
   (b)   “Agricultural Building” shall mean a structure designed and
constructed to house farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other
horticultural products. This structure shall not be a place of human habitation
or a place of employment where agricultural products are processed, treated or
packaged, nor shall it be a place used by the public.
   (c)   “Category” or “categories” shall mean one or more of the following:
probation youth; probation adult; social services; health services; libraries;
sheriff administration & detention; sheriff law enforcement; district attorney
and public defender; general administration; facility planning; and interim
restricted cash.
   (d)   “Commercial” shall mean sale or rental of merchandise (other than
automobiles, vehicles, trucks, trailers and related implements for agricultural
use), food or beverages for personal or household consumption, services
rendered in connection with such sales or rentals, and all uses not otherwise
classified under this chapter which have Standard Industrial Classification
codes with employment densities similar to those for uses listed in this
section.
   (e)   “Commercial improvement” shall mean new construction or alteration of,
or an addition to, a structure which occurs after the effective date of Yolo
County Ordinance No. 1119 and which results in a net increase of five hundred
(500) or more gross square feet (taking into account square footage which is
lost, including demolition under Section 3-142.04(d) of enclosed space suitable
and intended for office/service, retail, wholesale or manufacturing use.
   (f)   “County Facilities Fee” shall mean the fee imposed under this Chapter.
   (g)   “Dwelling” shall mean a building that contains one or more dwelling
units used, intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let, or hired out
to be occupied for living purposes.
   (h)   “Dwelling Unit” shall mean a single unit providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
   (i)   “Impacting development” shall mean any commercial improvement or
residential project, except to the extent that the improvement or project is
constructed pursuant to a building permit issued upon an application filed
before August 1, 1991 and determined or deemed to be complete before September
1, 1991.
   (j)   ”Industrial” shall mean (1) a use which mechanically or chemically
transforms materials or substances into, or fabricates, new products; (2)
agriculture, forestry or fishing; (3) mining; (4) construction; (5)
transportation; (6) public utility use; and (7) all uses not otherwise
classified under the ordinance codified in this chapter which have Standard
Industrial classification codes (These classification codes are found at:
https://www.osha.gov/pls/imis/sic_manual.html) with employment densities
similar to those for the uses listed in this section.
   (k)   “Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit” or “JADUs” shall mean a very small
Dwelling Unit created out of a bedroom within an existing single family home.
JADUs must comply with Government Code Section 65852.22.
   (l)   “Office” shall mean use or occupancy by: (1) persons or entities
performing or providing finance, insurance, real estate, professional,
technical, health, design, repair, personal or other services, other than
retail uses; (2) hotel use; (3) entertainment and public assembly uses; and (4)
all uses not otherwise classified under this chapter which have Standard
Industrial Classification codes with employment densities similar to those for
uses listed in this section.
   (m)   “Residential project” shall mean construction of one or more dwelling
units (including mobile homes) and alteration or addition of an existing unit
or units which creates one or more net additional units.
   (n)   “Security contract" shall mean a contract in recordable form which
constitutes a lien for payment of the fee due under this chapter, against the
present and future owners of the property in question, securing payment of the
fee in full upon the first dwelling or improvements in the project receiving
final inspection or a certificate of occupancy (or at such later time as this
chapter specifically provides in a particular case).
   (o)   “Warehouse” shall mean: (1) storage or transfer of goods primarily to
or for industrial, Commercial, institutional, farm, construction or
professional business users; (2) storage or transfer of automobile, trucks,
trailers and vehicles and related implements for agricultural use; and (3) all
uses not otherwise classified under this chapter which have Standard Industrial
Classification costs with employment densities similar to those for uses listed
in this section.
(§ 1, Ord. 1119, eff. May 30, 1991, as amended by §§ 2-5, Ord. 1150, eff.
December 26,1992, §§ 2, 4-6, Ord. 1179, eff. June 17, 1995;§ 3, Ord. 1301, eff.
June 19, 2003; and § 2, Ord. 1533, eff. February 11, 2021)
Sec. 3-14.03.   Authorization required.
   (a)   After August 1, 1991, no person shall construct, nor direct or
contract for construction of, any impacting development within the county
without first obtaining a county facilities and services authorization after
payment of the fee specified in Section
3-14.04(b).
   (b)   No person shall cause the use of an existing structure to be changed
without first obtaining a county facilities and services authorization after
payment of the fee specified in Section
3-14.04(g).
   (c)   County facilities and services authorizations shall be issued as
provided in Section
3-14.04, and construction and development shall not be otherwise regulated
under this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1119, eff. May 30, 1991, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1150, eff. December
26, 1992; and § 2, Ord. 1533, eff. February 11, 2021)
Sec. 3-14.04.   Terms of payment to obtain authorization.
   (a)   Conditions of issuance. The County Department of Community Services,
or a city so authorized pursuant to Section
3-14.05(d), shall issue a county facilities and services authorization, upon:
(1) payment of a fee in the amount set forth in subsection (b)or (h), whichever
applies; (2) a determination that the impacting development is exempt from the
fee; or (3) agreement to subsequently pay the fee set forth in subsection (b)or
(h)and execution of a security contract. Except where a security contract
provides otherwise, fees due shall be paid no later than the date of issuance
of a building permit to construct the impacting development in question or upon
occupancy where no building permit is required.
   (b)   Fee amounts. Except to the extent reduced by an in-lieu contribution
approved pursuant to subsection (d), fees under this section shall be payable
in the amounts established by the Board of Supervisors and set forth in the
County's Master Fee Resolution. The amount payable shall be reduced by the
amount of any fee charged to the developer by any other jurisdiction to provide
funding for the same county facilities. The Board of Supervisors may, without a
further comprehensive cost and fee study, adjust by resolution the fee amounts
once annually based on the percentage increase in the Engineering News Record
Construction Cost Index or a similar index which measures typical construction
costs for facilities generally similar to those to be built by the county. (§
4, Ord. 1349, eff. May 25, 2006.)
   (c)   Appeal.
   (1)   A person or entity who proposes to construct an impacting development
and has received a preliminary estimate of the fee due under this chapter, or
received certification by a city pursuant to Section
3-14.05(b), may file a written appeal requesting a fee reduction. The appeal
shall be filed with the County Department of Community Services within thirty
(30) days after filing the building permit application. The fee reduction may
be requested on the grounds that: (A) the development has been inappropriately
classified in determining the fee amount; or (B) the development's impact on
population, employment or use of facilities will, as a result of exceptional
circumstances not taken into account in adopting the fee, be less than the
impact projected for the use category in which the impacting development falls.
The burden of proof in establishing these grounds shall be on the person filing
the request.
   (2)   The appeal shall contain such information as the Department of
Community Services may reasonably require.
   (3)   The appeal shall be presented to and considered by a subcommittee
consisting of the Chief Building Official or his designee and two (2)
representatives of the Department of Community Services Director. Oral and
written evidence may be presented by any party at such hearing. The hearing may
be continued from time to time as is deemed necessary. The Subcommittee shall
issue a written decision on the appeal no later than fifteen (15) days after
the hearing is closed. The Subcommittee decision shall be a final
administrative decision, unless appealed to the Board of Supervisors.
   (4)   The Subcommittee's decision may be appealed to the Board of
Supervisors by filing, not later than fifteen (15) days after the Subcommittee
issues its written decision, a written appeal with the Clerk of the Board. The
Board may decide such appeals based on the material which formed the record
before the Subcommittee, or may consider additional evidence presented at a
hearing before the Board. The Board shall issue a written decision on the
appeal no later than thirty (30) days after it is filed, or not less than
thirty (30) days after completion of a hearing, whichever is later. The Board's
written decision shall be a final administrative decision for purposes of
exhaustion of administrative remedies.
   (5)   Any appeal to the Board of Supervisors shall be accompanied by a fee
in the amount which is necessary to recover the costs of processing the appeal.
Such fee shall be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
   (d)   Demolition or destruction offset. Where a building permit to construct
an impacting development is issued within two (2) years after demolition on the
same lot, or where new construction replaces a structure on the same lot which
was damaged or destroyed by fire, earthquake or other causes similarly beyond
the owner's control, the amount of new construction taken into account under
this chapter shall be reduced by the number of dwelling units (in the case of
construction of a residential project) or square feet (in the case of
construction of commercial improvements) which were demolished or destroyed.
   (e)   In-lieu contribution. The County may authorize, in connection with
approval of a subdivision map or any other development approval subject to a
required public hearing before any decision-making body of the County, an
impacting development within an unincorporated area of the County to substitute
completed facilities or another contribution of at least equivalent value to
the foregone fee for all or part of the fees required under this chapter. The
facilities or other contribution must reduce the need for new County facilities
in one or more of the categories. Where the facilities or other contribution
exceed in value the fee amount in the category or categories in which a benefit
is provided, the County may (but shall not be required to) credit the excess
value against fees in other categories and may further provide for a
compensating allocation to the other categories of future fee receipts from the
category in which a benefit is provided. (§ 1, Ord. 1119, eff. May 30, 1991, as
amended by §§ 2-5, Ord. 1150, eff. December 26,1992, §§ 2, 4-6, Ord. 1179, eff.
June 17, 1995; and § 4, Ord. 1301, eff. June 19, 2003)
   (f)   Information required. Where the County is to issue an authorization,
the person liable for the fee shall submit to the County Department of
Community Services such information as the Department may require to calculate
the amount due, or, where a city certifies square footage and use, or number of
dwelling units, pursuant to Section
3-14.05(b), the city's certification and any further information necessary to
calculate the fee.
   (g)   Change of use fee. The fee where a change of use of an existing
structure has occurred shall be determined by subtracting the fee that would be
charged for the previous use under subsection (b), above from the fee that
would be charged for the new use under that subsection. If the result is zero
or a negative number, no fee shall be charged. No change of use shall be
considered to have occurred for a structure to which a Business Park fee was
previously applied if the new and old uses are both uses described in Section
3-14.02, "Business park," of this chapter.
   (h)   Affordable housing fee waiver. Notwithstanding the remaining
provisions of this chapter, no County Facilities Fee shall be charged for those
residential dwelling units within a residential project which satisfy the
following criteria:
   (1)   The units are affordable to lower income households defined as
follows: In the case of rental units the rent shall not exceed thirty (30%)
percent of eighty (80%) percent. of area median income. In the case of for sale
units, the units will be sold at an affordable price to persons whose total
household income does not exceed eighty (80%) percent of area median income;
   (2)   The continued affordability of the rental units for the longest
feasible time, but in no event less than thirty (30) years, shall be assured by
some means that is satisfactory to the Director of Community Development. for
sale units without resale controls ensuring long term affordability, recapture
of the waived fee upon sale of the unit shall be assured by some means
satisfactory to the Director; and
   (3)   Where the units are located in an incorporated area, the City has
provided an incentive for the construction of the affordable units by a waiver
of City capital facilities fees.
   (i)   The waiver of County facilities fees provided in subsection (h) above,
shall be considered as a concession or incentive described in Section 65915(h)
of the Government Code.
   (j)   Exemption for certain agricultural structures. Agricultural structures
as defined by the Uniform Building Code shall be exempt from the fees provided
in this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1119, eff. May 30, 199 1, as amended by §§ 1 and 2 of Ord. 1132,
eff. December 26, 1991, §§ 7-9, Ord. 1150, eff. December 26, 1992, § 5, Ord.
1164, eff. November 4, 1993,§§ 7-9, 11, Ord. 1179, eff. June 17, 1995, and § 2,
Ord. 1533, eff. February 11, 2021)
Sec. 3-14.05.   City election to administer.
   (a)   City may condition approval. Any incorporated city within the County
may elect to condition any approval of an impacting development, including
without limitation issuance of a building permit, on obtaining a County
facilities and services authorization.
   (b)   City may certify. Irrespective of whether it conditions approval
pursuant to subsection (a)of this section, a city may determine the use
category and the number of gross square feet of a commercial improvement, or
number of dwelling units in a residential project, and provide certification of
its determination to the County, or to the applicant for transmission to the
County, for the purpose of calculating the County facilities and services fee.
   (c)   City may collect. Any city which conditions approval pursuant to
subsection (a)of this section may collect and pay over to the County the county
facilities and services fee, in the amount specified in Section
3-14.04, for an impacting development within that city. No impacting
development which pays in full to such a city, for the account of the County,
the county facilities and services fee, shall be liable for payment of the fee
to the County.
   (d)   City may issue authorization. Any city which collects the county
facilities and services fee pursuant to subsection (c)of this section and pays
said fee to the County Tax Collector shall issue the corresponding county
facilities and services authorization.
   (e)   Administrative fee to City. Any city which collects the county
facilities and services fee pursuant to subsection (c)of this section shall be
entitled to retain the administration fee specified pursuant to Section
3-14.07. Any city which provides to applicants, or to the County, certification
of the city’s calculation of the use category and number of gross square feet
of a commercial improvement, or number of dwelling units, pursuant to
subsection (b)of this section, shall be entitled to receive a portion of the
administration fee specified pursuant to Section
3-14.07(a).
   (f)   County to defend. Upon reasonable notice by a city after notice of any
claim or challenge, the County will defend, at its expense and with counsel of
its choice, indemnify and hold harmless any city acting pursuant to this
section with respect to any claim or challenge concerning the city’s actions
hereunder, except to the extent of the city’s own willful misconduct or gross
negligence.
   (g)   Liability for deficiency. No city which collects the County facilities
and services fee pursuant to subsection (c)of this section, or provides
certification pursuant to subsection (b)of this section, shall be liable to the
County for any deficiency in the amount of the fee collected, so long as the
city determines the square footage of commercial improvements and the number of
dwelling units in residential projects consistently with its determination of
other fees payable by the applicant to the city.
(§ 1, Ord. 1119, eff. May 30, 1991, and § 2, Ord. 1533, eff. February 11, 2021)
Sec. 3-14.06.   Use of fees.
   (a)   Fee allocation. The County Auditor/Controller shall allocate all fees
received into accounts corresponding to the categories. The amount so allocated
shall be the fee amount attributable to the respective category established by
Board resolution. The County Auditor/Controller shall maintain such accounts
from year to year.
   (b)   Use limitation. Amounts in each of the accounts shall be expended
exclusively to determine the necessity of, plan, design, carry to completion,
acquire or lease expanded or additional facilities of the type corresponding to
that fund, except as provided in subsections (1) and (2) below. In no event
shall any fee collected pursuant to this chapter (other than an administration
or processing fee) be expended for any purpose other than expanded or
additional facilities for one or more categories.
   (1)   Funds may be advanced from one account to another where the evidence
is for facilities which are proceeding sooner than those facilities to be
funded by the account from which the advance is furnished, and where the
advance will be repaid from future fee revenue allocated to the account
receiving the advance.
   (2)   Funds may be transferred between accounts where the transferred amount
is used for a facility for which the actual cost attributable to new
development as shown by subsequent evidence exceeds the corresponding amount
estimated by the Report, provided that this sub-section provides no authority
to increase in any respect the aggregate fee amount payable by any impacting
development.
   (c)   Government Code requirements. The County Auditor/Controller shall
deposit, invest and account for all fees received under this ordinance pursuant
to California Government Code Section 66006 (and any successor provision). All
fees received under this chapter and not expended or committed within five (5)
years after receipt shall be refunded pursuant to California Government Code
Section 66001 (and any successor provision), unless the County otherwise
complies with the requirements of that section (or a successor provision).
   (d)   Reference to report. A determination as to whether a facility falls
within any category shall be made with reference to the most current
development impact fee study and if necessary, its Background Technical
Information.
(§ 1, Ord. 1119, eff. May 30, 1991 and as amended by § 5, Ord. 1301, eff. June
19, 2003, and § 2, Ord. 1533, eff. February 11, 2021)
Sec. 3-14.07.   Administration.
   (a)   Fees.  The County Auditor/Controller shall determine the estimated
costs of administration of this chapter and may recommend to the Board of
Supervisors fees to recover those costs. Initially, costs shall be estimated
and the Board may establish fees separately, by resolution, for at least the
following two (2) types of administration:
   (1)   Administration through a city which collects and pays over the county
services and facilities fees pursuant to Section
3-14.05(c), or certifies use and square footage, or number of units, pursuant
to Section
3-14.05(b). In the case of a city which certifies use and square footage or
number of units, the component of the administration fee attributable to such
certification shall be identified.
   (2)   Administration by the County, including any additional costs resulting
from implementing a county review process to identify impacting developments
and carry out this chapter, or from analysis by the County, not otherwise
required, of the number of dwelling units, use or square footage of a
development, in order to determine the fee payable.
   The Board of Supervisors may, by resolution, modify or terminate any fee set
under this section and may establish additional fees or charges related to
administration of this chapter.
   (b)   Additional rules and regulations. The Board of Supervisors may adopt
by resolution rules, regulations, guidelines and procedures for administration
of this chapter. The County Community Development Agency shall provide for
availability of preliminary estimates of fees payable by impacting
developments. The County Community Development Agency, County Assessor and
County Auditor/Controller may each adopt such further rules or regulations not
in conflict with any action of the Board of Supervisors, as may be appropriate
to carry out this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1119, eff. May 30, 1991, and § 2, Ord. 1533, eff. February 11, 2021)
Sec. 3-14.08.   Enforcement.
   (a)   Misdemeanor. Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. The
District Attorney may institute criminal proceedings hereunder. Any violator,
upon conviction, shall be fined not more than One Thousand and no/100ths
($1,000.00) Dollars, imprisoned for a period not exceeding six (6) months or
both fined and imprisoned.
   (b)   Civil proceedings. The County Counsel may institute civil proceedings
to enforce this chapter, including without limitation actions for injunction
and civil penalties. Construction without the authorization required by this
chapter may be suspended by a court of competent jurisdiction. Violation of
this chapter interferes with provision of public services, and shall be a
public nuisance.
   (c)   Civil penalties. Any violator of this chapter shall be liable, in
addition to payment of the amount of any fees due, for civil penalties not to
exceed: (1) Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars for each day during
which construction proceeds in violation of this chapter, plus (2) fifteen
(15%) percent of the amount of any fees not paid when due.
   (d)   Lien. In the event of failure of an impacting development to pay in
full a fee payable pursuant to this chapter, the County may place and record a
lien upon the property at which the impacting development is constructed in the
amount of the unpaid fee. The Board of Supervisors shall adopt, pursuant to
Section
3-14.07(b) rules concerning imposition of such liens, which shall provide for a
timely public hearing concerning imposition of the lien.
   (e)   Costs of securing compliance. Any person or entity not in compliance
with this chapter shall be liable, in addition to other amounts provided for in
this section, for attorney’s fees, or the reasonable costs of staff legal
services incurred by the County, and all other reasonable costs of securing
compliance, including collection of fees.
   (f)   Interest. Interest shall accrue on all fees not paid when due pursuant
to this chapter at the rate prescribed by law for interest on judgments, from
the date when payment was due until the date payment is received in full.
(§ 1, Ord. 1119, eff. May 30, 1991, and § 2, Ord. 1533, eff. February 11, 2021)
Chapter 15
EXTENDED SERVICE CHARGES: DUNNIGAN COUNTY SERVICE AREA*
*   Chapter 12, added by Ordinance No. 1121, was renumbered to Chapter 15 by
codifier as Chapter 12 is already in use. Chapter 15 repealed in its entirety
by Ord. 1209, eff. October 16, 1997.
Chapter 16
FIRE DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT IMPACT MITIGATION FEES
Sections:
   
3-16.01   Purpose and Findings.
   
3-16.02   Prior Agreements and Dedication.
   
3-16.03   Definitions.
   
3-16.04   Exemptions; Replacement of Demolished or Destroyed Structures.
   
3-16.05   Required Actions of Affected Fire Service Providers.
   
3-16.06   Fee Payment.
   
3-16.07   Fee Funds and Report.
   
3-16.08   Administrative Charge.
   
3-16.09   Use of Fees.
   
3-16.10   Termination of Fee Collection.
   
3-16.11   Appeals.
Sec. 3-16.01.   Purpose and Findings.
   (a)   The purpose of this Chapter is to implement the Yolo County General
Plan policy providing for the adoption of development impact mitigation fees
and for the collection of said fees at the time of the issuance of building
permits. Subject to the requirements of this Chapter, said fees are to be
collected by or allocated to a fire district within the County of Yolo for the
acquisition of capital facilities in order to ensure the provision of the
capital facilities necessary to maintain current levels of fire protection
services necessitated by new Development (as hereinafter defined).
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors of the County of Yolo finds and declares as
follows:
   (1)   Adequate fire protection facilities must be available to serve new
Development.
   (2)   New Development requires the construction or expansion of fire
protection facilities and the acquisition of equipment.
   (3)   In many areas of the County, property taxes and fire suppression
assessments currently collected by the agencies providing fire protection
services are insufficient to provide funds for expansion or construction of
fire facilities and purchase of equipment necessitated by new Development,
resulting in the potential for inadequate fire protection coverage for the new
Development and the growing population.
   (4)   The above conditions, if not addressed, could place Yolo County 's
growing population in a condition that is potentially perilous to its health
and safety.
   (5)   The impacts of Development on the existing fire protection facilities
and equipment cannot be alleviated without County involvement.
   (6)   For the above reasons, new methods for financing fire protection
facilities and equipment necessitated by Development are needed in Yolo County.
   (7)   The provisions of this Chapter provide one such method, by permitting
the imposition of fire district development impact mitigation fees when the
conditions justifying the imposition of such fees exist as specified
hereinafter and when the procedures for such imposition have been followed as
specified hereinafter. (§ 1, Ord. 1313, eff. February 5, 2004)
Sec. 3-16.02.   Prior Agreements and Dedication.
   (a)   Any agreement existing prior to the operative date of this Chapter
between an applicant for Development and a Fire District pertaining to the
dedication of land or payment of fees for fire facilities and equipment to
serve the property that is the subject of the application, or any portion
thereof, shall satisfy the requirements of this Chapter.
   (b)   If land, facilities or equipment has been dedicated or donated to, and
accepted by, the Fire District as a condition of approval of a discretionary
permit, such dedication or donation may be considered by the Board of
Supervisors as satisfying the requirements of this Chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1313,
eff. February 5, 2004)
Sec. 3-16.03.   Definitions.
   Whenever the following words are used in this Chapter, they shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section.
   (a)   “Development” means all construction for which a County building
permit or other permit is required.
   (b)   “Board” means the Board of Supervisors of the County of Yolo .
   (c)   “Other permits” means County major and minor use permits.
   (d)   “Clerk” means the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of the County of
Yolo .
   (e)   “Fire District” and “District” means any special district providing
fire protection services within the unincorporated area of the County.
   (f)   “Facilities and Equipment” means any long-term capital facilities and
equipment used by a Fire District for fire suppression or emergency medical
services including station construction, station expansion and fire or
emergency medical apparatus. (§ 1, Ord. 1313, eff. February 5, 2004)
Sec. 3-16.04.   Exemptions; Replacement of Demolished or Destroyed Structures.
   (a)   There shall be exempt from the requirements of this Chapter, building
permits for the following types of development:
   (1)   Piers, ramps, boat lifts, docks, suspended platforms and pilings.
   (2)   Certain agricultural structures as defined by the Uniform Building
Code shall be exempt from the fees provided in this chapter.
   (b)   The requirements of this Chapter shall not apply to buildings
constructed for governmental uses.
   (c)   Where a permit to construct any Development is issued within two (2)
years after demolition on the same lot, or where new construction replaces a
structure on the same lot which was damaged or destroyed by fire, earthquake or
other causes similarly beyond the owner’s control, the amount of new
construction taken into account under this chapter shall be reduced by the
number of square feet which were demolished or destroyed. (§ 1, Ord. 1313, eff.
February 5, 2004)
Sec. 3-16.05.   Required Actions of Affected Fire Service Providers.
   (a)   This Chapter shall become applicable to Development within the
boundaries of a Fire District when the following events set forth in
subsections (b) through (e) occur.
   (b)   The governing body of a Fire District adopts a resolution making the
following findings:
   (1)   The District does not have existing fire protection facilities and
equipment that could be used to provide an adequate level of services to new
Development within the District’s boundaries.
   (2)   The District does not have sufficient funds available to construct
additional facilities from fund balances, capital facility funds, property tax
sources, fire suppression assessments, or any other appropriate sources.
   (3)   The lack of fire protection facilities and equipment to serve new
Development would create a situation perilous to the public health and safety
if fire mitigation fees are not levied within the district.
   (c)   The Fire District resolves as follows:
   (1)   The District requests that the County impose a specified percentage of
the fire mitigation fee ceiling on the District's behalf upon applicants for
building permits or other permits for Development.
   (2)   Mitigation fees paid under this Chapter shall only be used to expand
the availability of capital facilities and equipment to serve new Development.
   (3)   The District shall deposit all funds collected under this Chapter with
the County Treasurer , and all interest subsequently accrued by the District on
these funds, in a separate budget accounting category to be known as the “Yolo
County Fire Mitigation Fee.”
   (4)   The District shall expend funds from said “Yolo County Fire Mitigation
Fee” budget accounting category only for those purposes of providing capital
facilities and equipment to serve new Development.
   (5)   The District shall submit a Fire Mitigation Fee Annual Report no later
than October 31 of each year to the Clerk. Said report shall include, but not
be limited to, the balance in the account at the end of the previous fiscal
year, the fee revenue received, the amount and type of expenditures made, and
the ending balance in the fund. In addition, the report shall specify the
actions the District plans to take to alleviate the facility and equipment
needs caused by new Development in a capital fire facilities and equipment plan
adopted at a noticed public hearing. The District shall make available, upon
request by the Clerk, a copy of its annual audit report.
   (6)   The District shall make available to the public on request its records
that justify the basis for the fee amount.
   (7)   The District shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the County, its
officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers, from and against any and
all demands, claims, actions, litigation or other proceedings, liability,
damages and costs (including but not limited to attorney fees) that are based
in whole or in part upon the levy, imposition, collection or payment of the
fees, or the denial of a permit until the fee is paid, excepting only matters
that are based upon the County's gross negligence or willful misconduct.
   (8)   The District shall make findings, with respect to any portion of the
fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted in its account five or more years after
deposit of the fee, to identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put and
to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for
which it was charged. The District shall refund to the then current record
owner or owners of the Development project or projects on a prorated basis, the
unexpended or uncommitted portion of the fee and any interest accrued thereon,
for which need cannot be demonstrated.
   (d)   The governing body of the Fire District adopts a capital fire facility
and equipment plan in accordance with Government Code Section 66002 at a
noticed public hearing.
   (e)   The governing body of the Fire District sends a certified copy of the
resolution and the capital fire facility and equipment plan to the Clerk, and
the resolution and plan are approved by the Board of Supervisors as set forth
in this subsection. The Clerk shall agendize said resolution and capital fire
facilities and equipment plan for the Board's approval at a public hearing
noticed in the manner required by Government Code Section 66002(b). At the
close of the public hearing thereon, the Board may approve said resolution and
capital fire facilities and equipment plan if it finds that said documents meet
the requirements of this ordinance, the Yolo County General Plan and Government
Code Section 66000 et seq. The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable
to all building permits and other permits issued for new construction within
the boundaries of the Fire District thirty (30) days after the Board's
approval. Each District shall notify the County Building Official of the
effective date of its mitigation fee.
   (f)   By March 31 of each year following the year of the original adoption
of a resolution and approval by the Board pursuant to this Section, the
District may submit a copy of a new resolution and a new capital facility and
equipment plan adopted and approved, respectively, by the District's governing
body as set forth hereinabove and setting the amount of the fire mitigation fee
requested by the District. If, the resolution proposes to increase the fire
mitigation fee from that previously approved by the Board, said resolution
shall only become effective if approved by the Board in the manner set forth in
subsection (e)above. This revision shall be effective the following July 1. (§
1, Ord. 1313, eff. February 5, 2004)
Sec. 3-16.06.   Fee Payment.
   (a)   Prior to the issuance of any building permit or other permit for
Development, the applicant shall pay to the District the fees prescribed by the
Fire District resolution as approved by the Board, and shall present written
evidence to the County that the provisions of this Chapter have otherwise been
satisfied with respect to the Development for which permits are sought.
   (b)   The amount of such fees shall be determined by the Fire Mitigation Fee
in effect on the date of the payment of fees for an un-expired plan check.
   (c)   When application is made for a new building permit following the
expiration of a previously issued building permit for which fees were paid, the
fee payment shall not be required.
   (d)   In the event that subsequent Development occurs with respect to
property for which fees have been paid, additional fees shall be required only
for additional square footage of Development that was not included in computing
the prior fee. (§ 1, Ord. 1313, eff. February 5, 2004)
Sec. 3-16.07.   Fee Funds and Report.
   Any Fire District receiving funds pursuant to this Chapter shall deposit all
such funds, and all interest subsequently accrued by the District on these
funds, with the County Treasurer in a separate budget accounting category to be
known as the “Yolo County Fire Mitigation Fee.” By October 31 of each year,
each District receiving funds pursuant to this Chapter shall file a report with
the Clerk on the balance in the account at the end of the previous fiscal year,
the fee revenue received, the amount and type of expenditures made, and the
ending balance in the fund. In addition, the report shall specify the actions
the District plans to take to alleviate the facility and equipment needs caused
by new Development. (§ 1, Ord. 1313, eff. February 5, 2004)
Sec. 3-16.08.   Administrative Charge.
   The County may charge, for its services in administering this Chapter, an
administrative charge of up to two (2) percent of the fees collected and
deposited pursuant to this Chapter, and may cause the County Treasurer to
deduct such amount from the fees and accrued interest on deposit with the
Treasurer. (§ 1, Ord. 1313, eff. February 5, 2004)
Sec. 3-16.09.   Use of Fees.
   With the exception of the administrative charge provided for herein, all
fees collected pursuant to this Chapter, including any interest accrued
thereon, shall be expended by the District exclusively to plan, design, acquire
or lease used by the District for the purpose of providing for capital
facilities and equipment. (§ 1, Ord. 1313, eff. February 5, 2004)
Sec. 3-16.10.   Termination of Fee Collection.
   Fee collection as to any Fire District shall terminate as follows:
   (a)   If, by March 31 of any year following the year of the original
adoption of a resolution and capital fire facility and equipment plan pursuant
to Section
3-16.05 which were approved by the Board, the Fire District has not submitted a
copy of a new resolution and capital fire facility and equipment plan pursuant
to Section
3-16.05, fee collection shall terminate July 1 of said year.
   (b)   If, at any time, the governing body of a Fire District submits a copy
of a resolution to the Clerk requesting termination of fee collection, fee
collection shall terminate thirty (30) days from the date of receipt by the
Clerk.
   (c)   Each District shall notify the County Building Official of the
effective date of its termination of fee collection. (§ 1, Ord. 1313, eff.
February 5, 2004)
Sec. 3-16.11.   Appeals.
   (a)   A person or entity who proposes to construct a Development and has
received a preliminary estimate of the fee due under this Chapter may file a
written appeal requesting a fee reduction. The appeal shall be filed with the
County Administrative Officer within thirty (30) days after filing the building
permit application. The fee reduction may be requested on the grounds that: (A)
the Development has been inappropriately classified in determining the fee
amount; or (B) the Development’s impact on population, employment or use of
facilities will, as a result of exceptional circumstances not taken into
account in adopting the fee, be less than the impact projected for the use
category in which the impacting development falls. The burden of proof in
establishing these grounds shall be on the person filing the request.
   (b)   The appeal shall contain such information as the County and affected
fire district may reasonably require.
   (c)   The appeal shall be presented to and considered by a subcommittee
consisting of the fire chief or designee, the Chief Building Official or
designee, and the County Administrative Officer or designee. Oral and written
evidence may be presented by any party at such hearing. The hearing may be
continued from time to time as is deemed necessary. The Subcommittee shall
issue a written decision on the appeal no later than fifteen (15) days after
the hearing is closed. The Subcommittee decision shall be a final
administrative decision, unless appealed to the fire district board within the
time and in the manner set forth hereinafter.
   (d)   The Subcommittee’s decision may be appealed to the fire district board
by filing, not later than fifteen (15) days after the Subcommittee issues its
written decision, a written appeal with the clerk of the fire district board.
The fire district board may decide such appeal based on the material which
formed the record before the Subcommittee, or may determine the appeal de novo
based on the record before the Subcommittee and evidence presented at a hearing
before the board. The fire district board shall issue a written decision on the
appeal no later than sixty (60) days after it is filed, or not less than sixty
(60) days after completion of a de novo hearing, whichever is later. The fire
district board’s written decision shall be a final administrative decision.
   (e)   Any appeal to the fire district board shall be accompanied by a fee in
the amount which is necessary to recover the costs of processing the appeal.
Such fee shall be established by resolution of the fire district board. (§ 1,
Ord. 1313, eff. February 5, 2004)
Chapter 17
CLERK/RECORDER FEES
Sections:
   
3-17.01.   Fees Ratified and Imposed.
   
3-17.02.   Modifications.
Sec. 3-17.01.   Fees Ratified and Imposed.
   This ordinance affirms and ratifies that the fees listed below which had
previously been adopted by Resolution No. 01-229 are reasonably necessary to
recover the cost of providing the above listed products and services by the
Clerk/Recorder based upon appropriately conducted fee studies. This ordinance
ratifies the fees as adopted by Resolution No. 01-229. Pursuant to Government
Code section 54985, in addition to the fees prescribed by statute, the Office
of the Clerk/Recorder may charge:
   (a)   Thirty-six dollars ($36) for the issuance of a regular marriage
license and the filing of a certificate of registry of marriage.
   (b)   Thirty-four dollars ($34) for the filing of a confidential marriage
certificate.
   (c)   Twenty dollars ($20) for the issuance of either a regular or
confidential duplicate marriage certificate.
   (d)   Thirty-five dollars ($35) for the performance of a civil marriage
ceremony.
   (e)   Twenty-one dollars ($21) for the filing of a fictitious business name
statement for the first fictitious business name, and five dollars ($5) for
each additional name.
   (f)   Twenty-four dollars ($24) for the filing of a statement of withdrawal
from a partnership operating under a fictitious business name.
   (g)   Twenty-two dollars ($22) for the filing of the bond of a notary
public.
   (h)   Four dollars and twenty-five cents ($4.25) for the issuance of a
certificate stating whether the certificate of authority of an admitted surety
insurer issued by the Insurance Commissioner authorizing the insurer to
transact surety insurance, has been surrendered, revoked, canceled, annulled,
or suspended, and whether renewed authority has been granted, and for the
issuance of a certificate stating whether a copy of the transcript or record of
the unrevoked appointment, power of attorney, bylaws, or other instrument, duly
certified by the proper authority and attested by the seal of an admitted
surety insurer entitling or authorizing the person who executed a bond to do so
for and on behalf of the insurer, is filed in the office of the clerk, and for
each certificate to the official capacity of any public official.
   (i)   Six dollars and twenty-five cents ($6.25) for the filing of a power of
attorney for an admitted surety insurer.
   (j)   Two dollars and twenty-five cents ($2.25) for the filing of a power of
attorney for an admitted surety insurer for two or more names. (§ 2, Ord. 1346,
eff. April 20, 2006)
Sec. 3-17.02.   Modifications.
   Any fees ratified and imposed herein may be modified by resolution of this
Board. (§ 2, Ord. 1346, eff. April 20, 2006)
Chapter 18
CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
Sections:
   
3-18.01   Title.
   
3-18.02   General tax.
   
3-18.03   Purpose of the ordinance.
   
3-18.04   Definitions.
   
3-18.05   Tax imposed.
   
3-18.06   Reporting and remittance of tax.
   
3-18.07   Payments and communications – timely remittance.
   
3-18.08   Payment – when taxes deemed delinquent.
   
3-18.09   Notice not required by County.
   
3-18.10   Penalties and interest
   
3-18.11   Refunds and credits.
   
3-18.12   Refunds and procedures.
   
3-18.13   Exemptions from the tax.
   
3-18.14   Administration of tax.
   
3-18.15   Appeal procedure.
   
3-18.16   Enforcement – action to collect.
   
3-18.17   Apportionment.
   
3-18.18   Constitutionality and legality.
   
3-18.19   Audit and examination of records and equipment.
   
3-18.20   Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees or charges.
   
3-18.21   Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business.
   
3-18.22   Deficiency determinations.
   
3-18.23   Failure to report – nonpayment, fraud.
   
3-18.24   Tax assessment – notice requirements.
   
3-18.25   Tax assessment – hearing, application, and determination.
   
3-18.26   Conviction for chapter violation – taxes not waived.
   
3-18.27   Violation deemed misdemeanor.
   
3-18.28   Oversight committee.
   
3-18.29   Severability.
   
3-18.30   Remedies cumulative.
   
3-18.31   Amendment or repeal.
Sec. 3-18.01.   Title.
   This ordinance shall be known as the Cannabis Business Tax Ordinance. This
ordinance shall be applicable in the unincorporated territory of the County of
Yolo, which shall be referred to in this Chapter as “County.”
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.02.   General tax.
   The Cannabis Business Tax is enacted solely for general governmental
purposes for the County and not for specific purposes. The tax revenue raised
by this Chapter shall be placed in the County's general fund and can be spent
for unrestricted general revenue purposes.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.03.   Purpose of the ordinance.
   This Chapter is adopted to achieve the following purposes, among others, and
directs that the provisions of this Chapter be interpreted in order to
accomplish those purposes:
   a)   To impose a tax on the privilege of cultivating, dispensing, producing,
processing, preparing, storing, providing, donating, selling, or distributing
medical and nonmedical cannabis or cannabis products by cannabis businesses, in
the unincorporated area of the County, pursuant to the Medicinal and Adult-Use
Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (MAUCRSA), specifically California Revenue
and Taxation Code section 34021.5 or other enabling legislation;
   b)   To specify the type of tax and rate of tax to be levied and the method
of collection; and
   c)   To comply with all requirements for imposition of a general tax, such
tax to become operative only if submitted to the electorate and approved by the
number of voters required by law voting in an election on the issue.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.04.   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below when
used in this Chapter:
   a)   “Business” shall include all activities engaged in or caused to be
engaged in within the unincorporated area of the County, including any
commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, vocation,
calling, or livelihood, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, but shall
not include the services rendered by an employee to his or her employer.
   b)   "Cannabis", or “marijuana”, shall have the same definition as
“cannabis” as set forth in California Business and Professions Code section
26001 as it now reads or as amended.
   c)   “Commercial cannabis business” or “cannabis business” means any
commercial business activity relating to cannabis, including but not limited to
cultivating, transporting, distributing, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, processing, preparing, storing, packaging, delivering, and selling
(wholesale and/or retail sales) of cannabis and any ancillary products and
accessories in the unincorporated area of the County, whether or not carried on
for gain or profit.
   d)   “Commercial cannabis business tax,” “cannabis business tax”, “business
tax,” or “commercial cannabis tax” means the tax due pursuant to this Chapter
for engaging in cannabis business in the unincorporated area of the County.
   e)   “Commercial cannabis cultivation” means cultivation conducted by, for,
as part of a cannabis business.
   f)   "Cultivate" or "cultivation" means any activity involving the planting,
growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.
   g)   “Delivery” shall have the same definition as “delivery” as set forth in
California Business and Professions Code section 26001 as it now reads or as
amended.
   h)   “Dispensary” means a facility where cannabis, cannabis products, or
devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either
individually or in any combination, for retail sale, including a person that
delivers cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale. Where a
dispensary performs its functions through a technology platform of any type or
character, the technology platform shall also be deemed a dispensary for
purposes of this Chapter, and shall have the same duties and liabilities as the
principal. Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter by either the
principal or the technology platform shall, however, be considered compliance
by both.
   i)   “Distributor” or “distribution” or “distribution facility” shall have
the same definition as “distribution” as set forth in California Business and
Professions Code section 26001 as it now reads or as amended.
   j)   “Employee” means each and every person engaged in the operation or
conduct of any business, whether as owner, member of the owner's family,
partner, associate, agent, manager or solicitor, and each and every other
person employed or working in such business for a wage, salary, commission,
barter or any other form of compensation.
   k)   “Engaged in business” means the commencing, conducting, operating,
managing or carrying on of a cannabis business and the exercise of corporate or
franchise powers, whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent,
manager, employee, or otherwise, whether operating from a fixed location in the
unincorporated area of the County or coming into the unincorporated area of the
County from an outside location to engage in such activities. A person shall be
deemed engaged in business within the County if:
      1)   Such person or person’s employee maintains a fixed place of business
within unincorporated area of the County for the benefit or partial benefit of
such person;
      2)   Such person or person’s employee owns or leases real property within
the unincorporated area of County for business purposes;
      3)   Such person or person’s employee regularly maintains a stock of
tangible personal property in the unincorporated area of County for sale in the
ordinary course of business;
      4)   Such person or person’s employee regularly conducts solicitation of
business within the unincorporated area of County;
      5)   Such person or person’s employee performs work or renders services
in the unincorporated area of County; and
      6)   Such person or person’s employee utilizes the streets within the
unincorporated area of County in connection with the operation of motor
vehicles for business purposes.
   The foregoing specified activities shall not be a limitation on the meaning
of “engaged in business.”
   l)   “Evidence of doing business” means evidence such as, without
limitation, use of signs, circulars, cards or any other advertising media,
including the use of internet or telephone solicitation, or representation to a
government agency or to the public that such person is engaged in a cannabis
business in the unincorporated area of County.
   m)   “Fiscal year” means July 1 through June 30 of the following calendar
year.
   n)   “Gross receipts,” except as otherwise specifically provided, means the
total amount actually received or receivable from all sales, transactions or
transfers, or the cash value thereof; the total amount or compensation
actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of
whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed,
whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with
the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise; discounts, rents,
royalties, fees, commissions, dividends, and gains realized from trading in
stocks or bonds, however designated. Included in "gross receipts" shall be all
receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, whether or not
evidenced by sales registers or any transaction recording devices, without any
deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of
materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or
other expenses whatsoever, except that the following shall be excluded
therefrom:
      1)   Cash discounts where allowed and taken on sales;
      2)   Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price
and which property may later be sold, at which time the sales price shall be
included as gross receipts;
      3)   Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase
price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;
      4)   Such part of the sale price of any property returned by purchasers
to the seller as refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances or
return of refundable deposits previously included in gross receipts;
      5)   Receipts from investments where the holder of the investment
receives only interest and/or dividends, royalties, annuities and gains from
the sale or exchange of stock or securities solely for a person's own account,
not derived in the ordinary course of a business;
      6)   Receipts derived from the occasional sale of used, obsolete or
surplus trade fixtures, machinery or other equipment used by the taxpayer in
the regular course of the taxpayer's business;
      7)   Cash value of sales, trades or transactions that occur entirely
within the County of Yolo between departments or units of the same business;
      8)   Whenever there are included within the gross receipts amounts which
reflect sales for which credit is extended and such amount proved uncollectible
in a subsequent year, those amounts may be excluded from the gross receipts in
the year they prove to be uncollectible; provided, however, if the whole or
portion of such amounts excluded as uncollectible are subsequently collected
they shall be included in the amount of gross receipts for the period when they
are recovered;
      9)   Transactions between a partnership and its partners that occur
entirely within the County of Yolo;
      10)   Receipts from services or sales in transactions that occur entirely
within the County of Yolo between affiliated corporations. An affiliated
corporation is a corporation:
         a.   The voting and non-voting stock of which is owned at least eighty
percent by such other corporation with which such transaction is had; or
         b.   Which owns at least eighty percent of the voting and non- voting
stock of such other corporation; or
         c.   At least eighty percent of the voting and non-voting stock of
which is owned by a common parent corporation which also has such ownership of
the corporation with which such transaction is had.
      11)   Transactions between a limited liability company and its member(s)
that occur entirely within the County of Yolo, provided the limited liability
company has elected to file as a Subchapter K entity under the Internal Revenue
Code and that such transaction(s) shall be treated the same as between a
partnership and its partner(s) as specified in Subsection (9) above;
      12)   Receipts of refundable deposits, except that such deposits when
forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded when in
excess of one dollar;
      13)   Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an
agent or trustee and to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom
collected. These agents or trustees must provide the Treasurer-Tax Collector
with the names and the addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them.
This exclusion shall not apply to any fees, percentages, or other payments
retained by the agent or trustees.
   o)   "County License" means a license issued by the County of Yolo to a
person to authorize that person to operate or engage in a cannabis business.
   p)   “Manufacturer” shall have the same definition as “manufacturer” as set
forth in California Business and Professions Code section 26001 as it now reads
or as amended.
   q)   “Cannabis product” means raw cannabis that has undergone a process
whereby the raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate,
an edible product, or a topical product. “Cannabis product” also means cannabis
products as defined by Section 11018.1 of the California Health and Safety Code
and is not limited to medical cannabis products.
   r)   “Nursery” means a facility that produces only clones, immature plants,
seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the propagation
and cultivation of cannabis.
   s)   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business
trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit,
whether organized as a nonprofit or for-profit entity, and includes the plural
as well as the singular number.
   t)   “Personal cannabis cultivation” means cultivation pursuant to Section
5-20.04(A)(1) of the Yolo County Code.
   u)   “Processing” means to harvest, dry, cure, grade, trim, or package for
transport cannabis.
   v)   “Sale” means and includes any sale, exchange, or barter.
   w)   “State” means the State of California.
   x)   “State license,” “license,” or “registration” means a state license
issued pursuant to California Business & Professions Code Sections 19300, et
seq. or other applicable state law.
   y)   “Testing laboratory” means a facility, entity, or site in the state
that offers or performs testing of cannabis or cannabis products and that is
both of the following:
      1)   Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other
persons involved in the cannabis industry in the state; and
      2)   Registered with the California State Department of Public Health.
   z)   “Treasurer-Tax Collector” means the Treasurer-Tax Collector of the
County of Yolo, his or her deputies or any other County officer charged with
the administration of the provisions of this Chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.05.   Tax imposed.
   a)   There is established and imposed a cannabis business tax at the rates
set forth in this Chapter.
   b)   Tax on commercial cannabis cultivation.
      1)   Every person who is engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation in
the unincorporated area of the County shall pay an annual cannabis business
tax. The minimum tax rate for commercial cannabis cultivation shall be one
percent of gross receipts per fiscal year and the maximum rate shall be 15
percent of gross receipts per fiscal year.
      2)   Effective July 1, 2018 through June 30, 2020, the initial tax rate
on commercial cannabis cultivation shall be set at 4 percent of gross receipts
per fiscal year. Unless the Board of Supervisors takes action otherwise,
beginning on July 1, 2020, such tax rate shall automatically increase to five
percent of gross receipts per fiscal year and shall continue at that rate until
and unless the Board of Supervisors, in its discretion and subject to
Subsection (E) below, implements a higher or lower tax rate.
   c)   Tax on all other cannabis businesses.
      1)   Every person who is engaged in a cannabis business other than
cultivation, including but not limited to nurseries, processing, transporting,
distributing, distribution facility, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
preparing, storing, packaging, delivering, selling or a testing laboratory in
the unincorporated area of the County shall pay an annual cannabis business
tax. The minimum tax rate shall be one percent of gross receipts per fiscal
year and the maximum rate shall be 15 percent of gross receipts per fiscal
year. The initial tax rate shall be set at five percent of gross receipts per
fiscal year.
   d)   Notwithstanding the initial tax rates established in Subsection (B) and
Subsection (C) above and subject to Subsection (E) below, the Board of
Supervisors may, in its discretion, at any time by ordinance, implement a lower
or higher tax rate for all persons engaged in a cannabis business in the
unincorporated area of the County or establish differing tax rates for
different categories of cannabis businesses, including for medical or adult
use, subject to the minimum and maximum rates established in Subsection (B) and
Subsection (C) above.
   e)   Notwithstanding Subsection (B), Subsection (C) and Subsection (D)
above, the Board of Supervisors shall not increase or decrease the effective
tax rate for any category of cannabis business more frequently than once in a
12 month period and not by more than two percentage points, either up or down.
   f)   The Board of Supervisors may, in its discretion, at any time by
ordinance, establish exemptions, incentives, or other reductions, and penalties
or interest charges or assessments for failure to pay the tax in a timely
manner, as otherwise allowed by California law.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.06.   Reporting and remittance of tax.
   The cannabis business tax imposed by this Chapter shall be imposed on a
fiscal year basis and shall be due and payable in quarterly installments as
follows:
   a)   Each person owing a cannabis business tax shall, on or before the last
day of the month following the close of each quarter, prepare and submit a tax
return on the form prescribed by the Treasurer-Tax Collector and remit to the
Treasurer-Tax Collector the tax due. The tax due shall be no less than the
quarterly installment due, but the Treasurer-Tax Collector may permit the
taxpayer to pay the tax due for the entire fiscal year. Each business shall pay
on or before the last day of the month following the close of each quarter.
   b)   Tax statements and payments for all outstanding taxes owed the County
are immediately due to the Treasurer-Tax Collector upon cessation of business
for any reason.
   c)   The Treasurer-Tax Collector may, at his or her discretion, establish
shorter report and payment periods for any taxpayer as the Treasurer-Tax
Collector deems necessary to ensure collection of the tax.
   d)   The Treasurer-Tax Collector may, as part of administering the tax and
in his or her discretion, modify the form of payment and take such other
administrative actions as needed to facilitate collection of the tax.
   e)   The correctness of any tax return filed pursuant to this Chapter shall
be subject to audit and verification by the Treasurer-Tax Collector, or
designee, who is authorized and empowered to inspect and audit the books and
records of any commercial cannabis business. No cannabis business shall refuse
or fail to allow the Treasurer-Tax Collector, or designee, to inspect and audit
such books and records, or shall refuse or fail to provide such additional
information as requested by the Treasurer-Tax Collector, or designee.
   f)   For the purposes of this section, “on or before” shall be interpreted
as: (1) hand delivery; or (2) postal delivery of a properly stamped and
addressed envelope containing the return and full amount of the tax to the
United States Postal Service. Delivery to the Postal Service must be verified
by cancellation by the Postal Service showing a postmark date no later than
midnight on the date the tax is due. If the due date of the tax falls on a
United States Post Office closure date, the tax due date shall be the next
business day (excluding federal holidays). Private postal meter strips and
dates shall not be considered evidence of delivery to the United States Postal
Service.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.07.   Payments and communications – timely remittance.
   Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication is
due, it must be received by the Treasurer-Tax Collector on or before the final
due date. If the due date falls on Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, the due date
shall be the next regular business day on which the County is open to the
public.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.08.   Payment - when taxes deemed delinquent.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided under other provisions of this
Chapter, the taxes required to be paid pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed
delinquent if not received by the Treasurer-Tax Collector on or before the due
date as specified in Sections
3-18.06 and
3-18.07.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.09.   Notice not required by the County.
   The Treasurer-Tax Collector is not required to send a delinquency or other
notice or bill to any person subject to the provisions of this Chapter. Failure
to send such notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty
due under the provisions of this Chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.10.   Penalties and interest.
   a)   Any person who fails or refuses to pay any cannabis business tax
required to be paid pursuant to this Chapter on or before the due date shall
pay penalties and interest as follows:
      1)   A penalty equal to 10% of the amount of the tax, in addition to the
amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax calculated from the due date
of the tax at the rate of 1.5% per month; and
      2)   If the tax remains unpaid for a period exceeding one calendar month
beyond the due date, an additional penalty equal to 10% of the amount of the
tax, plus interest at the rate of 1.5% per month on the unpaid tax and on the
unpaid penalties.
      3)   Interest shall be applied at the rate of 1.5% per month on the first
day of the month for the full month, and will continue to accrue monthly on the
tax and penalty until the balance is paid in full.
   b)   Whenever a check or electronic payment is submitted in payment of a
cannabis business tax and the payment is subsequently returned unpaid by the
bank for any reason, the taxpayer will be liable for the tax amount due plus
any fees, penalties and interest as provided for in this Section, and any other
amount allowed under state law.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.11.   Refunds and credits.
   a)   No refund shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this Chapter,
except as provided in Section
3-18.12.
   b)   No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be made
because of the discontinuation, dissolution, or other termination of a
business.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.12.   Refunds and procedures.
   a)   Whenever the amount of any tax or penalty has been overpaid under this
Chapter, it may be refunded as provided in Subsection (B) of this section;
provided a written claim, stating under penalty of perjury under the laws of
the State of California the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded,
is filed with the Treasurer-Tax Collector within three years of the date of
payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Treasurer-Tax Collector.
   b)   A person licensed to engage in commercial cannabis activity may claim a
refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted any amount
overpaid when it is established, in a manner prescribed by the Tax Collector,
that a refund is due.
   c)   The Treasurer-Tax Collector, his or her deputies or any other County
officer charged with the administration of this Chapter, shall have the right
to examine and audit all the books and business records of the claimant in
order to determine the eligibility of the claimant to the claimed refund. No
claim for refund shall be allowed if the claimant refuses to allow such
examination of claimant's books and business records after request by the
Treasurer-Tax Collector to do so.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.13.   Exemptions from the tax.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to personal cannabis
cultivation as set forth in Section
5-20.04(A)(1) of the Yolo County Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.14.   Administration of the tax.
   a)   It shall be the duty of the Treasurer-Tax Collector to collect the
taxes, penalties, fees, and perform the duties required by this Chapter.
   b)   For purposes of administration and enforcement of this Chapter
generally, the Treasurer-Tax Collector may from time to time promulgate such
administrative rules and procedures consistent with the purpose, intent, and
express terms of this Chapter as he or she deems necessary to implement or
clarify such provisions or aid in enforcement.
   c)   The Treasurer-Tax Collector may take such administrative actions as
needed to administer the tax, including but not limited to:
      1)   Provide to all cannabis business taxpayers forms for the reporting
of the tax;
      2)   Provide information to any taxpayer concerning the provisions of
this Chapter;
      3)   Receive and record all taxes remitted to the County as provided in
this Chapter;
      4)   Maintain records of taxpayer reports and taxes collected pursuant to
this Chapter;
      5)   Assess penalties and interest to taxpayers pursuant to this Chapter;
or waive such penalties and interest when there is demonstrated evidence of
extenuating circumstances that were clearly beyond the control of the taxpayer;
and
      6)   Determine amounts owed and enforce collection pursuant to this
Chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.15.   Appeal procedure.
   Any taxpayer aggrieved by any decision of the Treasurer-Tax Collector with
respect to the amount of tax, interest, penalties and fees, if any, due under
this Chapter may appeal to the Board of Supervisors by filing a notice of
appeal with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors within 15 days of the serving
or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Clerk shall fix a time and
place for hearing such appeal, and the Clerk shall give notice in writing to
such operator at the last known place of address. The finding of the Board of
Supervisors shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the
appellant in the manner prescribed by this Chapter for service of notice of
hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon
the service of the notice.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.16.   Enforcement - action to collect.
   a)   Any taxes, penalties, interest and/or fees required to be paid under
the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the County. Any
person owing money to the County under the provisions of this Chapter shall be
liable in an action brought in the name of the County for the recovery of such
debt. The provisions of this Section shall not be deemed a limitation upon the
right of the County to bring any other action including criminal, civil and
equitable actions, based upon the failure to pay the tax, penalties and/or fees
imposed by this Chapter or the failure to comply with any of the provisions of
this Chapter.
   b)   In addition to any other remedies available under federal, state, or
local law, if any amount required to be paid to the County under this Chapter
is not paid when due, the Treasurer-Tax Collector may, within three years after
the amount is due, record a certificate of lien specifying the amount of taxes,
fees, interest and penalties due, and the name and address of the individual or
business as it appears on the records of Treasurer-Tax Collector. The lien
shall also specify that the Treasurer-Tax Collector has complied with all
provisions of this Chapter in the determination of the amount required to be
paid. From the time of the filing for record, the amount required to be paid,
together with penalties, fees and interest thereon, constitutes a lien upon all
real property in the County owned by the individual or business, or
subsequently acquired by the individual or business before the lien expires.
The lien has the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien and shall
continue for ten years from filing of the certificate unless sooner released or
otherwise discharged.
   c)   At any time within three years after any individual or business is
delinquent in the payment of any amount required to be paid under this Chapter
or within three years after the last recording of a certificate of lien under
Subsection B of this Section, the Treasurer-Tax Collector may issue a warrant
for the enforcement of any liens and for the collection of any amount required
to be paid to the County under this Chapter. The warrant shall be directed to
the Sheriff and shall have the same effect as a writ of execution. The warrant
shall be levied and sale made pursuant to it in the same manner and with the
same effect as a levy of and a sale pursuant to a writ of execution. The
Treasurer-Tax Collector may pay or advance to the Sheriff, the same fees,
commissions and expenses for service provided by law for similar services
pursuant to a writ of execution.
   d)   At any time within three years after recording a lien against any
individual or business, if the lien is not discharged and released in full, the
Treasurer-Tax Collector may forthwith seize any asset or property, real or
personal (including bank account), of the operator and sell at public auction
the asset or property, or a sufficient part of it to pay the amount due
together with any penalties and interest imposed for the delinquency and any
cost incurred on account of the seizure and sale. Assets or property of the
business subject to seizure and sale subject to this Chapter shall not include
any assets or property which is exempt from execution under the provisions of
Code of Civil Procedure.
   e)   The following shall constitute grounds for terminating a County
License:
      1)   Failure to pay any cannabis business tax due under this Chapter
within 30 days of the due date.
      2)   Failure to cooperate with the Treasurer-Tax Collector, or designee,
as determined by Treasurer-Tax Collector, or designee, during an audit pursuant
to this Chapter.
      3)   Underpaying any business tax due under this Chapter in any period by
50 percent or more.
      4)   If the County determines that the nonpayment of any business tax due
under this Chapter is due to fraud.
      5)   A County License revocation shall be subject to the appeal process
set forth in Yolo County Code section
5-20.04(A)(2)(c)(6).
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.17.   Apportionment.
   If a business subject to the business tax is operating both within and
outside the unincorporated County, it is the intent of the County to apply the
commercial cannabis business tax so that the measure of the tax fairly reflects
the proportion of the taxed activity actually carried on in the County. For
purposes of apportionment as may be required by law, the Treasurer-Tax
Collector may promulgate administrative procedures for apportionment in
accordance with state law and is authorized to obtain any necessary information
from the taxpayer for this purpose, including financial records pertaining to
activity occurring outside of the unincorporated County area.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.18.   Constitutionality and legality.
   This tax is intended to be applied in a manner consistent with the United
States and California Constitutions and state law. None of the tax provided for
by this Chapter shall be applied in a manner that causes an undue burden upon
interstate commerce, a violation of the equal protection and due process
clauses of the Constitutions of the United States or the State of California or
a violation of any other provision of the California Constitution or state law.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.19.   Audit and examination of records and equipment.
   a)   The Treasurer-Tax Collector shall have the power to audit and examine
all books and records of persons engaged in cannabis businesses, including both
state and federal income tax returns, California sales tax returns, or other
evidence documenting the gross receipts of persons engaged in cannabis
business, and, where necessary, all equipment, of any person engaged in
cannabis businesses in the County, for the purpose of ascertaining the amount
of commercial cannabis tax, if any, required to be paid by the provisions of
this Chapter, and for the purpose of verifying any statements or any item
thereof when filed by any person pursuant to this Chapter.
   b)   It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and
payment to the County of any tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve,
for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to
determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the
collection of and payment to the County, which records the Treasurer-Tax
Collector or his/her designee shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable
times.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.20.   Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees or charges.
   Nothing contained in this Chapter 18 shall be deemed to repeal, amend, be in
lieu of, replace or in any way affect any requirements for any permit or
license required by, under or by virtue of any provision of any other title or
chapter of this Code or any other ordinance or resolution of the County, nor be
deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any tax,
fee or other charge imposed, assessed or required by, under or by virtue of any
other title or chapter of this Code or any other ordinance or resolution of the
County. Any references made or contained in any other title or chapter of this
code to any licenses, license taxes, fees, or charges, or to any schedule of
license fees, shall be deemed to refer to the licenses, license taxes, fees or
charges, or schedule of license fees, provided for in other titles or chapters
of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.21.   Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business.
   a)   The payment of a cannabis business tax required by this Chapter, and
its acceptance by the County, shall not entitle any person to carry on any
cannabis business unless the person has complied with all of the requirements
of this Code and all other applicable state laws.
   b)   No tax paid under the provisions of this Chapter shall be construed as
authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business, or
any business in violation of any local or state law.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.22.   Deficiency determinations.
   If the Treasurer-Tax Collector is not satisfied that any return filed as
required under the provisions of this Chapter is correct, or that the amount of
tax is correctly computed, he or she may compute and determine the amount to be
paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained
in the statement or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession
or that may come into his or her possession within three years of the date the
tax was originally due and payable. One or more deficiency determinations of
the amount of tax due for a period or periods may be made. When a person
discontinues engaging in a business, a deficiency determination may be made at
any time within three years thereafter as to any liability arising from
engaging in such business whether or not a deficiency determination is issued
prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due. Whenever a deficiency
determination is made, a notice shall be given to the person concerned in the
same manner as notices of assessment are given under Section
3-18.24.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.23.   Failure to report - nonpayment, fraud.
   a)   Under any of the following circumstances, the Treasurer-Tax Collector
may make and give notice of an assessment of the amount of tax owed by a person
under this Chapter at any time:
      1)   If the person has not filed a complete statement required under the
provisions of this Chapter;
      2)   If the person has not paid the tax due under the provisions of this
Chapter;
      3)   If the person has not, after demand by the Treasurer-Tax Collector,
filed a corrected statement, or furnished to the Treasurer-Tax Collector
adequate substantiation of the information contained in a statement already
filed, or paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this
Chapter; or
      4)   If the County determines that the nonpayment of any business tax due
under this Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 30% of the amount of the tax
shall be added thereto in addition to penalties and interest otherwise stated
in this Chapter and any other penalties allowed by law.
   b)   The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any
tax known by the Treasurer-Tax Collector to be due or estimated by the
Treasurer-Tax Collector, after consideration of all information within the
Treasurer-Tax Collector's knowledge concerning the business and activities of
the person assessed, to be due under each applicable section of this Chapter,
and shall include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each
amount to the date of the notice of assessment.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.24.   Tax assessment - notice requirements.
   The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by personal
delivery, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage
prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the
business or to such other address as he or she shall register with the
Treasurer-Tax Collector for the purpose of receiving notices provided under
this Chapter; or, should the person have no address registered with the
Treasurer-Tax Collector for such purpose, then to such person's last known
address. For the purposes of this Section, a service by mail is complete at the
time of deposit in the United States mail.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.25.   Tax assessment - hearing, application and determination.
   Within ten days after the date of service the person may apply in writing to
the Treasurer-Tax Collector for a hearing on the assessment. If application for
a hearing before the County is not made within the time herein prescribed, the
tax assessed by the Treasurer-Tax Collector shall become final and conclusive.
Upon receipt of any such application for hearing, the Treasurer-Tax Collector
shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before him or her not later than
35 days after the receipt of the application, unless a later date is agreed to
by the Treasurer-Tax Collector and the person requesting the hearing. Notice of
such hearing shall be given by the Treasurer-Tax Collector to the person
requesting such hearing not later than five days prior to such hearing. At such
hearing the applicant may appear and offer evidence why the assessment as made
by the Treasurer-Tax Collector should not be confirmed and fixed as the tax
due. After such hearing the Treasurer-Tax Collector shall determine and
reassess the proper tax to be charged and shall give written notice to the
person in the manner prescribed in Section
3-18.24 for giving notice of assessment.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.26.   Conviction for chapter violation - taxes not waived.
   The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required
tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax
debt unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil action shall prevent a
criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter or of
any state law requiring the payment of all taxes.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.27.   Violation deemed misdemeanor.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor as provided in
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.28.   Oversight committee.
   The Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, establish a citizen’s
oversight committee to act in an advisory role to the Board of Supervisors in
reviewing the annual revenue and expenditure of funds from the tax authorized
by this Chapter, including the annual expenditure plan, and reviewing an annual
accounting of the previous year’s expenditures. The resolution shall establish
the committee members’ terms, qualifications and duties, and the committee’s
scope of authority.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.29.   Severability.
   If any provision of this Chapter, or its application to any person or
circumstance, is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unlawful, unenforceable or otherwise void, that determination shall have no
effect on any other provision of this Chapter or the application of this
Chapter to any other person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions
hereof are severable.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.30.   Remedies cumulative.
   All remedies and penalties prescribed by this Chapter or which are available
under Title 1 of the County Code and any other provision of law or equity are
cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the County shall not bar the use
of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
Chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Sec. 3-18.31.   Amendment or repeal.
   
Chapter 18 to Title 3 of the Yolo County Code may be repealed or amended by the
Board of Supervisors without a vote of the people to the extent allowed by law.
However, as required by Article XIII C of the California Constitution, voter
approval is required for any amendment that would increase the maximum rate of
any tax levied pursuant to this Chapter. The people of the County of Yolo
affirm that the following actions shall not constitute an increase of the rate
of a tax:
   a)   The setting of the rate of any tax allowed under this Chapter to a rate
that is no higher than the maximum rate set by this Chapter, or the restoration
of the rate of the tax to a rate that is no higher than the maximum rate set by
this Chapter, if the Board of Supervisors has acted to reduce the rate of the
tax;
   b)   An action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax, or
any definition applicable to the tax, so long as interpretation or
clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification)
is not inconsistent with the language of this Chapter; or
   c)   The collection of the tax imposed by this Chapter, even if the County
had, for some period of time, failed to collect the tax.
(§ 1, Ord. 1496, operative July 1, 2018, if approved by voters)
Title 4
PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapters:
1.   Emergency Services
2.   Fireworks
3.   Traffic
4.   County Parking Facilities
5.   County Airports
6.   Ambulances
7.   Port of Sacramento
Chapter 1
EMERGENCY SERVICES
Sections:
   
4-1.01   Purposes.
   
4-1.02   Definitions.
   
4-1.03   Disaster Services Council.
   
4-1.04   Director of Emergency Services.
   
4-1.05   Deputy Director of Emergency Services.
   
4-1.06   Emergency Management Organization.
   
4-1.07   Emergency Operations Plan.
   
4-1.08   Office of Emergency Services.
   
4-1.09   Yolo Operational Area
   
4-1.10   Expenditures
   
4-1.11   Punishment of Violations
Sec. 4-1.01.   Purposes.
   The declared purposes of this Chapter are to provide for the preparation,
unification and implementation of plans for the protection of persons and
property within this County in the event of an emergency, and to provide for
the direction of the emergency management organization and the coordination of
County emergency functions with all political subdivisions, emergency services
agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons.
   This Chapter shall be interpreted in a manner that provides the maximum
authority allowed under state and federal law to the County and other agencies
and their officers, employees, and disaster service workers during an emergency
within the operational area.
(§ 1, Ord. 226, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1359, eff. May 31, 2007, as amended by
§ 2, Ord. 1561, eff. April 6, 2023, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1568, eff. July 25,
2024)
Sec. 4-1.02.   Definitions.
   “Director”. During a declared Emergency, as defined below, shall mean the
Director of Emergency Services, as described further in Section
4-1.04, below.
   “Disaster Council”. The Yolo County Disaster Council, established and
described further in Section
4-1.03, below.
   “Disaster Service Worker”. Shall refer to individuals covered by California
Labor Code section 3211.92, as may be amended from time to time.
   “Emergency”. Includes a state of war emergency, state of emergency, or a
local emergency, all as defined in Government Code section 8558 as may be
amended from time to time. It shall also include a local health emergency, as
defined herein, but nothing in this Chapter shall conflict with or reduce the
roles or responsibilities of the County Public Health Officer as set forth in
California law.
   “Emergency Management Organization”. Refers to the Yolo County Emergency
Management Organization, established and described further in Section
4-1.06, below.
   “Emergency Operation Center (EOC)”. A location from which centralized
emergency management can be performed.
   “Local Emergency”. Shall have the meaning set forth in Government Code
section 8558(c)(1), as may be amended from time to time.
   “Local Government”. Shall have the meaning set forth in Government Code
section 8680.2, as may be amended from time to time.
   “Local Health Emergency”. Shall have the meaning set forth in California
Health & Safety Code section 101080, as may be amended from time to time.
   “Operational Area”. Shall have the meaning set forth in Government Code
section 8559(b), and for purposes of this Chapter shall consist of the County
of Yolo and all local government entities within its geographical limits.
   “Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS)”. A standardized response
to emergencies involving multiple jurisdictions or multiple agencies. It is
based upon and uses the principles and components of emergency management
including ICS, multi-agency coordination, operational area concept, and
established mutual aid systems.
   Other terms used herein shall have meanings as used in the California
Emergency Services Act and the County's Emergency Operations Plan, hereinafter
referred to as the County's Emergency Plan.
(§ 2, Ord. 226, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1359, eff. May 31, 2007, as amended by
§ 2, Ord. 1561, eff. April 6, 2023, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1568, eff. July 25,
2024)
Sec. 4-1.03.   Disaster Services Council.
   (a)   Disaster Council powers and duties. It shall be the duty of the Yolo
County Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to advise the Office of
Emergency Services on disaster preparedness activities and emergency and
disaster plans, policies, and procedures. The Disaster Council will also review
and recommend ordinances, resolutions, plans and policies for adoption by the
Board of Supervisors, emergency and mutual aid agreements, and rules and
regulations necessary or helpful to implementing any of the foregoing.
   Additional duties of the Disaster Council include:
      (1)   Assess and coordinate disaster related training relating
specifically to the unincorporated areas of the County of Yolo.
      (2)   Develop plans for meeting any condition constituting an Emergency.
      (3)   Evaluate potential hazards within the County and assist in
developing response plans relating to those hazards.
      (4)   Review and approve the County Emergency Operations Plan.
      (5)   Develop and approve plans to effectively mobilize resources within
the operational area, including private resources.
      (6)   By ordinance or other appropriate means, ensure the organization,
powers and duties, divisions, services, and staff of the County’s emergency
services office.
      (7)   Act as an advisory board to the Office of Emergency Services.
      (8)   Certify Disaster Service Workers through the Office of Emergency
Services under authority of Section 3211.9 of the California Labor Code.
   (b)   Membership. The Yolo County Disaster Council consists of the following
persons or their designees. The County Administrator shall appoint all County
representatives listed below, and other non-County representatives shall be
appointed as indicated. All representatives shall serve in an advisory capacity
(except as otherwise expressly set forth in this Chapter) and without any term
limits.
   (1)   Director of Emergency Services, who shall serve as the Chair.
   (2)   Assistant or Deputy County Administrator or other designee of the
County Administrator, who shall serve as Vice-Chair.
   (3)   County Counsel.
   (4)   County Health Officer.
   (5)   County Behavioral Health Director or designee.
   (6)   County Director of Community Services or designee.
   (7)   County Sheriff or designee.
   (8)   A representative from each city (at city discretion to appoint, and
participation by each city is optional).
   (9)   Yolo County Fire Chiefs Association (one appointee).
   (10)   Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation (one appointee) (The Yocha Dehe Wintun
Nation’s participation on the Yolo County Disaster Council shall in no way
effectuate, or be interpreted to effectuate, a waiver of the Tribe’s sovereign
immunity.).
   (11)   American Red Cross (one appointee).
   (12)   Two Access and Functional Needs representatives (appointed by the
County Administrator).
   (13)   Special District Representative (appointed by the County
administrator).
   (14)   Aging Commission (one appointee).
   (15)   Up to two additional at-large representatives, appointed by the Board
of Supervisors.
   The Chief of the Office of Emergency Services (also referred to as the
Deputy Director) or designee shall be the Secretary and provide technical
guidance.
   A majority of Council members shall constitute a quorum of the Council for
purposes of the Brown Act, excluding seats held by city representatives and any
vacant seats. Members that are unable to be physically present may participate
remotely in accordance with the Brown Act.
   (c)   Meetings. The Disaster Council shall meet bi-annually or upon the call
of the Chair, or in their absence or inability to call such a meeting, upon the
call of the Vice-Chair. (§ 3, Ord. 226, as amended by § 1, Ord. 306, §§ 1 and
2, Ord. 636, eff. August 24, 1970, § 2, Ord. 671, eff. August 16, 1972, § 2,
Ord. 673, eff. September 20, 1972, and § 3, Ord. 894, eff. November 6, 1980, as
amended by § 1, Ord. 1359, eff. May 31, 2007, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1561,
eff. April 6, 2023, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1568, eff. July 25, 2024, as
amended by § 4, Ord. 1573, eff. May 8, 2025)
Sec. 4-1.04.   Director of Emergency Services.
   (a)   Director of Emergency Services. There is hereby created the office of
Director of Emergency Services. The County Administrator shall be the Director
of Emergency Services. In the event the CAO is unavailable to serve as
Director, the person(s) designated as the CAO's successor as Director of
Emergency Services are, in order of succession, the Assistant County
Administrative Officer, the Deputy County Administrative Officer, and the Chief
of the Office of Emergency Services.
   (b)   Powers and Duties of the Director of Emergency Services. The Director
is hereby empowered to direct the operational response to an Emergency, and is
specifically empowered and authorized to:
      (1)   Request the Board of Supervisors to proclaim the existence or
threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the Board of Supervisors is in
session, or to issue such proclamation if the Board of Supervisors is not in
session. Whenever the Director proclaims a local emergency, the Board of
Supervisors shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days
thereafter (or within any other timeframe provided by state law or executive
order) or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;
      (2)   Request the Governor or recommend that the Chair of the Board of
Supervisors request the Governor to proclaim a "State of Emergency" when, in
the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to
cope with the emergency. Whenever the Director makes such a request directly,
it shall be confirmed by the Board of Supervisors at the earliest practicable
time;
      (3)   Control and direct the effort of the Emergency Management
Organization of this County for the accomplishment of the purposes of this
Chapter;
      (4)   Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff
of the Emergency Management Organization of this County and resolve questions
of authority; and responsibility that may arise between them;
      (5)   Represent this County in all dealings with public or private
entities on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein. Such day to
day dealings may be delegated as appropriate;
      (6)   In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein
provided, the proclamation of a "State of Emergency" by the Governor or the
Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a
"State of War Emergency," the Director is hereby empowered:
         (i)   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency;
provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest
possible practicable time by the Board of Supervisors;
         (ii)   To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and other properties found
lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the
County for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer
the same for public use;
         (iii)   To require emergency services of any County officer or
employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "Local Emergency" or "State
of Emergency" in the County or the existence of a "State of War Emergency," to
command the aid of as many citizens of this County as deemed necessary in the
execution of emergency duties; such persons shall be entitled to all
privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by State law for
registered Disaster Service Workers;
         (iv)   To appoint additional emergency management staff as needed, in
addition to those established by the County Emergency Operations Plan, and to
delegate to those members of the emergency management organization such duties
and responsibilities as the Director may deem necessary;
         (v)   To requisition necessary personnel, facilities, or assets of any
County department or agency; and
         (vi)   To execute all ordinary powers as Administrative Officer; all
the special powers conferred upon that position by this Chapter or by
resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the Board of
Supervisors; all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute; by any
agreement approved by the Board of Supervisors; and by any other lawful
authority.
   The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession
to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to
attend meetings or otherwise perform the duties of that office during an
emergency.
(§ 4, Ord. 226, as amended by § 3, Ord. 671, eff. August 16, 1972, § 3, Ord.
673, eff. September 20, 1972, and § 4, Ord. 894, eff. November 6, 1980, as
amended by § 1, Ord. 1359, eff. May 31, 2007, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1561,
eff. April 6, 2023, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1568, eff. July 25, 2024)
Sec. 4-1.05.   Deputy Director of Emergency Services.
   There is hereby created the position of Deputy Director of Emergency
Services, who shall serve as (and at times is referred to herein as) the Chief
of the Office of Emergency Services. The Director shall appoint a Deputy
Director/Chief of Emergency Services within the County Administration Office to
manage the day-to-day administration and operations of emergency services for
the accomplishment of the purposes of this Chapter. This position shall report
to the County Administrator or designee.
(§ 5, Ord. 226, as amend-ed by § I, Ord. 326, § 4, Ord. 671, eff. August 16,
1972, and § 4, Ord. 673, eff. September 20, 1972 as amended by § 1, Ord. 1359,
eff. May 31, 2007, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1561, eff. April 6, 2023, as amended
by § 2, Ord. 1568, eff. July 25, 2024)
Sec. 4-1.06.   Emergency Management Organization.
   The Emergency Management Organization shall consist of all officers and
employees of this County, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid
them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons
commandeered under the provisions of the California Emergency Services Act and
this Chapter, with all equipment and material publicly owned, volunteered,
commandeered or in any way under the control of the aforementioned personnel,
for the support of the aforementioned personnel in the conduct of emergency
operations. The Emergency Operations Plan may further define the organization
and functions of the Emergency Management Organization.
   The Emergency Management Organization shall be activated and function only
during a declared Emergency, including an Emergency declared or proclaimed by
two or more cities within the Operational Area, or in the following
circumstances:
   (a)   The Operational Area is requesting resources from outside its
boundaries, except those resources used in normal day-to-day operations which
are obtained through existing agreements providing for the exchange or
furnishing of certain types of facilities and services on a reimbursable,
exchange, or other basis as provided for under the Master Mutual Aid Agreement.
   (b)   The Operational Area has received resource requests from outside its
boundaries, except those resources used in normal day-to-day operations which
are obtained through existing agreements for the exchange or furnishing of
certain types of facilities and services on a reimbursable, exchange, or other
basis as provided for under the Master Mutual Aid Agreement.
(§ 6, Ord. 226, as amended by § 5, Ord. 671, eff. August 16, 1972, and § 5,
Ord. 673, eff. September 20, 1972, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1359, eff. May 31,
2007, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1561, eff. April 6, 2023, as amended by § 2, Ord.
1568, eff. July 25, 2024)
Sec. 4-1.07.   Emergency Operations Plan.
   The emergency plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all
County resources, both public and private, as necessary to carry out the
purposes of this chapter. It shall comply with the State of California and
national emergency planning guidance. Assignment of emergency duties and
functions shall be outlined in the plan for all County agencies. Major
revisions to the emergency plan shall be presented to the Board of Supervisors
and shall become effective upon Board approval. In assigning emergency duties
and functions to County agencies and personnel, the Director shall strive to
take advantage of inherent competencies already existing among County
personnel. All County departments, employees, and disaster service worker shall
adhere to the requirements of the plan, and shall diligently work to develop
and support the most effective emergency program within their means.
(§ 8, Ord. 226, as amended by § 1, Ord. 306, § 6, Ord. 671, eff. August 16,
1972, and § 6, Ord. 673, eff. September 20, 1972; as amended by § 1, Ord. 1359,
eff. May 31, 2007, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1561, eff. April 6, 2023, as amended
by § 2, Ord. 1568, eff. July 25, 2024)
Sec. 4-1.08.   Office of Emergency Services.
   An Office of Emergency Services is hereby established to coordinate all
emergency preparedness, response and recovery functions and responsibilities to
carry out the intent of this Chapter. The Office of Emergency Services shall be
headed by the Chief of Emergency Services, which position is designated as the
Deputy Director of Emergency Services. The Deputy Director shall develop
emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the County and shall have
such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director of Emergency
Services. In the absence of the Director, the Deputy Director shall act as the
Director.
   Responsibilities and duties of the Deputy Director shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
   (a)   Coordinate the activities of all emergency services both in pre-
emergency planning, during an emergency, and in post emergency recovery
activities;
   (b)   Represent the County in all dealings with public or private agencies
pertaining to emergency planning;
   (c)   Organize and develop the County emergency program and operational area
emergency programs, working with County departments, other political
subdivisions, supporting agencies, volunteer groups and individuals;
   (d)   Administer the Office of Emergency Services;
   (e)   Develop and maintain the emergency operations plan for the County and
supporting emergency plans;
   (f)   Assist County departments and other political subdivisions in the
preparation of emergency plans and operating procedures, reviews, modifications
as necessary, and approve agency/department emergency plans and operating
procedures;
   (g)   Develop and coordinate such training programs and exercises as may be
necessary to ensure readiness of the emergency organization;
   (h)   Develop and coordinate programs designed to inform the public of
measures for self-protection and emergency services activities;
   (i)   Submit the County emergency operations reports as necessary to the
Board of Supervisors and the Disaster Council;
   (j)   Provide an annual report to the Board of Supervisors either verbally
or in writing;
   (k)   Prepare and submit all reports required of the Office of Emergency
Services by the emergency agencies of the Federal government and the State of
California;
   (l)   Serve as Secretary to the Disaster Council;
   (m)   Administer the loyalty oath to disaster service workers or delegate
the authority to administer the loyalty oath to such service chiefs as deemed
necessary to meet the purposes of this chapter and maintain a disaster service
worker registration program in the County;
   (n)   Maintain twenty-four (24) hour-a-day availability of on-call emergency
management personnel for immediate response if called upon by the County;
   (o)   Designate and maintain an Emergency Operations Center in an acceptable
state of readiness;
   (p)   Develop and maintain such programs as may be necessary to ensure
adequate staffing for the emergency operations center and other emergency
response or recovery activities;
   (q)   Serve as the Emergency Operations Center Coordinator when the
emergency operations center is activated;
   (r)   Provide advice and support to the Director of Emergency Services
during an emergency.
(§ 9, Ord. 226, as amended by § 7, Ord. 671, eff. August 16, 1972, and § 7,
Ord. 673, eff. September 20, 1972; as amended by § 1, Ord. 1359, eff. May 31,
2007, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1561, eff. April 6, 2023, as amended by § 2, Ord.
1568, eff. July 25, 2024)
Section 4-1.09.   Yolo Operational Area.
   Consistent with Government Code section 8605 and the definitions set forth
above, the Yolo County Operational Area is an intermediate level of the state
emergency services organization consisting of the County of Yolo, all political
subdivisions, and those special districts that have signed an agreement and
become part of the Operational Area within the geographic boundaries of Yolo
County. The Yolo County Operational Area is used for the coordination of
emergency activities and to serve as the link in the system of communications
and coordination between the state's emergency operation centers and the
emergency operation centers of the County and the other entities comprising the
Yolo County Operational Area.
   The County government shall serve as the lead agency of the "Yolo County
Operational Area" unless another member agency of the Operational Area assumes
that responsibility by written agreement approved by the Board of Supervisors
or its delegee.
   The operational area authority and responsibility under the Standardized
Emergency Management System shall not be affected by the non-participation of
any local government(s) within the area.
   As the lead agency, the County shall:
   (a)   Coordinate information, resources, and priorities among local
governments within the operational area.
   (b)   Coordinate information, resources and priorities between the regional
and local government levels. Coordination of fire and law enforcement resources
shall be accomplished through their respective mutual aid systems.
   (c)   Use multi-agency coordination to facilitate decisions for overall
operational-level emergency response activities.
   (d)   Provide for an Operational Area EOC, which may be co-located within
the County EOC.
   (e)   Coordinate resources within the County not covered by normal law
enforcement or fire mutual aid.
(§ 1, Ord. 1359, eff. May 31, 2007, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1561, eff. April 6,
2023, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1568, eff. July 25, 2024)
Sec. 4-1.10.   Expenditures.
   Any expenditure of County funds made in connection with emergency
activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be
for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants, property, and/or
environment of or within the County of Yolo.
(§ 1, Ord. 1359, eff. May 31, 2007, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1561, eff. April 6,
2023, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1568, eff. July 25, 2024)
Sec. 4-1.11.   Punishment of Violations.
   Consistent with Government Code section 8665, it shall be a misdemeanor and
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for
not more than 6 months, or both, for any person during an emergency:
   (a)   Willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the Yolo County
Emergency Management Organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule,
regulation or order issued pursuant to this ordinance, or in the performance of
any duty imposed upon by virtue of this ordinance;
   (b)   To do any act forbidden by any lawful rule, regulation or order issued
pursuant to this Chapter;
   (c)   To wear, carry or display, without authority and for the purpose of
obstructing, hindering, or delaying emergency response efforts or for other
improper or illegal purposes, any means of identification used by the County of
Yolo and/or disaster agencies of the Federal or State Governments.
(§ 1, Ord. 1359, eff. May 31, 2007, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1561, eff. April 6,
2023, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1568, eff. July 25, 2024)
Chapter 2
FIREWORKS
(Section 4-2.01 was repealed by § 2, Ord. 1261, effective May 17, 2001;
Sections
4-2.101 through
4-2.605 added by § 3, Ord. 1261, effective May 17, 2001)
Article 1.   Definitions
Article 2.   General Prohibition
Article 3.   Exception for Public Displays
Article 4.   Permits Required for the Sale of Safe and Sane Fireworks
Article 5.   Enforcement
Article 6.   Operative Provisions
Article 1.
Definitions
Sec. 4-2.101.
   The terms used in this Chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this
Article unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in this
Chapter in the present tense include the future as well as the present. The
singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. (§ 1,
Ord. 250, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1574, eff. July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.102.
   "Dangerous fireworks" shall have the same meaning as set forth in California
Health and Safety Code section 12505, as that section may be amended from time
to time, and shall not include “safe and sane fireworks.” (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff.
May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1574, eff. July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.103.
   "Fireworks" shall have the same meaning as set forth in California Health
and Safety Code section 12511, as that section may be amended from time to
time. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001)
Sec. 4-2.104.
   “Host” shall mean an owner of any private residential or nonresidential real
property in the unincorporated area of the County; or any person who has the
right to use, possess, or occupy public or private property under a lease,
permit, license, rental agreement, or contract; or any person who hosts,
organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts, or accepts responsibility for a
gathering on public or private property. (§ 2, Ord. 1574, eff. July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.105.
   “Liable” in this section shall mean liability for a wrongful act regardless
of a person’s intent, knowledge, negligence, or lack thereof in committing the
wrongful act. (§ 2, Ord. 1574, eff. July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.106.
   "Permit" means any nontransferable authorization granted by the local fire
protection district pursuant to this Chapter to allow the holder of the Permit
to sell safe and sane fireworks subject to the provisions of this Chapter. (§
3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001)
Sec. 4-2.107.
   "Permittee" means an organization who is issued a permit pursuant to Article
4 of this Chapter. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001)
Sec. 4-2.108.
   "Person" means any person, copartnership, organization, firm, corporation,
association, or any combination thereof, or any special district with
boundaries within Yolo County , and shall include any of their employees and
authorized representatives. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001)
Sec. 4-2.109.
   "Public display of fireworks" means an entertainment feature where the
public or a private group is admitted or permitted to view the display or
discharge of dangerous fireworks. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001)
Sec. 4-2.110.
   "Safe and sane fireworks" shall have the same meaning as set forth in
California Health and Safety Code section 12529, as that section may be amended
from time to time. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001)
Article 2.
Prohibitions
Sec. 4-2.201.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, possess, sell,
use, or discharge any dangerous fireworks within the unincorporated area of the
County.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to use or discharge any firework, including safe
and sane fireworks, in High or Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones designated
by the State Fire Marshall.
   (c)   Except as permitted by this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person to sell any safe and sane fireworks within the unincorporated area of
the County.
   (d)   Any host shall be liable for any unlawful possession, ignition,
explosion, discharge, use, or display of any fireworks in violation of this
chapter on their property or at their gathering. No person who has the right to
use, possess, or occupy a unit in a multifamily residential property under a
lease, rental agreement, or contract shall be liable for a violation of this
Chapter occurring in the common area of the property unless the person
personally commits the violation or hosts, organizes, supervises, officiates,
conducts, or accepts responsibility for a gathering at which the violation
occurs. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1574, eff.
July 3, 2025)
Article 3.
Exception for Public Displays
Sec. 4-2.301.
   Public displays of fireworks may be given with the written permission of the
fire chief of the fire protection district in which the public display is to
occur. It shall be unlawful for any public display to be given unless given
under the supervision and direction of a State of California licensed
pyrotechnic operator. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001)
Article 4.
Permits Required for the Sale of Safe and Sane Fireworks
Sec. 4-2.401.
   Any person desiring to sell safe and sane fireworks within the
unincorporated area of Yolo County must first have applied for and received a
permit from the fire chief of the fire protection district in which the sale is
to occur. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1574,
eff. July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.402.
   The permit requirement set forth in Section
4-2.401 and the criteria set forth in Section
4-2.403 of this Chapter shall not apply to a fire protection district that
desires to sell safe and sane fireworks within the boundaries of its district
to raise funds for that fire protection district so long as the fire protection
district fully complies with all other requirements of this Chapter for the
sale of safe and sane fireworks. Except as may be otherwise indicated in a
particular provision, all other provisions of this Chapter shall apply to a
fire protection district that desires to sell safe and sane fireworks on its
own financial behalf. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1574, eff. July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.403.
   No permit to sell safe and sane fireworks shall be issued to any person
except to a non-profit corporation or non-profit unincorporated association
that meets all of the following criteria:
   a.   The principal purpose of the organization is youth service or youth
welfare or the organization is a non-profit association, charity, corporation,
or fraternal association organized primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare,
civic betterment or charitable purposes and sponsors organizations which have
as their principal purpose youth service or youth welfare.
   b.   The principal and permanent meeting place of the organization or the
sponsoring organization is within the fire protection district in which the
sales are to occur.
   c.   The organization has been organized and established in Yolo County for
a continuous period of at least one year immediately preceding the application
for a permit.
   d.   No organization shall submit more than one application annually for one
permit to sell safe and sane fireworks within the unincorporated area of Yolo
County.
   e.   The organization has a bona fide membership of at least fifteen
members.
   f.   A minimum of 90% of the profits from the sale of safe and sane
fireworks must be directly appropriated for youth services or youth welfare
programs. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001)
Sec. 4-2.405.
   Applications for permits to sell safe and sane fireworks within the
boundaries of a particular fire protection district shall be submitted to the
fire chief of that fire protection district. Applications must be received by
April 1 each year. Each application shall specify the proposed location of the
fireworks stand as well as the name, address, and telephone number of one or
more responsible adults who will be in charge of and responsible for the
fireworks stand during the period that safe and sane fireworks will be sold,
displayed, or stored at such location. Each application shall include written
permission from the owner of record of the property upon which the proposed
stand will be located. The fire chief of the fire protection district receiving
the application shall retain the original of the application. A copy of the
approved application shall be promptly transmitted to the Yolo County Building
Official and one copy shall be transmitted to the Yolo County Sheriff. Each
application shall be accompanied by the payment of a non-refundable application
fees established by the Board of Supervisors. A fire district that is selling
safe and sane fireworks on its own financial behalf is not required to pay any
portion of the application fee. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001, as amended
by § 2, Ord. 1574, eff. July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.406.
   Applications shall be accompanied by proof of liability insurance coverage
of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate coverage, or in
such other amounts as required by the fire chief. Each of the policies of
insurance shall contain a rider that designates the County of Yolo and the
issuing fire protection district as additional insureds thereunder. Each of the
policies of insurance shall also contain a rider that establishes that the
policy will not be cancelled without at least 15 days advance written notice to
the issuing fire chief and the County Building Official. None of the policies
shall contain a provision allowing a deductible amount. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff.
May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1574, eff. July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.407.
   No more than three permits may be issued in any one year by a fire chief of
a fire protection district. However, if a particular fire protection district
sells safe and sane fireworks to raise funds for that district, then only two
permits per year may be issued by the fire chief of that district. Only one
permit may be issued annually to an organization. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17,
2001)
Sec. 4-2.408.
   Applicants for permits to sell safe and sane fireworks shall be notified
within 10 days of the deadline for submission of applications of the approval
or disapproval of the applications for each permit. All organizations whose
permits have been approved shall have 10 days to pick up their permit. (§ 3,
Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001)
Sec. 4-2.409.
   Each issuing fire chief, or a designee, shall participate in a safe and sane
stand operator safety seminar for those organizations receiving permits
pursuant to this Chapter. The failure of a fire chief, or a designee, to
participate in such a safety seminar shall result in that fire chief's fire
protection district no longer being permitted to issue permits to sell safe and
sane fireworks pursuant to this Chapter. The continued validity of any permit
issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to the requirement that at
least one of the responsible adults whose name, address, and telephone number
was included in the application for the permit attends a safe and sane
fireworks stand operator safety seminar conducted by the fire protection
district and the licensed fireworks wholesaler that is supplying the safe and
sane fireworks to the permittee. The failure of an organization to have a
responsible adult attend such a safety seminar shall result in the immediate
revocation of its permit to sell safe and sane fireworks. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff.
May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1574, eff. July 3, 2025)  
Sec. 4-2.410.
   A fire chief shall issue a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks within the
boundaries of the fire protection district unless:
   a.   The fire chief finds, in writing, that the applicant has failed to
provide sufficient plans, information or other data necessary to permit a
determination respecting compliance with the requirements of this Chapter;
   b.   The fire chief finds, in writing, that the applicant is not in
compliance with any of the requirements of this Chapter;
   c.   The fire chief finds, in writing, that the applicant is barred from
obtaining a permit pursuant to the provisions of Section
4-2.501 of this Chapter; or
   d.   The fire chief determines that the number of qualified applicants
exceeds the number of permissible permits allowed under Section
4-2.407 of this Chapter. In such an instance, the governing body of the
district may establish a selection process that assures that permittees will be
selected on a fair, equitable, and impartial basis. If no such process is
established by the governing body, then permittees will be selected by lot. (§
3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1574, eff. July 3,
2025)
Sec. 4-2.411.
   One copy of each permit issued shall be submitted by the applicant to the
County Building Official and the County Sheriff, with the required fees. A fire
district that is selling safe and sane fireworks on its own financial behalf is
not required to pay the issuance fee. Prior to receipt of a permit, the
permittee must provide the issuing fire chief with a copy of the requisite
State retail sales permit from the Office of the California State Fire Marshal
and copies of the insurance policies and riders required by Section
4-2.406. A permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be nontransferable to
any other organization. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1574, eff. July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.412.
   Any organization, including a fire protection district, that sells safe and
sane fireworks pursuant to this Chapter shall comply with any requirement to
obtain a temporary sales tax permit from the local office of the California
State Board of Equalization. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001)
Sec. 4-2.413.
   Each stand selling safe and sane fireworks shall be operated in full
compliance with each of the following:
   a.   No person shall sell fireworks to any person under the age of 18 years.
   b.   The sale of safe and sane fireworks shall begin no earlier than 12:00
noon on June 28th and shall not continue after 12:00 noon on July 5th of the
same year. Sales shall not be permitted past 9:00 p.m. on any day. From June
29th until July 5th, sales shall be permitted beginning at 9:00 a.m. daily.
   c.   No person other than the individuals who are members of the permittee
organization, or an organization sponsored by the permittee organization, or
the spouses, parents or adult children of such members shall sell or otherwise
participate in the sale of safe and sane fireworks at such stand.
   d.   No person under the age of 18 years shall sell or participate in the
sale of safe and sane fireworks at such stand or be present inside the stand.
   e.   No person shall be paid any consideration by the permittee organization
or any wholesaler/distributor of safe and sane fireworks for selling or
otherwise participating in the sale of safe and sane fireworks at such stand,
provided, however, that compensation may be paid for licensed security
personnel during sale or non-sale hours and to the party authorizing the
location of the stand on its property.
   f.   Each stand must have an adult in attendance and in charge thereof while
the stand is being used for the sale, dispensing or storage of fireworks.
   g.   All unsold stock of fireworks in the hands of the permittee
organization after 12:00 noon on July 5 shall be returned to the wholesaler/
distributor and removed from the unincorporated area of the County within ten
days. On the closing of the stand, the stand and all litter shall be removed
from the premises and the premises left in a clean, safe condition.
   h.   No fuel-powered generator or similar equipment shall be allowed within
50 feet of a safe and sane fireworks stand.
   i.   Each organization must post at a prominent location inside the stand
each of the following: the permit issued by the fire chief authorizing the sale
of safe and sane fireworks, its temporary sales tax permit from the California
State Board of Equalization (if required), its State Fire Marshal Retail Sales
Permit, and proof of the required insurance.
   j.   Each organization must take all reasonable steps necessary to ensure
each of the following: that no person smokes within 25 feet of the stand; and
that no person lights, causes to be lighted, or permits to be lighted any
fireworks or combustible material within 50 feet of any stand. (§ 3, Ord. 1261,
eff. May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1574, eff. July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.414.
   All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only from
within a temporary fireworks stand, and retail sales from any other building,
structure, or place are hereby prohibited. Temporary stands shall be subject to
the following provisions:
   a.   No fireworks stand shall be located within 25 feet of any other
building or within 100 feet of any gasoline pump or distribution point or
flammable storage.
   b.   Fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions of the Building
Code of the Yolo County provided, however, that all stands shall be erected
under the supervision of the issuing fire chief who shall require that the
fireworks stands be constructed in a manner which will reasonably insure the
safety of attendants and patrons; and further that any electrical installation
shall comply with all applicable codes.
   c.   No stand shall have a floor area in excess of 750 square feet.
   d.   Each stand shall have at least two exits. Each stand in excess of 40
feet in length shall have at least 3 exits spaced approximately equidistant
apart; provided, however, that in no case shall the distance between the exits
exceed 20 feet. Exit doors shall be not less than 24 inches wide and six feet
in height and shall swing in the direction of exit travel.
   e.   Each stand shall have two, 2½ gallon "water type" (minimum rating 2A)
or soda and acid fire extinguishers in good working order and easily accessible
for use in case of fire.
   f.   All weeds and combustible materials shall be cleared from the location
of the stand to a distance of at least 25 feet surrounding the stand. All trash
resulting from the operation of the stand must be removed on a daily basis.
   g.   "NO SMOKING" signs shall be prominently displayed at no less than two
locations on the outside of the stand and at no less than two locations on
inside of the stand. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1574, eff. July 3, 2025)
Article 5.
Enforcement
Sec. 4-2.501.
   The fire chief who issues a permit pursuant to this Chapter shall have
authority and primary responsibility to enforce the permit restrictions set
forth in Article 4 of this Chapter. In the event that a permittee violates any
provision of Article 4 of this Chapter, the fire chief who issued the permit
shall promptly require immediate corrective action by the permittee so that the
permittee comes into full compliance with the provisions of Article 4 of this
Chapter. If, in the determination of the fire chief, a violation poses an
imminent threat to the safety of persons or property or if there are repeated
violations by a permittee, then the fire chief shall immediately revoke the
permit and order the stand closed. The stand shall remain closed but the
revocation shall not take effect for 5 days, during which time the permittee
may seek review of the fire chief's decision by submitting a written request
for review to the board of commissioners of the governing fire protection
district. Upon an appeal, the fire chief shall submit a written statement to
the governing body of the fire protection district describing the basis for the
fire chief's decision to revoke the permit. Upon appeal, the governing body of
the fire protection district shall provide the affected permittee with an
opportunity to respond to the basis of the fire chief's decision to revoke the
permit. The decision of the governing body of the fire protection district to
uphold the revocation or grant the appeal shall be final. Any permittee whose
permit has been revoked pursuant to this Section
4-2.501 shall be barred from receiving a permit pursuant to this Chapter for 5
years from the date of the revocation. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001, as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1574, eff. July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.502.
   (a)   Pursuant to the County Code Enforcement Ordinance, Title 1, Chapter 5,
violations of this Code may be enforced by any County Code Enforcement Officer,
the Chief Building Official, the County Health Officer, the Sheriff’s Office,
or the fire chief of the fire protection district in which the violation takes
place.
   (b)   Each dangerous firework possessed, ignited, exploded, discharged,
used, or displayed, constitutes a separate violation of this Chapter, and each
safe and sane firework sold in violation of this Chapter constitutes a separate
violation of this Chapter. Each violation of this Chapter is subject to a
separate fine for each device. Possession includes having direct or indirect
custody and/or control of any dangerous firework prohibited under this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 1574, eff. July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.503.
   (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
1-2.01 of this Code or any other section of this Code, the violation of any of
the provisions of this Chapter is an infraction subject to the procedures set
forth in the County’s Code Enforcement Ordinance.
   (b)   Every violation of any provision of this chapter constituting an
infraction is punishable by a $1,000 fine. Such fines may only be appealed
through the administrative hearing process of the County’s Code Enforcement
Ordinance, Sec.
1-5.09. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1574, eff.
July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.504.
   The enforcing official may seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at
the expense of the person committing a violation, all stock of fireworks
offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of this Chapter when
such violation is determined by the enforcement official to create an imminent
threat to the safety of persons or property. The person committing the
violation shall be responsible for all costs associated with the disposal of
the seized fireworks. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1574, eff. July 3, 2025)
Article 6.
Operative Provisions
Sec. 4-2.601.
   The provisions of Articles 1, 2, 3, and 6 shall be operative on the
effective date of this Ordinance. The provisions of Article 4 shall not be
operative in a fire protection district unless and until the governing body of
that fire protection district authorizes its fire chief in writing to issue
permits pursuant to this Chapter. If no such authorization is given, then it
shall be unlawful to sell safe and sane fireworks within the boundaries of that
district. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1574,
eff. July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.602.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
4-2.601, the provisions of Articles 3, 4, and 5 shall not apply in any area of
the County for which the State of California or the federal government has the
legal responsibility for fire prevention and suppression. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff.
May 17, 2001)
Sec. 4-2.603.
   This Chapter is not the exclusive regulation for fireworks within the
unincorporated area of the County. It shall supplement and be in addition to
the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter
enacted by the County, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having
jurisdiction. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1574,
eff. July 3, 2025)
Sec. 4-2.605.
   This Chapter is not the exclusive regulation for fireworks within the
unincorporated area of the County. It shall supplement and be in addition to
the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter
enacted by the County, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having
jurisdiction. (§ 3, Ord. 1261, eff. May 17, 2001)
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC
Sections:
Article 1. Parking
   
4-3.101   Scope.
   
4-3.102   Definitions.
   
4-3.103   Seventy-two hour parking: Violations.
   
4-3.104   Parking for certain purposes: Exceptions: Violations.
   
4-3.105   Motor truck, truck tractor, trailer, and semitrailer parking:
Violations.
   
4-3.106   Removal of vehicles.
   
4-3.107   Parking on County roads and highways and State highways.
   
4-3.108   Angle parking.
   
4-3.109   Parking on County roads and highways and State Highways affected by a
labor controversy.
   
4-3.110   Handicapped parking: County lots.
   
4-3.111   Handicapped parking: Private lots.
Article 2. Speed Limits
   
4-3.201   Authority
   
4-3.202   Twenty-five miles per hour.
   
4-3.202.1   Thirty miles per hour.
   
4-3.203   Thirty-five miles per hour.
   
4-3.203.1   Forty miles per hour.
   
4-3.204   Forty-five miles per hour.
   
4-3.205   Fifty miles per hour.
   
4-3.205.1   Fifty-five miles per hour.
   
4-3.206   Violations.
Article 3. Through Highways and Stop Intersections
   
4-3.301   Designation: Stop signs.
Article 4. Weight Limits
   
4-3.401   Partially improved County highway: Defined.
   
4-3.402   Partially improved County highways: Weight limit.
   
4-3.403   Partially improved County highways: Weight limit: Exceptions:
Permits.
   
4-3.404   Vehicles in excess of 14,000 pounds prohibited on certain streets.
   
4-3.405   Vehicles in excess of 14,000 pounds: Alternate routes.
   
4-3.406   Transportation permits: Authorized
   
4-3.407   Transportation permits: Continuous operations.
   
4-3.408   Transportation permit: Limitations.
   
4-3.409   Transportation permits: Applications: Fees.
   
4-3.410   Transportation permits: Amendments: Revocation: Notices.
   
4-3.411   Transportation permits: Appeals: Hearings: Notices.
   
4-3.412   Transportation permits: Exceptions.
   
4-3.413   Violations: Penalties.
   
4-3.414   Vehicles in excess of 30,000 pounds prohibited on certain streets.
Article 5. Miscellaneous Provisions
   
4-3.501   Temporary closure of roads to vehicles.
   
4-3.502   Flange-wheeled vehicles and machinery.
   
4-3.503   Bicycle paths: Horses.
   
4-3.504   Bridges: Pedestrians.
   
4-3.505   Skateboarding, rollerskating, and rollerblading prohibited at County
buildings.
   
4-3.506   Length Restrictions.
Article 6. Turning Movements
   
4-3.601   Right turns prohibited.
Article 7. Terminal Routes
   
4-3.701   Authority.
   
4-3.702   Definitions.
   
4-3.703   Applications.
   
4-3.704   Approval.
   
4-3.705   Routes designated.
   
4-3.706   Violations: Prosecution.
Article 1.
Parking
Sec. 4-3.101.   Scope.
   (a)   The provisions of this article prohibiting the stopping, standing, or
parking of vehicles shall apply at all times, or at those times specified,
except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic
control device.
   (b)   The provisions of this article shall not relieve any person from the
duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code of
the State or the laws of the County prohibiting, limiting, or otherwise
regulating the standing, parking, or storage of vehicles in specified places at
specified times. (§ II, Ord. 521)
Sec. 4-3.102.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
   (a)   “County road” shall mean and include all or any part of the entire
width of the right-of-way of a County road, whether or not such entire area is
actually used for road purposes. “County road” shall include streets, roads,
and highways.
   (b)   “Peace officer” shall mean any member of the Highway Patrol of the
State or any regularly employed and salaried deputy of the County Sheriff-
Coroner’s office.
   (c)   “Residential district” shall mean that portion of a highway and the
property contiguous thereto, other than a business district, as defined by the
Vehicle Code of the State, upon one side of which highway, within a distance of
one-fourth (1/4) mile, the contiguous property fronting thereon is occupied by
thirteen (13) or more separate dwelling houses or business structures, or upon
both sides of which highway, collectively, within a distance of one-fourth (1/
4) mile, the contiguous property fronting thereon is occupied by sixteen (16)
or more separate dwelling houses or business structures. A residential district
may be longer than one-fourth (1/4) mile if such ratio of separate dwelling
houses or business structures to the length of the highway exists.
   (d)   “Business district” shall mean that portion of a highway and the
property contiguous thereto (a)upon one side of which highway, for a distance
of 600 feet, fifty (50%) percent or more of the contiguous property fronting
thereon is occupied by buildings in use for business, or (b)upon both sides of
which highway, collectively, for a distance of 300 feet, fifty (50%) percent or
more of the contiguous property fronting thereon is occupied by buildings in
use for business. A business district may be longer than the distances
specified in this subsection if such ratio of buildings in use for business to
the length of the highway exists.
   (e)   Determination of business and residence districts. In determining
whether a highway is within a business or residence district, the following
limitations shall apply and shall qualify the definitions in subsections (c)and
(d)of this section:
   (1)   No building shall be regarded unless its entrance faces the highway
and the front of the building is within seventy-five (75’) feet of the roadway.
   (2)   Where a highway is physically divided into two (2) or more roadways,
only those buildings facing each roadway separately shall be regarded for the
purpose of determining whether the roadway is within a district.
   (3)   All churches, apartments, hotels, multiple dwelling houses, clubs, and
public buildings, other than schools, shall be deemed to be business
structures.
   (4)   A highway, or portion of a highway, shall not be deemed to be within a
district, regardless of the number of buildings upon the contiguous property,
if there is no right of access to the highway by vehicles from the contiguous
property.
   (f)   “Motor truck” shall mean a motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained
primarily for the transportation of property. “Motor truck” shall not include a
“pick-up” truck of three-quarters (3/4) ton capacity or less.
   (g)   “Truck tractor” shall mean a motor vehicle designed and used primarily
for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than
a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
   (h)   “Trailer” shall mean a vehicle designed for carrying persons or
property on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that no part of its weight rests upon any other vehicle.
   (i)   “Semitrailer” shall mean a vehicle designed for carrying persons or
property, used in conjunction with a motor vehicle, and so constructed that
some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon, or is carried by,
another vehicle.
   (j)   “Vehicle” shall mean a device by which any person or property may be
propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (§ I, Ord.
521, as amended by §§ 1 and 2, Ord. 869, eff. April 3, 1980)
Sec. 4-3.103.   Seventy-two-hour parking: Violations.
   (a)   Limit. No person who owns or has possession, custody, or control of
any vehicle shall park or allow such vehicle to be parked upon any County road
for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours.
   (b)   Violations. Any person who knowingly parks or leaves standing a
vehicle on a County road in excess of a period of seventy-two (72) consecutive
hours, or any person who has control of such vehicle and knowingly authorizes
or allows such vehicle to be so parked or left standing, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ III, Ord. 521)
Sec. 4-3.104.   Parking for certain purposes: Exceptions: Violations.
   (a)   Prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle upon any County road for
the principal purpose of:
   (1)   Displaying such vehicle for sale or selling from such vehicle any
article, service, or thing; or
   (2)   Washing for hire, greasing, or repairing such vehicle.
   (b)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit a seller
from taking orders or delivering any commodity from a vehicle on the part of a
County road immediately adjacent to the premises of the purchaser; nor shall
the provisions of this section prohibit an owner or operator of a vehicle, or a
mechanic, from servicing, repairing, or otherwise working upon any vehicle
which is temporarily disabled in a manner and to such an extent that it is
impossible to avoid stopping such vehicle on such County road.
   (c)   Violations. Any person who knowingly parks a vehicle for the purposes
prohibited by the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. (§ IV, Ord.
521)
Sec. 4-3.105.   Motor truck, truck tractor, trailer, and semitrailer parking:
Violations.
   (a)   Limited. No person shall park any motor truck, truck tractor, trailer,
or semitrailer for more than two (2) hours on any County road within a
residential or business district, or move and repark such vehicle on any County
road in such residential district or business district to within 300 feet of
the original parking site within any twenty-four (24) hour period, except while
loading or unloading property or in connection with, and in the aid of, the
performance of a service to or on a property adjacent to the block in which
such truck is parked, and only for such time in addition to two (2) hours which
is reasonably necessary to complete such loading, unloading, or service.
   (b)   Semitrailers and trailers having steel wheels or plates. No person
shall park a semitrailer or trailer, any portion of which rests on steel wheels
or steel plates, on any County road at any time; provided, however, this
section shall not prohibit an owner or operator of a semitrailer or trailer or
a mechanic from servicing, repairing, or otherwise working upon such trailer or
semitrailer which is temporarily disabled in a manner and to such an extent
that it is impossible to avoid stopping such trailer or semitrailer on such
County road.
   (c)   Violations. Any person who knowingly parks a vehicle for the purposes
prohibited by the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. (§ V, Ord.
521, as amended by § 3, Ord. 869, eff. April 3, 1980)
Sec. 4-3.106.   Removal of vehicles.
   A peace officer may remove any vehicle in violation of the provisions of
Sections
4-3.101 through
4-3.105 of this article from a County road in a manner prescribed by, and
subject to, the provisions of Chapter 10 of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code of
the State. (§ VI, Ord. 521)
Sec. 4-3.107.   Parking on County roads and highways and State highways.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any
unattended motor vehicle at the localities designated in accordance with the
provisions of subsection (b)of this section.
   (b)   The Board, by resolution, shall designate the streets or roads, or
portions thereof, upon which parking shall not be lawful. Parking restrictions
shall be placed upon State highways only on a request, made in writing, by the
Board to the Department of Public Works of the State. Parking restrictions upon
County highways may be so designated at the discretion of the Board.
   (c)   Any provision of this section which regulates traffic or delegates the
regulation of traffic upon State highways in any way for which the approval of
the Department of Public Works of the State is required by State law shall
cease to be operative six (6) months after receipt by the Board of written
notice of withdrawal of approval of said Department of Public Works.
   (d)   Whenever the provisions of this section delegate authority to a County
officer or authorize action by the Board to regulate traffic upon a State
highway in any way which by State law requires the prior approval of the
Department of Public Works of the State, no such officer shall exercise such
authority, nor shall such action by the Board be effective, with respect to any
State highway without the prior approval in writing of said Department of
Public Works when and to the extent required by Divisions 11 and 15 of the
Vehicle Code of the State.
   (e)   The provisions of this section shall be of no force or effect unless
the localities designated by resolution of the Board, as provided in subsection
(b)of this section are either plainly signposted or appropriately marked in the
manner provided in Section 21351 of the Vehicle Code of the State to give
warning of the prohibition of such parking. (§§ 1 through 5, Ord. 361)
Sec. 4-3.108.   Angle parking.
   (a)   Pursuant to Section 22503 of the California Vehicle Code, upon finding
that angle parking is a necessary or appropriate method to provide for parking,
the Director of the Yolo County Planning and Public Works Department is
authorized to establish angle parking on any road within the unincorporated
area of the County. In providing angle parking, the Director shall designate
and establish the specific locations and number of spaces on the affected
County road or State highway. Vehicles placed in areas so designated shall be
parked at the angle designated and shall park entirely within the marked
spaces. The Director shall ensure that pavement markings designating the angled
parking spaces are installed and maintained.
   (b)   Prior to providing angle parking on any State highway, the Director
shall consult with the California Department of Transportation and obtain its
written approval or similar consent to the proposal. (§§ 1 and 2, Ord. 531, and
§ 1, Ord. 539, as amended by § 1, Ord. 623, eff. December 3, 1969, as amended
by § 2, Ord. 1390, eff. October 29, 2009)
Sec. 4-3.109.   Parking on County roads and highways and State highways
affected by a labor controversy.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any
unattended motor vehicle at the localities designated as affected by a labor
controversy in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b)of this section,
and any vehicle so parked or left standing may be removed pursuant to Division
11 of the Vehicle Code of the State.
   (b)   After considering a recommendation thereon by the Sheriff-Coroner, the
Director of Public Works may designate those portions of roads, streets, or
highways as localities affected by a labor controversy if he finds as follows:
   (1)   A labor controversy exists; and
   (2)   That controversy affects a designated portion of a County road,
street, or highway or a State highway in that parked motor vehicles impede the
flow of traffic, block the vision of law enforcement personnel at the locality,
diminish the safety of persons present at the locality, or otherwise constitute
an invasion of the public health, safety, or general welfare at the locality.
   (c)   Parking restrictions shall be placed upon State highways only upon a
request, made in writing, by the Board to the Department of Transportation of
the State.
   (d)   Any provision of this section which regulates traffic or delegates the
regulation of traffic upon State highways in any way for which the approval of
the Department of Transportation of the State is required by State law shall
cease to be operative six (6) months after the receipt by the County Director
of Public Works of written notice of withdrawal of approval by the Department
of Transportation of the State.
   (e)   Whenever the provisions of this section delegate authority to a County
officer or authorize action by the Board to regulate traffic upon a State
highway which, by State law, requires the prior approval of the Department of
Transportation of the State, no such officer shall exercise such authority, nor
shall such action by the County Director of Public Works be effective, with
respect to any State highway without the prior approval in writing of the
Department of Transportation of the State when and to the extent required by
Division 11 of the Vehicle Code of the State.
   (f)   The provisions of this section shall be of no force or effect unless
the localities designated by resolution of the Board, as provided in subsection
(b)of this section, are either plainly signposted or appropriately marked in
the manner provided by Section 21351 of the Vehicle Code of the State to give
warning of the prohibition of such parking. Such signs shall give notice of
removal. (§ 1, Ord. 872, eff. April 1, 1980)
Sec. 4-3.110.   Handicapped parking: County lots.
   Section 22507.8 of the Vehicle Code of the State, which provides that it
shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle in a
stall or space designed for physically handicapped persons if, immediately
adjacent to and visible from such stall or space, there is posted a sign
consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with an occupant in white on a
bIue back-ground, unless the vehicle displays either one of the distinguishing
license plates or a placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.5 or Section 9105
of said Vehicle Code, shall be operative on all off-street parking facilities
owned or operated by the County, (§ 1, Ord. 927, eff. March 18, 1982)
Sec. 4-3.111.   Handicapped parking: Private lots.
   (a)   There are within the County privately-owned and maintained off-street
parking facilities which are held open for the use of the general public for
the purposes of vehicular parking. The Board, from time to time, by resolution,
may make any private off-street parking facilities subject to the provisions of
Section 22507.8 of the Vehicle Code of the State; provided, however, no such
resolution shall be passed unless the Board first:
   (1)   Gives public notice and holds a hearing, and
   (2)   Gives written notice by letter to the owners of the lots to be made
subject to this section.
   (b)   Section 22507.8 of the Vehicle Code of the State, relating to parking
in spaces designated for handicapped persons, shall apply to all privately-
owned parking facilities located in the County and designated by resolution of
the Board as provided in subsection (a)of this section.
   (c)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any off-street
parking facility unless the owner or operator thereof has caused to be posted
in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such off-street parking facility a
notice not less than seventeen (17”) inches by twenty-two (22”) inches in size,
with lettering not less than one inch in height, to the effect that such off-
street parking facility is subject to Section 22507.8 of the Vehicle Code of
the State. (§ 2, Ord. 927, eff. March 18, 1982)
Article 2.   Speed Limits
Sec. 4-3.201.   Authority.
   Pursuant to the authority provided by Section 22358 of the Vehicle Code of
the State, it is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
survey that the speed limit of sixty-five (65) miles per hour is more than is
reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon the streets and
parts of streets of the County set forth in this article, and it is hereby
declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as set forth in this article
on such streets and parts of streets. Such declared prima facie limit shall be
effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon such
streets. (§ 1, Ord. 410, § 1, Ord. 458, § 1, Ord. 498, § 1, Ord. 504, § I, Ord.
533, § I, Ord. 537, § I, Ord. 544, § I, Ord. 560, § I, Ord. 562, § 1, Ord. 564,
§ 1, Ord. 565, § I, Ord. 568, § 1, Ord. 570, § 1, Ord. 571, § 1, Ord. 577, § 1,
Ord. 579, § 1, Ord. 589, § 1, Ord. 593, § 1, Ord. 601, § 1, Ord. 602, § 1, Ord.
609, and § 1, Ord. 614)
Sec. 4-3.202.   Twenty-five miles per hour.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following streets and parts of streets in
the County is hereby declared to be twenty-five (25) miles per hour:
   (a)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (b)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (c)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (d)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (e)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (f)   Country Club Drive from El Macero Drive to El Macero Drive (El Macero
Unit No. 1);
   (g)   County Road 96B from State Highway 16 southerly to the end;
   (h)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (i)   El Macero Drive from Mace Boulevard to the east line of the
subdivision (El Macero Unit No. 1);
   (j)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (k)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (I)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (m)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (n)   Railroad Street from Hurlbut Street to Rudolph Street;
   (o)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (p)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (q)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (r)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (s)   Netherlands Road between South River Road and a point three-tenths
(0.3) mile westerly thereof;
   (t)   Fairway Drive between County Road 29 and its southerly terminus.
(Added by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011)
(§ 1, Ord. 458, § 1, Ord. 504, § I, Ord. 533, § I, Ord. 560, § 1, Ord. 565, §
1, Ord. 570, § 1, Ord. 577, and § 1, Ord. 609, as amended by § 2, Ord. 719,
eff. April 30, 1975, § 1, Ord. 775, eff. April 26, 1977, §§ 1 and 2, Ord. 778,
eff. June 7, 1977, § 1, Ord. 815, eff. September 19, 1978, §§ 1 and 2, Ord.
840, eff. February 27, 1979, §§ 1, 2, and 3, Urgency Ord. 926, eff. February
16, 1982, §§ 1, 2, and 3, Urgency Ord. 929, eff. March 2, 1982, §§ 1, 2, 3, and
4, Urgency Ord. 975, eff. May 24, 1984, and § 2, Ord. 1079, eff. June 28, 1988,
§ 1, Ord. 1240, eff. July 29, 1999, and § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011)
Sec. 4-3.202.1.   Thirty miles per hour.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following streets and parts of streets in
the County is hereby declared to be thirty (30) miles per hour:
   (a)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (b)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (c)   County Road 17A between    State Highway 113 and County Road 99A;
   (d)   Montgomery Avenue between Davis City Limits and Davis City Limits.
(Added by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011)
(§ 1, Ord. 1079, eff. June 28, 1988, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1168, eff. May 26,
1994, § 2, Ord. 1240, eff. July 29, 1999, and § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8,
2011)
Sec. 4-3.203.   Thirty-five miles per hour.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following streets and parts of streets in
the County is hereby declared to be thirty-five (35) miles per hour:
   (a)   County Road 139, adjacent to the community of Clarksburg, between
County Road 151and the southerly line of Lot 40 of the Holland Land Division
No.10;
   (b)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (c)   Russell Boulevard between the Davis City Limits and County Road 98;
   (d)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (e)   County Road 21A between State Highway 16 and one-half (1/2) mile west
of State Highway 16;
   (f)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011) (Ords. 240, 269,
284, 295, 330, 397, § 1, Ord. 498, § 1, Ord. 579, § 1, Ord. 601, and § 1, Ord.
602, as amended by § 2, Ord. 629, eff. March 27, 1970, § 1, Ord. 633, eff. June
1, 1970, § 1, Ord. 678, eff. December 26, 1972, § 1, Ord. 719, eff. April 30,
1975, § 1, Ord. 748, eff. March 3, 1976, § 1, Ord. 774, eff. April 12, 1977, §
1, Ord. 787, eff. November 1, 1977, § 1, Ord. 796, eff. April 18, 1978, § 3,
Ord. 840, eff. February 27, 1979, § 2, Ord. 891, eff. September 19, 1980, § 1,
Ord. 904, eff. February 12, 1981, § 1, Ord. 909, eff. May 28, 1981, § 1, Ord.
915, eff. July 30, 1981, § 2, Ord. 1066, eff. December 31, 1987, § 2, Ord.
1081, eff. August 25, 1988, § 1, Ord. 1093, eff. June 13, 1989, § 3, Ord. 1240,
eff. July 29, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (g)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1433, eff. September 5, 2013) (as amended by §
2, Ord. 1317, eff. May 13, 2004);
   (h)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1433, eff. September 5, 2013) (§ 2, Ord. 1330,
eff. February 11, 2005);
   (i)   County Road 78 between State Highway 16, west to the end of the road.
(§ 2, Ord. 1331, eff. March 17, 2005, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff.
December 8, 2011)
Sec. 4-3.203.1.   Forty miles per hour.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following streets and parts of street in
the County is hereby declared to be forty (40) miles per hour:
   (a)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (b)   County Road 94B between State Highway 16 and County Road 24;
   (c)   County Road 99W from 1,000 feet north of County Road 8 to 1,000 feet
south of County Road 8. (Added by § 2, Ord. 1433, eff. September 5, 2013)
   (d)   Willow Avenue between Willow Point Road and 0.3 miles south of Willow
Point Road. (Added by § 2, Ord. 1448, eff. October 23, 2014)
(§ 1, Ord. 1066, eff. December 31, 1987, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1081, eff.
August 25, 1988, § 1, Ord. 1083, eff. November 24, 1988, § 4, Ord.1240, eff.
July 29, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011)
Sec. 4-3.204.   Forty-five miles per hour.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following streets and parts of streets in
the County is hereby declared to be forty-five (45) miles per hour:
   (a)   Russell Boulevard between State Highway 505 and a point six-tenths
(0.6) mile easterly thereof;
   (b)   County Road 96 between County Road 29 and County Road 31;
   (c)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (d)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (e)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (f)   County Road 99W between a point two-tenths (0.2) mile north of County
Road 17 to Second Street;
   (g)   Beamer Street (County Road 21) from County Road 102 west to the
Woodland City Limits;
   (h)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (i)   County Road 98 between 300 feet south of Hutchison Drive and Russell
Boulevard;
   (j)   Aviation Avenue between County Road 29 and County Road 95;
   (k)   County Road 99W between County Road 6 and the northern section of
County Road 89;
   (l)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (m)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1433, eff. September 5, 2013) . (§ 1, Ord. 410,
§ I, Ord. 537, § I, Ord. 544, § I, Ord. 562, § 1, Ord. 564, § I, Ord. 568, § 1,
Ord. 571, § 1, Ord. 589, § 1, Ord. 593, and § 1, Ord. 614, as amended by § 1,
Ord. 629, eff. March 27, 1970, § 1, Ord. 630, eff. March 23, 1970, § 1, Ord.
657, eff. June 21, 1971, § 1, Ord. 693, eff. November 19, 1973, § 1, Ord. 704,
and § 1, Ord. 705, eff. June 5, 1974, § 1, Ord. 713, § 1, Ord. 714, and § 1,
Ord. 715, eff. January 22, 1975, § 1, Ord. 727, eff. September 30, 1975, § 3,
Ord. 778, eff. June 7, 1977, § 4, Ord. 840, eff. February 27, 1979, § 1, Ord.
883, eff. June 19, 1980, § 1, Ord. 891, eff. September 19, 1980, § 1, Ord. 909,
eff. May 28, 1981, § 1, Ord. 941, eff. December 9, 1982, § 1, Urgency Ord.
1055, eff. April 21, 1987, § 1, Ord. 1154, effective December 24, 1992, § 1,
Ord. 1156, eff. January 21, 1993, § 5, Ord. 1240, eff. July 29, 1999, and § 2,
Ord. 1246, eff. April 6, 2000, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1330, eff. February 11,
2005, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (n)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1433, eff. September 5, 2013) (as amended by §
3, Ord. 1317, eff. May 13, 2004);
   (o)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1448, eff. October 23, 2014) (as amended by §
4, Ord. 1317, eff. May 13, 2004);
   (p)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1433, eff. September 5, 2013) (§ 4, Ord. 1317,
eff. May 13, 2004)
   (q)   County Road 96 between County Road 31 and County Road 32 (Russell
Boulevard). (§ 3, Ord. 1331, eff. March 17, 2005)
   (r)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1433, eff. September 5, 2013) (Added by § 2,
Ord. 1343, eff. March 16, 2006).
   (s)   County Road 94B in the unincorporated area of the County between State
Highway 16 and a point 500 feet north of County Road 22. (Added by § 2, Ord.
1413, eff. December 8, 2011)
   (t)   County Road 98 between State Highway 16 (West Main Street) and West
Lincoln Avenue. (Added by § 2, Ord. 1433, eff. September 5, 2013).(§ 1, Ord.
410, §I, Ord. 537, §I, Ord. 544, §I, Ord. 562, § 1, Ord. 564, §I, Ord. 568, §
1, Ord. 571, § 1, Ord. 589, § 1, Ord. 593, and § 1, Ord. 614, as amended by §
1, Ord. 629, eff. March 27, 1970, § 1, Ord. 630, eff. March 23, 1970, § 1, Ord.
657, eff. June 21, 1971, § 1, Ord. 693, eff. November 19, 1973, § 1, Ord. 704,
and § 1, Ord. 705, eff. June 5, 1974, § 1, Ord. 713, § 1, Ord. 714, and § 1,
Ord. 715, eff. January 22, 1975, § 1, Ord. 727, eff. September 30, 1975, § 3,
Ord. 778, eff. June 7, 1977, § 4, Ord. 840, eff. February 27, 1979, § 1, Ord.
883, eff. June 19, 1980, § 1, Ord. 891, eff. September 19, 1980, § 1, Ord. 909,
eff. May 28, 1981, § 1, Ord. 941, eff. December 9, 1982, § 1, Urgency Ord.
1055, eff. April 21, 1987, § 1, Ord. 1154, effective December 24, 1992, § 1,
Ord. 1156, eff. January 21, 1993, § 5, Ord. 1240, eff. July 29, 1999, § 2, Ord.
1246, eff. April 6, 2000, § 4, Ord. 1317, eff. May 13, 2004, § 3, Ord. 1330,
eff. February 11, 2005, § 3, Ord. 1331, eff. March 17, 2005, § 2, Ord. 1343,
eff. March 16, 2006, and § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011)
   (u)   County Road 89 between County Road 99W and County Road 6. (Added by §
2, Ord. 1459, eff. October 29, 2015)
   (v)   County Road 97 between County Road 20 and State Highway 16. (Added by
§ 2, Ord. 1489, eff. May 25, 2017)
Sec. 4-3.205.   Fifty miles per hour.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following streets and parts of streets in
the County is hereby declared to be fifty (50) miles per hour:
   (a)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (b)   South River (County Road 139) between Willow Point Road (County Road
151) and Gregory Avenue (County Road 111);
   (c)   South River Road (County Road 140) between the Sacramento County line
and the center line of Elk Slough;
   (d)   County Road 21A between One-Half Mile West of State Highway No. 16 and
County Road No. 85C;
   (e)   County Road 96 between State Highway 16 and County Road 20;
   (f)   County Road 24 between County Road 95 and a point eight-tenths (0.8)
mile west of County Road 94B (Added by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011);
   (g)   (Repealed by § 2, Ord. 1489, eff. May 25, 2017);
   (h)   County Road 98 between West Lincoln Avenue and County Road 24 (also
known as Gibson Road). (Added by § 2, Ord. 1433, eff. September 5, 2013);
   (i)   County Road 95 between State Route 16 and County Road 24. (Added by §
2, Ord. 1433, eff. September 5, 2013).
(§ 1, Ord. 564, and § 1, Ord. 614, as amended by § 1, Ord. 670, eff. July 10,
1972, § 1, Ord. 694, eff. November 19, 1973, and § 1, Ord. 1093, eff. June 13,
1989, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1413, eff. December 8, 2011)
Sec. 4-3.205.1.   Fifty-five miles per hour.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following streets and parts of streets in
the County is hereby declared to be fifty-five (55) miles per hour:
   (a)   County Road 32 between County Road 98 and County Road 95;
   (b)   County Road 99W from 1,000 feet north of County Road 8 to 3,000 feet
north of County Road 8. (Added by § 2, Ord. 1433, eff. September 5, 2013);
   (c)   County Road 99W from 800 feet south of County Road 8 to 600 feet north
of County Road 9. (Added by § 2, Ord. 1433, eff. September 5, 2013).
Sec. 4-3.206.   Violations.
   Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable as follows:
   (a)   For a first conviction, by a fine not exceeding Fifty and no/100ths
($50.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment;
   (b)   For a second conviction within a period of twelve (12) months, by a
fine not exceeding One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars, or by
imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not exceeding ten (10) days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment; and
   (c)   For a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of twelve
(12) months, by a fine not exceeding Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00)
Dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not exceeding six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(§ 2, Ord. 410, § 2, Ord. 458, § 2, Ord. 498, § 2, Ord. 504, § II, Ord. 533, §
II, Ord. 537, § II, Ord. 544, § II, Ord. 560, § II, Ord. 562, § 2, Ord. 564, §
2, Ord. 565, § II, Ord. 568, § 2, Ord. 570, § 2, Ord. 571, § 2, Ord. 577, § 2,
Ord. 579, § 2, Ord. 589, § 2, Ord. 593, § 2, Ord. 601, and § 2, Ord. 602)
Article 3.
Through Highways and Stop Intersections
Sec. 4-3.301.   Designation: Stop signs.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21354 of the Vehicle Code of the
State, subject to the provisions of Section 21353 of said Vehicle Code, the
Board may, by resolution, designate any highway under its jurisdiction as a
through highway and may erect stop signs at entrances thereto, or may designate
any intersection under its exclusive jurisdiction as a stop intersection and
erect stop signs at one or more entrances thereto.
Article 4.
Weight Limits
Sec. 4-3.401.   Partially improved County highway: Defined.
   For the purposes of this article, “partially improved County highway” shall
mean every public County highway, except a highway paved with cement concrete
or asphalt, concrete, or with a roadway of a hard surface not less than four
(4”) inches thick made up of a mixture of rock, sand, or gravel bound together
by an artificial binder other than natural soil. (§ 1, Ord. 357)
Sec. 4-3.402.   Partially improved County highways: Weight limit.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to
cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any partially improved
County highway any vehicle of a weight, including its load, in excess of 16,000
pounds, such weight to be distributed as follows:
   (a)   Not more than 6,000 pounds resting upon any one axle with single
tires; and
   (b)   Not more than 10,000 pounds resting upon one axle with dual tires. (§
2, Ord. 357)
Sec. 4-3.403.   Partially improved County highways: Weight limit: Exceptions:
Permits.
   The weight limit imposed by the provisions of Section
4-3.402 of this article shall not apply in cases where proper application has
been made and a permit has been issued by the Director of Public Works
authorizing the movement of equipment or vehicles exceeding such weight limit.
   The Director of Public Works is hereby granted authority to issue permits,
upon proper application and, under such restrictions as he shall deem
appropriate, authorizing the movement of equipment or vehicles exceeding such
load limit over partially improved County highways when, in his judgment, such
movement will be in the public interest or when the issuance of such permit
will not seriously damage or impair such roads or be detrimental to the public
safety or dangerous to life, limb, or property; provided, however, no permit
issued pursuant to the authority granted by the provisions of this section
shall relieve the permittee of any civil or criminal liability imposed by
general State laws or other provisions enacted by the State covering damages
occasioned to, or injury of, County highways or bridges. (§§ 5 and 6, Ord. 357)
Sec. 4-3.404.   Vehicles in excess of 14,000 pounds prohibited on certain
streets.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 35712 of the Vehicle Code of the
State, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for any owner
to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, any commercial vehicle
exceeding a gross weight of 14,000 pounds on the following designated streets
in an unincorporated residential or subdivision area of the County:
   (a)   (1)   Ash Avenue between Evergreen Avenue and Willow Avenue;
   (2)   Balsam Street between Evergreen Avenue and Buckeye Street;
   (3)   Buckeye Street between Sycamore Street and Poplar Street;
   (4)   Evergreen Avenue between Sycamore Street and Westacre Road;
   (5)   Hemlock Street between Evergreen Avenue and Buckeye Street;
   (6)   Poplar Street between Buckeye Street and Merkley Avenue;
   (7)   Proctor Avenue between Sycamore Street and Ash Avenue;
   (8)   Sycamore Street between Evergreen Avenue and Buckeye Street;
   (9)   Sycamore Street between Evergreen Avenue and Evergreen Avenue;
   (10)   Willow Avenue between Sycamore Street and Westacre Road: and
   (11)   Walnut Street between Evergreen Avenue and West Capitol Avenue;
   (b)   (1)   Doran Avenue between Marigold Street and Garnet Street;
   (2)   Garnet Street between West Capitol Avenue and Doran Avenue;
   (3)   Greenmeadow Avenue between Garnet Street and Pine Street;
   (4)   Marigold Street between Palomar Avenue and Doran Avenue;
   (5)   Morning Glory Street between Palomar Avenue and Doran Avenue; and
   (6)   Palomar Avenue between Marigold Street and Pine Street;
   (c)   (1)   Aster Avenue between Kinsington Street and Manchester Street;
   (2)   Birmingham Avenue between Kinsington Street and Manchester Street;
   (3)   Crown Avenue between Kinsington Street and Manchester Street;
   (4)   Devon Avenue between Jefferson Boulevard (State Highway 84) and
Manchester Street;
   (5)   Diablo Street between Essex Avenue and Kinsington Street;
   (6)   Essex Avenue between Kinsington Street and Diablo Street;
   (7)   Kinsington Street between Manchester Street and Aster Avenue; and
   (8)   Manchester Street between Jefferson Boulevard (State Highway 84) and
Aster Avenue;
   (d)   (1)   Nineteenth Street between Park Boulevard and Jefferson Boulevard
(State Highway 84); and
   (2)   Alameda Street between Park Boulevard and Jefferson Boulevard (State
Highway 84);
   (e)   (1)   Holly Street between Pecan Street and Maple Street;
   (2)   Maple Street between West Capitol Avenue and Holly Street;
   (3)   Michigan Avenue between Pecan Street and Poplar Avenue;
   (4)   Pecan Street between West Capitol Avenue and Holly Street; and
   (5)   Walnut Street between West Capitol Avenue and Holly Street;
   (f)   (1)   Palm Avenue between Kentucky Avenue and the Woodland city limits
(1,000 feet south of Kentucky Avenue);
   (g)   (1)   Norfolk Avenue between Clarendon Street and 0.03 mile east of
Femwood Street;
   (2)   Meadow Road between Clarendon Street and 0.05 mile east of Webster
Street;
   (3)   Grand Vista Avenue between Deerwood Street and Fallbrook Street;
   (4)   Gardenia Avenue between Deerwood Street and Clarendon Street;
   (5)   Lakewood Drive between Deerwood Street and Park Boulevard;
   (6)   Nineteenth Street between Deerwood Street and Park Boulevard;
   (7)   Deerwood Street between Park Boulevard and Grand Vista Avenue;
   (8)   Clarendon Street between Gardenia Avenue and Norfolk Avenue;
   (9)   Longcroft Street between Grand Vista Avenue and 0.04 mile north of
Meadow Road;
   (10)   Haverhill Street between Grand Vista Avenue and Norfolk Avenue;
   (11)   Fallbrook Street between Park Boulevard and Sonora Street;
   (12)   Fernwood Street between 0.05 mile west of Fallbrook Street and
Norfolk Avenue;
   (13)   Sonora Street between Fallbrook Street and Fernwood Street;
   (14)   Danbury Court between Fallbrook Street and 0.05 mile east of
Fallbrook Street;
   (15)   Bonita Court between Fernwood Street and 0.04 mile west of Fernwood
Street;
   (16)   Westwood Circle between Lakewood Drive and 0.03 mile south of
Lakewood Drive;
   (17)   Femdale Circle between Lakewood Drive and 0.03 mile south of Lakewood
Drive;
   (18)   Mosswood Circle between Lakewood Drive and 0.03 mile south of
Lakewood Drive;
   (19)   Deerwood Circle between Deerwood Street and 0.05 mile east of
Deerwood Street;
   (20)   Carrigan Court between Deerwood Street and 0.03 mile east of Deerwood
Street;
   (21)   Park Circle between Park Boulevard and 0.03 mile west of Park
Boulevard;
   (22)   Acorn Court between Park Boulevard and 0.05 mile west of Park
Boulevard;
   (23)   Webster Street between Eleventh Street and Jefferson Boulevard (State
Highway 84);
   (24)   Eleventh Street between Webster Street and Jefferson Boulevard (State
Highway 84);
   (25)   Canna Way between Webster Street and Eleventh Street;
   (26)   Rose Court between Eleventh Street and 0.03 mile west of Eleventh
Street;
   (27)   Maryland Avenue between Stone Boulevard and Fifteenth Street and
between Eleventh Street and Webster Street;
   (28)   Delaware Avenue between Stone Boulevard and Alabama Avenue;
   (29)   Pennsylvania Avenue between Stone Boulevard and Euclid Street and
between Regent Street and Fifteenth Street;
   (30)   Alabama Avenue between Stone Boulevard and Circle Street and between
Circle Street and Eleventh Street;
   (31)   Virginia Avenue between Stone Boulevard and Eleventh Street and
between Eleventh Street and Webster Street;
   (32)   Vermont Avenue between Stone Boulevard and Jefferson Boulevard (State
Highway 84);
   (33)   Carolina Avenue between Stone Boulevard and Nineteenth Street;
   (34)   Tenth Street between Maryland Avenue and Virginia Avenue;
   (35)   Thirteenth Street between Delaware Avenue and Jefferson Boulevard
(State Highway 84);
   (36)   Circle Street between Alabama Avenue and Jefferson Boulevard (State
Highway 84);
   (37)   Alameda Street between Park Boulevard and Jefferson Boulevard (State
Highway 84);
   (38)   Sixteenth Street between Park Boulevard and Vermont Avenue;
   (39)   Seventeenth Street between Park Boulevard and Vermont Avenue and
between Vermont Avenue and Jefferson Boulevard (State Highway 84);
   (40)   Eighteenth Street between Park Boulevard and Delaware Avenue and
between Alabama Avenue and Virginia Avenue;
   (41)   Regent Street between Delaware Avenue and Alabama Avenue;
   (42)   Euclid Street between Delaware Avenue and Alabama Avenue;
   (43)   Maryland Court between Stone Boulevard and 0.04 mile south of Stone
Boulevard;
   (44)   Delaware Court between Stone Boulevard and 0.04 mile south of Stone
Boulevard;
   (45)   Pennsylvania Court between Stone Boulevard and 0.04 mile south of
Stone Boulevard;
   (46)   Stone Court between Stone Boulevard and 0.04 mile south of Stone
Boulevard;
   (47)   Alabama Court between Stone Boulevard and 0.04 mile south of Stone
Boulevard;
   (48)   Stone Boulevard between Park Boulevard and Jefferson Boulevard (State
Highway 84);
   (h)   (1)   Poplar Avenue between West Capitol Avenue and Manzanita Way;
   (2)   Westacre Road between Michigan Boulevard and Park Boulevard;
   (3)   Manzanita Way between Washington Avenue and Westacre Road;
   (4)   Michigan Boulevard between Poplar Avenue and Jefferson Boulevard;
   (5)   Rock Rose Road between Maple Street and Michigan Boulevard;
   (6)   Madrone Avenue between Poplar Avenue and Rock Rose Road;
   (7)   Laurel Lane between Poplar Avenue and Rock Rose Road;
   (8)   Lilac Lane between Michigan Boulevard and Manzanita Way;
    (9)   Chaparral Way between Michigan Boulevard and Manzanita Way;
   (10)   Oxford Street between Washington Avenue and Poplar Avenue;
   (11)   Washington Avenue between Oxford Street and Manzanita Way;
   (12)   McKinley Way between Oxford Street and 0.05 mile north of Oxford
Street;
   (13)   Castle Court between Manzanita Way and 0.05 mile west of Manzanita
Way;
   (14)   Portsmouth Avenue between 0.03 mile west of Manzanita Way and
Michigan Boulevard;
   (15)   Seabrook Court between Michigan Boulevard and 0.04 mile north of
Michigan Boulevard;
   (16)   Park Boulevard between Stone Boulevard and Jefferson Boulevard;
   (17)   Linden Road between Jefferson Boulevard and 0.08 mile south of Diane
Drive;
   (18)   Higgins Road between Jefferson Boulevard and Linden Road;
   (19)   Blacker Road between Jefferson Boulevard and Allan Avenue;
   (20)   Hart Avenue between Allan Avenue and Higgins Road;
   (21)   Allan Avenue between 0.06 mile south of Blacker Road and Higgins
Road;
   (22)   Constitution Avenue between Higgins Road and Linden Road;
   (23)   Summerfield Drive between Jacquelyn Lane and 0.02 mile south of
Higgins Road;
   (24)   Betty Way between Summerfield Drive and Linden Road;
   (25)   Canvasback Way between 0.02 mile south of Shoveler Court and Higgins
Road;
   (26)   Mareca Way between Higgins Road and 0.02 mile south of Goldeneye
Court;
   (27)   Teal Drive between Higgins Road and Mandarin Court;
   (28)   Independent Avenue between Linden Road and Duet Drive;
   (29)   Driftwood Court between Independence Avenue and 0.03 mile north of
Independence Avenue;
   (30)   Lagoon Lane between Independence Avenue and 0.07 mile east of
Paradise Way;
   (31)   Crystal Court between Lagoon Lane and 0.03 mile north of Lagoon Lane;
   (32)   Paradise Way between Lagoon Lane and Higgins Road;
   (33)   Duet Drive between Constitution Avenue and Paradise Way;
   (34)   Gary Court between Summerfield Drive and 0.01 mile north of
Summerfield Drive;
   (35)   Kents Court between Olive Court and 0.04 mile north of Olive Court;
   (36)   Olive Court between Summerfield Drive and 0.11 mile east of
Summerfield Drive;
   (37)   Gadwall Court between Summerfield Drive and 0.03 mile west of
Summerfield Drive;
   (38)   Mandarin Court between Teal Drive and 0.04 mile north of Teal Drive;
   (39)   Pintail Court between 0.02 mile west of Summerfield Drive and 0.03
mile east of Summerfield Drive;
   (40)   Roven Court between 0.02 mile west of Summerfield Drive and 0.02 mile
east of Summerfield Drive;
   (41)   Shoveler Court between Canvasback Way and 0.02 mile east of
Canvasback Way;
   (42)   Goldeneye Court between Mareca Way and 0.05 mile west of Mareca Way;
   (43)   Aylesbury Court between Mareca Way and 0.05 mile west of Mareca Way:
   (44)   Mergansers Court between 0.04 mile west of Mareca Way and 0.03 mile
east of Mareca Way;
   (45)   Baldpate Court between Teal Drive and 0.03 mile west of Teal Drive;
   (46)   Pekins Court between 0.02 mile west of Teal Drive and 0.01 mile east
of Teal Drive;
   (47)   Sawbills Court between Teal Drive and 0.03 mile west of Teal Drive;
   (48)   Greycalls Court between Teal Drive and 0.04 mile west of Teal Drive;
   (49)   Jacquelyn Lane between Summerfield Drive and Janet Drive;
   (50)   Janet Drive between Jacquelyn Lane and 0.09 mile east of Betty Way;
   (51)   Kimberly Court between Betty Way and 0.03 mile east of Betty Way;
   (52)   Sharon Court between Betty Way and 0.08 mile west of Betty Way;
   (53)   Claudia Court between 0.05 mile west of Betty Way and 0.05 mile east
of Betty Way;
   (54)   Denise Court between 0.05 mile west of Betty Way and 0.05 mile east
of Betty Way;
   (55)   Renee Court between 0.05 mile west of Betty Way and 0.05 mile east of
Betty Way;
   (56)   Angel Court between 0.05 mile west of Betty Way and 0.05 mile east of
Betty Way;
   (57)   Shirley Street between Leslie Lane and Betty Way;
   (58)   Leslie Lane between Diane Drive and Shirley Street;
   (59)   Teresa Road between Diane Drive and Shirley Street;
   (60)   Colleen Court between Teresa Road and 0.03 mile east of Teresa Road;
   (61)   Diane Drive between Leslie Lane and Linden Road;
   (62)   Second Street between 0.05 mile south of C Street and B Street;
   (63)   Third Street between C Street and B Street;
   (64)   Fourth Street between C Street and County Road 136;
   (65)   Fifth Street between C Street and 0.05 mile north of A Street;
   (66)   Sixth Street between C Street and 0.02 mile north of Cummings Way;
   (67)   Alvin Street between William Street and James Street;
   (68)   Eighth Street between Sacramento Avenue and Elizabeth Street;
   (69)   Eighth Street between William Street and Cummings Way;
   (70)   Newton Way between Cummings Way and Anna Street;
   (71)   Reuter Drive between Sacramento Avenue and Cummings Way;
   (72)   Beardsley Drive between Elkhorn Plaza and Cummings Way;
   (73)   Casselman Drive between Elkhorn Plaza and Cummings Way;
   (74)   Douglas Street between Sacramento Avenue and .2 mile north of Anna
Street;
   (75)   Elder Drive between Fremont Boulevard and Cummings Way;
   (76)   Fairway Drive between Fremont Boulevard and Cummings Way;
   (77)   Greenwood Avenue between Fremont Boulevard and Cummings Way;
   (78)   Hardy Drive between Fremont Boulevard and Anna Street;
   (79)   Inglewood Drive between Fremont Boulevard and Cummings Way;
   (80)   Julian Drive between Fremont Boulevard and Cummings Way;
   (81)   Kegle Drive between Sacramento Avenue and Carrie Street;
   (82)   Bowlen Drive between Charles Street and Anna Street;
   (83)   Holland Drive between Carrie Street and Anna Street;
   (84)   Arthur Drive between Anna Street and Fremont Boulevard;
   (85)   Fourness Drive between Anna Street and Hobson Avenue;
   (86)   Hill Court between Drew Street and .05 mile south of Drew Street;
   (87)   Simpson Terrace between Sacramento Avenue and .14 mile north of
Sacramento Avenue;
   (88)   Todhunter Avenue between Anna Street and Sacramento Avenue;
   (89)   Todhunter Avenue between Lisbon Street and Riverbank Road:
   (90)   Jasmine Avenue between Lisbon Street and Riverbank Road;
   (91)   Myrtle Avenue between Anna Street and Riverbank Road;
   (92)   Smilax Avenue between Riverbank Road and Lisbon Street;
   (93)   Stuart Court between Hobson Avenue and .05 mile north of Hobson
Avenue;
   (94)   Dobros Street between Bryte Avenue and .1 mile east of Bryte Avenue;
   (95)   Bryte Avenue between Riverbank Road and Sacramento Avenue;
   (96)   Yolo Street between Riverbank Road and Sacramento Avenue;
   (97)   Solano Street between Riverbank Road and Sacramento Avenue;
   (98)   Water Street between Riverbank Road and .04 mile south of Hobson
Avenue;
   (99)   Short Street between Riverbank Road and Lisbon Street;
   (100)   North Hobson Avenue between Riverbank Road and Water Street;
   (101)   Riverbank Road between County Road 22 and .45 mile east of Todhunter
Avenue;
   (102)   Carrie Street between Bryte Avenue and Kegle Drive;
   (103)   Lisbon Street between 0.07 mile west of North Hobson Avenue and
Todhunter Avenue;
   (104)   Rogers Street between Holland Drive and Kegle Drive;
   (105)   Marston Street between Holland Drive and Kegle Drive;
   (106)   Taber Street between Holland Drive and Kegle Drive;
   (107)   Pierce Street between Holland Drive and Kegle Drive;
   (108)   County Road 136 between Fourth Street and 0.65 mile north of Anna
Street;
   (109)   May Street between Bryte Avenue and Myrtle Avenue;
   (110)   Anna Street between Bryte Avenue and County Road 136;
   (111)   Sparkman Court between Anna Street and .02 mile north of Anna
Street:
   (112)   Ferguson Court between Anna Street and .06 mile north of Anna
Street;
   (113)   Sullivan Court between Fourness Drive and .06 mile west of Fourness
Drive;
   (114)   Milton Street between Arthur Drive and Bowlen Drive;
   (115)   Charles Street between Arthur Drive and Bowlen Drive;
   (116)   Cummings Way between Arthur Drive and Sixth Street;
   (117)   Joan Street between Kegle Drive and Hardy Drive;
   (118)   Sharian Street between Kegle Drive and Hardy Drive;
   (119)   Rich Street between Arthur Drive and Kegle Drive;
   (120)   Burrows Street between Todhunter Avenue and Fourness Drive;
   (121)   Drew Street between Todhunter Avenue and Fourness Drive;
   (122)   Morse Court between Foumess Drive and .07 miles west of Forness
Drive;
   (123)   Hobson Avenue between Water Street and Kegle Drive;
   (124)   Elliot Street between Arthur Drive and Kegle Drive;
   (125)   Fremont Boulevard between Arthur Drive and Douglas Street;
   (126)   Jones Circle between Newton Way and .04 mile west of Newton Way;
   (127)   Bell Circle between Newton Way and .04 mile east of Newton Way;
   (128)   Welland Way between Eighth Street and Sixth Street;
   (129)   James Street between Eighth Street and Sixth Street;
   (130)   Andrew Street between Douglas Street and Sixth Street;
   (131)   A Street between Sixth Street and .02 mile east of Fifth Street;
   (132)   B Street between Sixth Street and Second Street;
   (133)   William Street between Eighth Street and Sixth Street;
   (134)   Elizabeth Street between Eighth Street and Sixth Street;
   (135)   California Street between Eighth Street and Sixth Street;
   (136)   Elkhorn Plaza between Douglas Street and Reuter Drive; and
   (137)   C Street between Third Street and Second Street; and
   (i)   (1)   Alder Way;
   (2)   Cedar Court; and
   (3)   Tammarack Road. (§ 1, Ord. 512, § 1, Ord. 529, § 1, Ord. 586, § 1,
Ord. 594, and § 1, Ord. 615, as amended by § 1, Ord. 632, eff. July 1, 1970, §
1, Ord. 635, eff. October 1, 1970, § 1, Ord. 659, eff. December 1, 1971, § 1,
Ord. 660, eff. December 29, 1971, § 1, Ord. 776, eff. June 23, 1977, § 1, Ord.
981, eff. September 1, 1984, § 1, Ord. 1016, eff. August 15, 1985, and § 1,
Ord. 1048, eff. January 15, 1987)
Sec. 4-3.405.   Vehicles in excess of 14,000 pounds: Alternate routes.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 35713 of the Vehicle Code of the
State, the following routes are hereby designated as alternate routes for
commercial vehicles exceeding a gross weight of 14,000 pounds:
   (a)   For the streets set forth in subsection (a)of Section
4-3.404 of this article:
   (1)   Evergreen Avenue between Sycamore Street and Harbor Boulevard;
   (2)   Sycamore Street between West Capitol Avenue and Evergreen Avenue; and
   (3)   West Capitol Avenue;
   (b)   For the streets set forth in subsection (b)of Section
4-3.404 of this article:
   (1)   Evergreen Avenue west of Harbor Boulevard;
   (2)   Pine Street; and
   (3)   West Capitol Avenue;
   (c)   For the streets set forth in subsection (c)of Section
4-3.404 of this article:
   (1)   Arlington Road; and
   (2)   Jefferson Boulevard (State Highway 84);
   (d)   For the streets set forth in subsection (d)of Section
4-3.404 of this article:
   (1)   Jefferson Boulevard (State Highway 84);
   (e)   For the streets set forth in subsection (e)of Section
4-3.404 of this article:
   (1)   Glide Avenue;
   (2)   Harbor Boulevard;
   (3)   Rice Avenue; and
   (4)   West Capitol Avenue;
   (f)   For the streets set forth in subsection (f)of Section
4-3.404 of this article:
   (1)   Kentucky Avenue;
   (g)   For the streets set forth in subsection (g)of Section
4-3.404 of this article:
   (1)   Jefferson Boulevard (State Highway 84);
   (2)   Stone Boulevard between Industrial Boulevard and Cebrian Street;
   (3)   Harbor Boulevard;
   (4)   Industrial Boulevard; and
   (5)   Interstate Highway 80;
   (h)   For the streets set forth in subsection (h)of Section
4-3.404 of this article:
   (1)   West Capital Avenue; and
   (2)   Jefferson Boulevard; and
   (i)   For the streets set forth in subsection (i)of Section
4-3.404 of this article:
   (1)   Redwood Avenue. (§ 1, Ord. 529, § 1, Ord. 586, § 2, Ord. 594, and § 1,
Ord. 615, as amended by § 2, Ord. 632, eff. July 1, 1970, §§ 2 and 3, Ord. 659,
eff. December 1, 1971, §§ 2 and 3, Ord. 660, eff. December 29, 1971, § 2, Ord.
776, eff. June 23, 1977, § 2, Ord. 1016, eff. August 15, 1985, and § 2, Ord.
1048, eff. January 15, 1987)
Sec. 4-3.406.   Transportation permits: Authorized.
   The Director of Public Works, in his discretion and if good cause appears,
may issue written permits authorizing the permittee to do any of the following
acts:
   (a)   To operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles or special
mobile equipment of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in the Vehicle Code of the State on or across any County highway or
road;
   (b)   Under emergency conditions, to operate or move a type of vehicle
otherwise prohibited by the Vehicle Code of the State on or across any county
highway or road;
   (c)   To operate or move during a period not exceeding one year a vehicle or
combination of vehicles or special equipment with loads of a size and weight
exceeding the maximum specified in the Vehicle Code of the State on or across
any County highway or road, except those that may be set forth in the permit,
subject to the following conditions:
   (1)   The transportation of overwidth and overweight vehicles and equipment
shall be restricted to the normal five (5) day week during daylight hours
except in cases of emergency;
   (2)   Only one unit or group of similar units may be included in an annual
permit which shall describe the special equipment, maximum size, and maximum
weight, including the vehicle license number or other identifying number;
   (3)   The maximum width shall not exceed twelve (12’) feet;
   (4)   The maximum height shall not exceed fourteen (14’) feet six (6”)
inches;
   (5)   The maximum length shall not exceed eighty-five (85’) feet; and
   (6)   The maximum gross weight per groups of axles shall not exceed that
determined by the formula 1.3 x 700 (L + 40) where “L” equals the distance in
feet between the first and last axle of the group. The maximum weight permitted
for any single axle shall not exceed 24,000 pounds; and
   (d)   To operate or move during a period not exceeding one year a vehicle or
combination of vehicles or special equipment with a gross weight exceeding the
maximum set forth in subsection (6) of subsection (c)of this section over a
specific route to be determined by the Director of Public Works. In no case
shall the dimensions exceed those specified in subsection (c)of this section.(§
1, Ord. 608, as amended by § 1, Ord. 639, eff. November 25, 1970, and § 1, Ord.
783, eff. August 4, 1977)
Sec. 4-3.407.   Transportation permits: Continuous Operations.
   Upon application to the Director of Public Works for permission to use and
operate private or contract vehicles on County roads for the purpose of
continuous operations, which include hauling loads which exceed the size and
weight limitations otherwise prohibited by the Vehicle Code of the State, and
upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Works, the Board, in its
discretion and if good cause appears, may authorize the Director of Public
Works to issue a written permit for such continuous operations for a period not
exceeding one year, specifying the protective restrictions set forth in this
article. (§ 2, Ord. 608, as amended by § 2, Ord. 639, eff. November 25, 1970)
Sec. 4-3.408.   Transportation permits: Limitations.
   If a permit is issued, the Board or the Director of Public Works is hereby
authorized to limit the number of trips, or to establish seasonal or other time
limitations within which the vehicles described may be operated on the highways
indicated, or otherwise to limit or prescribe the conditions of operation of
the vehicles when necessary to prevent interference with the orderly flow of
traffic and to assure against undue damage to road foundations, surfaces, or
structures, and may require an undertaking or other security as may be deemed
necessary to protect the highways and bridges from injury or to provide
indemnity for any injuries resulting from the operation of such vehicles. (§ 3,
Ord. 608)
Sec. 4-3.409.   Transportation permits: Applications: Fees.
   The applications for such permits shall be in writing and shall:
   (a)   Specifically describe the vehicles and loads to be operated or moved;
   (b)   Set forth the particular highways and roads over which the permit to
operate is requested;
   (c)   Specify the dates of the moves and whether such permit is requested
for a single trip, round trip, on an annual or seasonal basis, or for a
continuous operation;
   (d)   Specify any other information the Director of Public Works may deem
necessary in accordance with the provisions of Section
4-3.408 of this article; and
   (e)   Unless the applicant is a public agency or public utility other than a
common carrier, be accompanied by an application fee set by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors. (§ 4, Ord. 608, as amended by § 3, Ord. 639, § 1, Ord.
644, eff. November 25, 1970, § 2, Ord. 783, eff. August 4, 1977, and § 1, Ord.
1082, eff. September 22, 1988)
Sec. 4-3.410.   Transportation permits: Amendments: Revocation: Notices.
   Any permit issued pursuant to the transportation permit provisions of this
article for good cause may be amended or revoked by the Director of Public
Works by giving the permittee twenty-four (24) hours’ written notice setting
forth the grounds therefor. Notice by mail shall be deemed adequate notice
under the provisions of this section. (§ 5, Ord. 608)
Sec. 4-3.411.   Transportation permits: Appeals: Hearings: Notices.
   In the event an applicant is not satisfied with the action of the Director
of Public Works relating to the transportation permit provisions of this
article, the applicant, within fifteen (15) days, may appeal in writing to the
Board, and the Board shall set a date for a hearing and cause five (5) days’
written notice thereof by mail to be given the applicant. (§ 6, Ord. 608)
Sec. 4-3.412.   Transportation permits: Exceptions.
   The transportation permit provisions of this article shall have no
application to highways, roads, or streets other than those highways, roads,
and streets maintained by the Department of Public Works of the County. (§ 7,
Ord. 608)
Sec. 4-3.413.   Violations: Penalties.
   Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable as follows:
   (a)   For a first conviction, by a fine not exceeding Fifty and no/100ths
($50.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not
exceeding five (5) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment;
   (b)   For a second conviction within a period of twelve (12) months, by a
fine not exceeding One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars, or by
imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not exceeding ten (10) days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment; and
   (c)   For a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of twelve
(12) months, by a fine not exceeding Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00)
Dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not exceeding six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (§ 2, Ord. 981, eff. September
1, 1984)
Sec. 4-3.414.   Vehicles in excess of 30,000 pounds prohibited on certain
streets.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 35706 of the Vehicle Code of the
State, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for any owner
to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, any vehicle exceeding a
gross weight of 30,000 pounds on Bridge No. 22C-012 which connects County Road
16 over the Knights Landing Ridge Cut. (§ 2, Ord. 1211, eff. October 23, 1997)
Article 5.
Miscellaneous Provisions
Sec. 4-3.501.   Temporary closure of roads to vehicles.
   Notwithstanding any County or State law which may now be in effect, the
Director of Public Works or the Board shall have the authority to temporarily
close any County road to any and all vehicles when the Director of Public Works
or Board shall deem it necessary for the protection of life, limb, or property
or to prevent the deterioration or destruction of such County road. Such road
may be reopened at any time by a majority vote of the Board. (§ 3, Ord. 357)
Sec. 4-3.502.   Flange-wheeled vehicles and machinery.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to
cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any County highway any
tractor, harvester, or other implement, vehicle, or machine of any kind having
any tire, wheel, or track to any part of which there is attached a sharp or
uneven surface, or to any part of which there are attached cleats, grousers,
lugs, protuberances, or any device which will cause or have a tendency to cause
damage to the surface of such highway. (§ 4, Ord. 357)
Sec. 4-3.503.   Bicycle paths: Horses.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse on, or to cause or
permit a horse to enter upon, a bicycle path controlled or maintained by the
County. (§ 1, Ord. 726, eff. June 14, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.504.   Bridges: Pedestrians.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to jump or dive from any County
bridge which has been posted pursuant to Section 21109 of the Vehicle Code of
the State.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fish from any bridge or
appurtenance thereto which has been posted pursuant to Section 21109 of the
Vehicle Code of the State.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create an obstruction at any
time upon, or refuse to vacate when so ordered by lawful authority, any bridge
or appurtenance thereto which has been posted pursuant to Section 21109 of the
Vehicle Code of the State.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park an automobile, except in a
designated parking space, upon any bridge or approach thereto which has been
posted pursuant to Section 21109 of the Vehicle Code of the State.
   (e)   Any violation of this section shall constitute an infraction and shall
be punishable by a fine not exceeding Fifty and no/100ths ($50.00) Dollars or
such other fine as specified in Section 42001 of the Vehicle Code of the State.
(§ 1, Ord. 762, eff. August 12, 1976, as amended
by § 1, Ord. 946, eff. March 17, 1983)
Sec. 4-3.505.   Skateboarding, rollerskating and rollerblading prohibited at
County buildings.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, roller skates or
roller blades on any property on which a building owned, occupied or maintained
by the County is located, excepting those park and recreation facilities
designated by the Director of General Services appropriate for skating,
skateboarding, and rollerblading. (§ 1, Ord. 1172, eff. January 5, 1995)
Sec. 4-3.506.   Length Restrictions.
   (a)   Designated.  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 35401(d)   of the
Vehicle Code of the State, vehicles of a total length in excess of 60 feet are
hereby prohibited from traveling on certain highways as follows:
   (1)   Barnard Court
   (b)   Such prohibitions shall be effective when appropriate signs giving
notice thereof are erected upon such streets. (§ 2, Ord. 1332, eff. May 26,
2005)
Article 6.
Turning Movements
Sec. 4-3.601.   Right turns prohibited.
   No person shall drive or move a vehicle so as to make a turning movement to
the right onto the following streets, roads, or highways at any of the
following intersections:
   (a)   State Highway 16 at its intersection with Harbor Boulevard. (§ 1, Ord.
648, eff. March 18, 1971)
Article 7.
Terminal Routes
Sec. 4-3.701.   Authority.
   Pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b)of Section 35401.5 of the
Vehicle Code of the State, the County has authority to determine which routes
may be determined to be terminal routes within the County. (§ 1, Ord. 985, eff.
September 20, 1984)
Sec. 4-3.702.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Freeway truck” shall mean a truck defined under exemption from
limitations by Section 35401.5 of the Vehicle Code of the State to operate on
certain designated highways and freeways.
   (b)   “Terminal” shall be as defined in subsection (b)of Section 35401.5 of
the Vehicle Code of the State.
   (c)   “Terminal route” shall mean a route which has been jointly determined
by the Department of Transportation of the State and the County to meet the
requirements of Section 35401.5 of the Vehicle Code of the State and has been
included, either originally or by amendment, into Section
4-3.705 of this article and has been properly signed by the responsible agency
which will permit the operation of freeway trucks. (§ 1, Ord. 985, eff.
September 20, 1984)
Sec. 4-3.703.   Applications.
   All persons desiring a terminal route designation shall make such request in
writing to the County Public Works Department.
   (a)   Within ninety (90) days, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon, the
Director of Public Works shall make a report to the Board recommending the
rejection or designation of such route based upon the expected safe operation
of such freeway vehicles.
   (b)   Concurrently, the Director of Community Development shall make a
report to the Board as to the compatibility of such a designated route with
existing land use intensities consistent with the County General Plan and
Codes. (§ 1, Ord. 985, eff. September 20, 1984)
Sec. 4-3.704.   Approval.
   The Board, by enacting this article and any amendments to Section
4-3.705 of this article, may adopt such terminal routes as have been applied
for and recommended by the Director of Public Works and Director of Community
Development. No such route so designated shall become valid until also approved
by the State Department of Transportation and adequate signing erected by the
appropriate agencies. (§ 1, Ord. 985, eff, September 20, 1984)
Sec. 4-3.705.   Routes designated.
   Pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b)of Section 35401.5 of the
Vehicle Code of the State, the following routes are designated as terminal
routes:
   (a)   Harbor Boulevard from I-80 to Industrial Boulevard;
   (b)   (1)   County Road 17 from I-5 to County Road 99 W;
   (2)   County Road 99 W from County Road 17 to a point 1,500 feet south of
County Road 17;
   (c)   County Road 21 from County Road 102 west to the eastern Woodland city
limits; and
   (d)   County Road 102 between County Road 21 and East Main Street in
Woodland. (§ 1, Ord. 985, eff. September 20, 1984, as amended by § 1, Ord.
1017, eff. August 15, 1985, and § 1, Ord. 1059, eff. October 8, 1987)
Sec. 4-3.706.   Violations: Prosecution.
   Any violation of this article shall be prosecuted in accordance with the
provisions of Division 17 of the Vehicle Code of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 985,
eff. September 20, 1984)
Chapter 4
COUNTY PARKING FACILITIES
*   Chapter 4, formerly entitled “County Parking Facility”, amended by Section
1 of Ordinance No. 1076, effective June 2, 1988.
Sections:
   
4-4.01   Purpose.
   
4-4.02   Application.
   
4-4.03   Authority.
   
4-4.04   Definitions.
   
4-4.05   General restrictions.
   
4-4.06   Overnight parking prohibited.
   
4-4.07   Electric vehicle charging station parking stalls.
   
4-4.08   Reserved parking spaces.
   
4-4.09   Parking permits.
   
4-4.10   Special events.
   
4-4.11   Enforcement authority.
   
4-4.12   Violations subject to civil penalties.
Sec. 4-4.01.   Purpose.
   This chapter regulates the use of all off-street parking facilities owned or
operated by the County of Yolo, including all designated County parking lots.
The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the transaction of County business
by assuring adequate parking space at such facilities, thereby allowing
sufficient parking space for County employees and visitors. This chapter does
not apply to County parking lots that are part of a County park or County
recreation area. (§ 2, Ord. 1570, eff. December 5, 2024)
Sec. 4-4.02.   Application.
   This chapter shall apply to all County parking facilities that have signs
posted at each entrance with the following language: “PARKING BY PERMIT ONLY –
VIOLATORS WILL BE CITED” or “COUNTY PARKING CODE ENFORCED.” (§ 2, Ord. 1570,
eff. December 5, 2024)
Sec. 4-4.03.   Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of Section 21113 and 22519
of the California Vehicle Code. (§ 2, Ord. 1570, eff. December 5, 2024)
Sec. 4-4.04.   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   “Charging of electric vehicle.” An electric vehicle is “charging” when
it is electrically connected to the charging station equipment and is battery
has not reached full capacity.
   (b)   “County parking facility.” A facility owned, leased or operated by the
County in or upon which the County allows the parking of motor vehicles,
whether located within the unincorporated area of the County or within the
boundaries of an incorporated city.
   (c)   “County vehicle.” A vehicle owned or leased by the County.
   (d)   “Driveway.” An entrance or exit used by vehicles to access County
parking facilities or a vehicle corridor within County parking facilities.
   (e)   “Electric vehicle.” Shall be a “motor vehicle” as defined in
California Vehicle Code Section 415, which either (i) displays the State of
California Air Board ZEV (zero emission vehicle) sticker; or (ii) has the
capability to charge a battery from an off-vehicle electric energy source that
cannot be connected or coupled to the vehicle in any manner while the vehicle
is being driven.”
   (f)   “Handbill.” Any printed or written matter, circular, flier, leaflet,
pamphlet, paper booklet or any other printed matter or literature which is not
delivered by the United States mail.
   (g)   “Parking space.” The area between two parallel lines painted on the
ground, the area between a set of double parallel lines painted on the ground
or the area between lines forming a “T” or “L” painted on the ground. Parking
space shall not include a hatched area painted on the ground, a crosshatched
area painted on the ground, or an area fully enclosed by solid lines painted on
the ground. (§ 2, Ord. 1570, eff. December 5, 2024)
Sec. 4-4.05.   General restrictions.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle within any off-
street County parking facility in violation of any posted parking regulations,
marked loading/unloading zones, and time limits.
   (b)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle within any off-
street County parking facility outside designated parking stall markings, in
whole or in part. No person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle within
any off-street County parking facility in a manner that occupies more than one
designated parking stall.
   (c)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle within any
County-owned parking lot in a stall designated for disabled persons without
displaying a license plate or placard issued to disabled persons by the
California Department of Motor Vehicles or a foreign jurisdiction.
   (d)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle within any
County-owned parking lot for the purpose of overhaul, maintenance or repair of
such vehicle except for emergency repairs requiring less than two hours to
complete.
   (e)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle within any off-
street County parking facility in any area designated a "no parking zone." A
"no parking zone" is the paved area in front of any red-painted curbing or any
other area designated by signage, including signs stating "No Parking" or "No
Parking Anytime."
   (f)   No person shall use any area of an off-street County parking facility
for storage of any kind, including the parking of detached trailers, fifth
wheels, and other equipment, or for storage of any personal property, or for
any use other than parking a motor vehicle and accessing adjacent public
facilities, unless authorized by the Director of General Services or the
Director's designee.
   (g)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle within any County
parking facility for the purpose of displaying the vehicle for sale.
   (h)   County employees must mark their vehicles with decals issued by the
Department of General Services which shall be prominently displayed upon the
parked vehicle by the operator thereof. (§ 2, Ord. 1570, eff. December 5, 2024)
Sec. 4-4.06.   Overnight parking prohibited.
   (a)   Except as specifically authorized by the Director of the Department of
General Services, or as otherwise validly authorized pursuant to County
ordinance or resolution, it is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park
any vehicle between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. in any off-street
parking area owned or operated by the County.
   (b)   Overnight parking for the purposes of electric vehicle charging at
County charging stations located in County parking lots is allowed subject to
compliance with all other requirements of this chapter and any posted rules and
regulations at each specific lot. (§ 2, Ord. 1570, eff. December 5, 2024)
Sec. 4-4.07.   Electric vehicle charging station parking stalls.
   Unless specifically authorized by the Director of the Department of General
Services, it shall be unlawful to park in a designated electric vehicle
charging station parking stall unless the vehicle is an electric vehicle that
is actively charging its battery.
   An electric vehicle is "charging" when it is electrically connected to the
charging station equipment and its battery has not reached full capacity. (§ 2,
Ord. 1570, eff. December 5, 2024)
Sec. 4-4.08.   Reserved parking spaces.
   (a)   The Director of General Services and such persons they may designate
shall direct and control the designation and signage of reserved parking
spaces.
   (b)   Parking spaces may be reserved for the exclusive use of any person
with disabilities displaying a special license plate or placard issued in
accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 22511.5.
   (c)   The Director of General Services may also reserve, by the postage of
appropriate signage, parking spaces for the exclusive use of County officials,
departments, or employees. (§ 2, Ord. 1570, eff. December 5, 2024)
Sec. 4-4.09.   Parking permits.
   Parking in non-public parking spaces (for example, spaces at securely fenced
facilities accessible only by County personnel) in County parking facilities
may be regulated by permits issued by the Director of General Services and such
persons they may designate. (§ 2, Ord. 1570, eff. December 5, 2024)
Sec. 4-4.10.   Special events.
   To promote the purposes of this chapter, for special events or meetings, the
Director of General Services and their designee(s) may establish any additional
regulations, issue any additional permits, and/or make temporary amendments to
time restrictions and permit requirements. (§ 2, Ord. 1570, eff. December 5,
2024)
Sec. 4-4.11. Enforcement authority.
   (a)   The following County officers or employees shall have the authority to
enforce the provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   Director of General Services or designee;
      (2)   Sheriff or designee;
      (3)   Local law enforcement having primary jurisdiction where a County
parking facility is located;
   (b)   The persons listed in subsection (a), above are hereby authorized to
remove, or cause to be removed, or issue citations to, any vehicle found to be
in violation of parking laws or regulations set forth in this chapter. Any
removal (towing) of vehicles shall proceed in a manner that ensures compliance
with California Vehicle Code Section 22651, including that towing may only
occur in locations where signs are posted giving notice that violations may
result in vehicle removal (unless the vehicle is otherwise in violation of
Section 22651, such as if it is blocking the movement of legally parked
vehicles or is preventing access to a fire hydrant). The persons listed above
shall also have the authority to take all such steps as are required by law to
notify the California Department of Motor Vehicles of those persons who fail to
pay the civil penalties for violations of County parking ordinances, unless
such functions have been delegated by resolution of the Board of Supervisors to
a public or private processing center with which the board has executed a
contract pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 40200.5.
   (c)   With the exception of encampments and related personal property within
the express scope of
Chapter 20 of Title 6 of the Yolo County Code (Promotion of Safe and Open
Public Spaces), which shall be regulated exclusively by the provisions thereof,
the Director of General Services and such persons as they may designate shall
have the authority to remove property other than vehicles located on county-
owned parking lots which is in violation of Sections
4-4.05,
4-4.06, and
4-4.07 after providing 48-hour notice of intention to remove such property.
Notwithstanding the above, the Director of General Services and such persons as
they may designate shall have the authority to immediately remove property that
constitutes an immediate threat to public health or safety, or is evidence of a
crime, or contraband. Any property removed will be stored at a designated
location, and if unclaimed, subject to disposition in accordance with
California Civil Code Section 2080.6.
   (d)   The Director of General Services and such persons as they may
designate shall have the authority to impound any shopping carts left in
county-owned parking lots to the extent and manner permitted by Section 22435.7
of the California Business and Professions Code.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, obstruct, or obscure a
mark or designation on or around a vehicle parked in a county parking lot with
the intent to interfere with an officer or employee ensuring that vehicle has
not been parked in violation of posted time restrictions. (§ 2, Ord. 1570, eff.
December 5, 2024)
Sec. 4-4.12.   Violations subject to civil penalties.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall not be a criminal
violation but shall be subject to a civil penalty enforceable pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 40200 et seq. Citations issued for violations
shall comply with the requirements thereof, including but not limited to
California Vehicle Code Section 40202. Civil penalty amounts and other costs
(e.g., late fees, collection costs) shall be as set forth in the Master Fee
Schedule. Notwithstanding the foregoing, unless otherwise set forth in the
Master Fee Schedule, all penalties and other amounts (e.g., late fees,
collection costs) for citations issued within the jurisdictional boundaries of
a city shall be as duly adopted by its governing body. (§ 2, Ord. 1570, eff.
December 5, 2024)
Chapter 5
COUNTY AIRPORTS
Sections:
Article 1. General
   
4-5.101   Policy and purpose.
   
4-5.102   Definitions.
Article 2. Airport Business Activities
   
4-5.201   Contracts required.
   
4-5.202   Fees for the use of non-leased areas or facilities.
Article 3. Aircraft Operation
   
4-5.301   Compliance with Federal Aviation Agency rules.
   
4-5.302   Aircraft parking.
   
4-5.303   Traffic patterns.
   
4-5.304   Aircraft engine operation.
   
4-5.305   Use of runways.
   
4-5.306   Braking systems.
   
4-5.307   Formation flying.
   
4-5.308   Maximum weight.
   
4-5.309   Simulated forced landings.
   
4-5.310   Operation of malfunctioning aircraft.
   
4-5.311   Use of runways and taxiways.
   
4-5.312   Operation and taxiing.
Article 4. Motor Vehicle Operation
   
4-5.401   Speed limits.
   
4-5.402   Crossing runways and taxiways.
   
4-5.403   Rights-of-way.
   
4-5.404   Areas of operation.
Article 5. Firearms
   
4-5.501   Carrying firearms.
   
4-5.502   Hunting.
Article 6. Fire Safety
   
4-5.601   Operation and storage of vehicles in hangars.
   
4-5.602   Fueling and fuel storage.
   
4-5.603   Smoking within hangars.
   
4-5.604   Welding and painting operations.
   
4-5.605   Fire extinguishers required.
   
4-5.606   Fire extinguisher access.
   
4-5.607   Fire extinguisher training.
   
4-5.608   Storage of flammables.
   
4-5.609   Floors.
   
4-5.610   Cleaning solvents.
   
4-5.611   Electrical wiring.
   
4-5.612   Reporting fires.
   
4-5.613   Compliance with rules.
Article 7. Accident Reporting and Assistance
   
4-5.701   Accidents involving aircraft.
Article 8. Littering
   
4-5.801   Litter prohibited.
   
4-5.802   Work areas.
Article 9. Financial Responsibility
   
4-5.901   Financial responsibility required: Form.
   
4-5.902   Evidence of financial responsibility, inspections, and indemnity.
Article 10. Violations: Penalties: Rules: Rulemaking
   
4-5.1001   Violations of chapter provisions or rules: Penalties.
   
4-5.1002   Rulemaking by Board.
   
4-5.1003   Violations: Administrative sanctions: Applications.
   
4-5.1004   Violations: Administrative sanctions authorized.
   
4-5.1005   Violations: Hearings: Procedure.
   
4-5.1006   Cease and desist orders: Procedure: Violations Constituting
emergencies.
Article 1.
General
Sec. 4-5.101.   Policy and purpose.
   The Board hereby expresses its policy and purpose in the enactment of this
chapter to be as follows:
   (a)   To provide rules and regulations governing the safe operation of the
airport facilities owned by the County, including, but not limited to, the
rules expressed in this chapter governing the operation of aircraft to the
extent permissible by Federal and State laws or rules on the subject;
   (b)   To provide minimum standards for the conduct of business operations on
airport property; and
   (c)   To authorize and provide standards for the operation by resolution of
the Board of detailed rules governing specific aspects of the matters governed
by this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.102.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Airport” shall mean each and every airport and all airport property
owned, operated, or controlled by the County. “Airport” shall include all
improvements, facilities, and appurtenances, including all roads and access
ways within the boundaries of the airport. “Airport” shall include the Yolo
County Airport as particularly described in the certain deeds recorded in the
office of the County Recorder at Book 285, Page 35, and Book 567, Page 386,
Official Records.
   (b)   “Aircraft” shall mean any machine or contrivance used for flying,
whether heavier or lighter than air, whether self-propelled or not, excluding
parachutes.
   (c)   “Aircraft ground movement area” shall mean the runways, taxiways, and
parking aprons of the airport.
   (d)   “Airport Director” shall mean the person designated by the Board as
having primary jurisdiction for administering the provisions of this chapter,
applicable rules and regulations, and the leases and/or contracts concerning
airports in the County.
   (e)   “Based aircraft” shall mean any aircraft assigned a reserved parking
space, tie-down space, or hangar space, whether or not such assignment is made
under a written lease with the County.
   (f)   “Board” shall mean the Board of Supervisors of the County of Yolo,
State of California.
   (g)   “Competent aircraft operator” shall mean a person holding a valid
pilot’s license of any class from the Federal Aviation Agency or a person who
has the requisite skill and knowledge to perform ground operations limited to
the maintenance and surface movement of aircraft.
   (h)   “County” shall mean the County of Yolo, State of California.
   (i)   “FAA” shall mean the Federal Aviation Agency of the United States of
America, as defined in the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, or any subsequent and
successor body to that agency created for the control and operation of aviation
and its related functions.
   (j)   “Fixed base operator” shall mean any person, firm, or corporation
providing aircraft servicing, maintenance, storage, aircraft sales, lease, or
rentals, flight instruction, or other activities of a similar nature at the
airport pursuant to a lease or contract or sublease or sub-contract with the
County; provided, however, “fixed base operator”, shall exclude parachuting
and/or skydiving activities or providers.
   (k)   “Fire Department” shall mean the West Plainfield Fire District or any
successor in function.
   (l)   “Maintain aircraft” shall mean any form of service, maintenance, or
repair of aircraft.
   (m)   “Operate aircraft” shall mean the self-propelled, pushed, or towed
movement of aircraft on the ground or the movement of aircraft in flight.
   (n)   “Owner” shall mean the registered and/or legal owner of an aircraft
according to the files and records of the FAA.
   (o)   “Person” shall mean an individual, corporate entity, or public agency.
   (p)   “Regularly situated” shall mean an aircraft based at the airport for a
period in excess of ten (10) days. For the purposes of this subsection,
aircraft are based at the airport all of any day in which the aircraft is
situated at the airport for a period exceeding eight (8) hours. (§ 1, Ord. 773,
eff. April 14, 1977)
Article 2.
Airport Business Activities
Sec. 4-5.201.   Contracts required.
   No person, within the boundaries of any County airport, shall operate any
wholesale or retail business outlet, location, store, or similar place of
business for the provision of any goods or services without a written lease or
contract with the County or the County’s written consent to a sublease,
assignment, or other entitlement permitting the operation. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff.
April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.202.   Fees for the use of non-leased areas or facilities.
   The Board by rule adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section
4-5.1002 of Article 10 of this chapter, may set reasonable fees to be charged
to the public for the use of any or all airport areas or facilities, unless the
right to set fees is otherwise granted to a lessee or contractor pursuant to
the provisions of Section
4-5.201 of this article.
   Such rule may provide for the collection of such fees by the fixed base
operators and the reimbursement of the fixed base operators for the service in
a set amount of percentage of fees collected. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14,
1977)
Article 3.
Aircraft Operation
Sec. 4-5.301.   Compliance with Federal Aviation Agency rules.
   No person shall operate or maintain any aircraft at any airport except in
strict conformity with all laws, rules, and regulations of the County and the
regulations of the FAA and the Division of Aeronautics of the State. (§ 1, Ord.
773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.302.   Aircraft parking.
   Aircraft shall be parked in designated areas only and shall have parking
brakes set and wheels firmly blocked to prevent movement and/or shall be firmly
secured to the ground by ropes or other appropriate means. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff.
April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.303.   Traffic patterns.
   (a)   Minimum height.  The Yolo County Airport traffic pattern is
established at 1,100 feet AMSL (above measured sea level). Low flying shall be
prohibited except when climbing from a takeoff or descending for a landing
within the designated airport approach or departure zone.
   (b)   Traffic pattern map. The official airport traffic pattern for Yolo
County Airport shall be as set forth in this section. All aircraft shall
observe the approved traffic pattern for the Yolo County Airport, emergency
landings excepted; provided, however, the Board, by rule, may approve alternate
traffic patterns for commercial crop dusting aircraft. (Ord. 773, eff. April
14, 1977, as amended by 8 1, Ord. 812, eff. July 27, 1978)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/de66ea921125bb6e72629087eec5bc9b667694bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-19.jpg]
   PATTERN ALTITUDE 900 ft. MSL
   YOLO COUNTY AIRPORT
Sec. 4-5.304.   Aircraft engine operation.
   (a)   Minimum distance from buildings. Aircraft shall be stopped and all
engines shut off at a minimum distance of twenty-five (25’) feet before
entering any hangar or building.
   (b)   Operations within buildings. No aircraft engine shall be started or
run up in any hangar, or when the aircraft is tailed toward hangar doors, or
when positioned in such a manner as to constitute a danger to persons or
property. Taxiing in and out of hangars shall be specifically prohibited.
   (c)   Engine tests. Engine run-ups and tests shall be performed in areas
designated by the fixed base operator and approved by the Board by rule. (§ 1,
Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.305.   Use of runways.
   (a)   All aircraft shall land and take off only on designated runways.
   (b)   Touch-and-go operations shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977, as amended by § 2, Ord.
812, eff. July 27, 1978)
Sec. 4-5.306.   Braking systems.
   No person shall land or take off from any airport unless the aircraft is
equipped with properly functioning brakes or other FAA authorized means to
assure adequate ground control. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.307.   Formation flying.
   Formation flying within the designated traffic pattern and/or simultaneous
landings and/or take-offs shall be prohibited. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14,
1977)
Sec. 4-5.308.   Maximum weight.
   Prior written authorization of the Board shall be required for landings and/
or take-offs of any aircraft of more than 30,000 pounds maximum certified take-
off weight, except in an emergency. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.309.   Simulated forced landings.
   Aircraft shall have all engines which are operational in operation when
landing and taking off. Simulated forced landings by students shall be
forbidden unless accompanied by a certified instructor. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff.
April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.310.   Operation of malfunctioning aircraft.
   No person shall operate a non-licensed or unworthy aircraft or an aircraft
with a known malfunction at the Yolo County Airport without the prior approval
of an FAA permit, except in an emergency. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.311.   Use of runways and taxiways.
   (a)   Remain idle. No aircraft shall remain idle on the airport runways.
   (b)   Blocking access. No aircraft shall block the entrance to the airport,
taxiways, or runways, other than for the normal time required to perform
routine check-outs prior to takeoff.
   (c)   Crossing access ways. Aircraft shall not cross or enter upon a runway
until the pilot has stopped and assured by visual inspection that there is no
danger of collision with any person or object. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14,
1977)
Sec. 4-5.312.   Operation and taxiing.
   (a)   Operators in aircraft. No aircraft engine shall be started or operated
unless a competent aircraft operator is in the aircraft attending to the
controls or the aircraft is being serviced or repaired in an area designated
for the purpose and the aircraft is properly secured to prevent accidental
movement.
   (b)   Taxiing speed. Aircraft shall be taxied at all times at a reasonable
and safe speed under all circumstances with a competent aircraft operator at
the controls and shall taxi at the operator’s discretion, unless specifically
directed otherwise. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Article 4.
Motor Vehicle Operation
Sec. 4-5.401.   Speed limits.
   Motor vehicle speeds shall be limited to twenty-five (25) miles per hour
within the confines of the airport and fifteen (15) miles per hour within 150
feet of any aircraft or building; provided, however, at no time shall a motor
vehicle be driven at a speed faster than is safe and reasonable under all the
circumstances. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.402.   Crossing runways and taxiways.
   No motor vehicle shall be driven across or upon any active runway, except
emergency vehicles, as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State, performing
emergency operations. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.403.   Rights-of-way.
   Aircraft shall have the right-of-way at all times over all motor vehicles
operating within the airport. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.404.   Areas of operation.
   No person shall operate any vehicle or travel on the airport in any manner
except on the roads, walks, paths, and areas designated for the particular
means of travel. No obstruction shall be permitted on any road, walk, or path
without the prior permission of the County. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14,
1977)
Article 5.
Firearms
Sec. 4-5.501.   Carrying firearms.
   Unless authorized by subsection (b)of Section 12031 of the Penal Code of the
State or by this section, no person shall carry firearms or explosives of any
type on any County airport; provided, however, the provisions of this section
shall not prohibit the carrying of firearms within the airport, which firearms
are unloaded and in a proper case or holster. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14,
1977)
Sec. 4-5.502.   Hunting.
   No person shall hunt, conduct target practice, or discharge firearms or
explosives on the airport without the prior written consent of the County. (§
1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Article 6.
Fire Safety
Sec. 4-5.601.   Operation and storage of vehicles in hangars.
   (a)   Non-Aviation storage in a hangar must not interfere with movement of
aircraft in or out of the hangar, or impede access to other aeronautical
contents of the hangar.
   (b)   Industrial vehicles. Power-operated industrial trucks and tractors
used or stored within hangars shall be of a type approved by the Fire
Department and shall meet the standards designated in the Occupational Safety
and Health Act of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977, as amended by
§ 2, Ord. 1491, eff. August 17, 2017)
Sec. 4-5.602.   Fueling and fuel storage.
   (a)   No aircraft or vehicle shall be fueled or defueled within any hangar
or any other building not specifically designed for the purpose.
   (b)   Fuel shall not be stored within any hangar or other building not
designed for the purpose, except fuel remaining in the fuel tanks of aircraft
stored within the hangar.
   (c)   All equipment and storage facilities for fuel shall meet the
applicable regulations of the FAA, the Fire Department, and other applicable
laws. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.603.   Smoking within hangars.
   (a)   Signs: Posting. All fixed base operators shall post “No Smoking” signs
as designated by the Fire Department.
   (b)   Smoking restricted. No person shall smoke any cigarette, cigar, or
pipe, or strike any match, or kindle any flame whatsoever within fifty (50’)
feet of any aircraft while being fueled, or within fifty (50’) feet from any
fuel island or any flammable liquid container, or within any hangar or aircraft
workshop located upon the airport, except as approved by the Fire Department.
Smoking may be permitted within areas designated by the Fire Department. (§ 1,
Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.604.   Welding and painting operations.
   Cutting, welding, soldering, doping, and spray painting operations shall be
conducted only within areas and buildings approved by the Fire Department. (§
1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.605.   Fire extinguishers required.
   Suitable portable fire extinguishers shall be provided and installed by the
fixed base operators as directed by the Fire Department as to number, type, and
location and shall not be moved from designated locations for any reason other
than as a precaution against an immediate hazard or to be recharged. (§ 1, Ord.
773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.606.   Fire extinguisher access.
   Access to all fire-extinguishing equipment shall be kept free and
unobstructed at all times. Portable fire extinguishers shall be fully charged
at all times and shall be inspected periodically by the Fire Department. Fire
prevention inspections shall be made by the Fire Department. (§ 1, Ord. 773,
eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.607.   Fire extinguisher training.
   Each fixed base operator shall institute training programs for employees in
the use of portable fire-extinguishing equipment and methods of evacuating or
relocating occupants of the premises in the event of a fire or other emergency.
(§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.608.   Storage of flammables.
   (a)   Storage bins required. All tenants of buildings shall provide metal
containers equipped with self-closing doors approved by the Fire Department for
the storage of oily wastes, rags, and similar combustible materials. All such
wastes shall be removed and disposed of in the manner prescribed by the Fire
Department.
   (b)   Storage outside bins prohibited. No person shall store or stock any
material or equipment or place any flammable liquid, solid, gas, signal flare,
or similar hazardous materials within any hangar or building, except in areas,
containers, and quantities specifically approved by the Fire Department. (§ 1,
Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.609.   Floors.
   All tenants of buildings shall maintain the floors of hangars, and all areas
leased by them, free and clear of oil, grease, and other flammable materials.
No person shall use flammable substances for cleaning floors of hangars or
other buildings. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.610.   Cleaning solvents.
   Only nonflammable or high flashpoint (100 degrees Fahrenheit or greater)
solvents shall be used during any cleaning process, including cleaning aircraft
parts. The disposal of gasoline, oil, solvent, or other flammable waste
products into any drain, manhole, open ditch, or other airport area not
designated for such purpose shall be strictly prohibited. Drip and collecting
pans shall be used during any cleaning process and shall be emptied daily. (§
1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.611.   Electrical wiring.
   All electrical wiring, fixtures, and appliances shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with the Electrical Code of the County. (§ 1, Ord.
773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.612.   Reporting fires.
   Every person who becomes aware of any fire or smoldering combustion of an
unwarranted or insidious nature which is not confined within equipment
designated for the purpose or which constitutes a potential hazard to the
premises, shall report such fire or smoldering combustion to the Fire
Department immediately. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.613.   Compliance with rules.
   (a)   Local fire protection entities. All persons shall comply with all fire
safety regulations established by a governmental entity having jurisdiction for
fire protection at the airport and the Fire Prevention Code of the County.
   (b)   National Fire Protection Association Standard 407. National Fire
Protection Association Standard 407 is hereby adopted as a part of this chapter
by reference. All persons using or occupying the airport shall be required to
have full and complete knowledge of the terms and conditions of NFPA Standard
407. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Article 7.
Accident Reporting and Assistance
Sec. 4-5.701.   Accidents involving aircraft.
   (a)   Reporting. Witnesses to any person involved in any accident or damage
to aircraft occurring at the airport shall promptly make a full report of such
damage or accident to the nearest FAA Safety Officer, to the office of the
County Executive, and to the Sheriff-Coroner.
   (b)   Assistance. Aircraft operators, owners, or their agents, or permittees
of aircraft involved in any accident shall be responsible for, and shall
cooperate and assist in, the prompt removal of damaged aircraft, parts,
property, or debris resulting from such accident; provided, however, the County
or officials of the FAA may prohibit the movement or removal of any damaged
aircraft or property. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Article 8.
Littering
Sec. 4-5.801.   Litter prohibited.
   All persons using the airport shall place all rubbish, garbage, and other
debris in appropriate containers. (§ 1, Ord. 773. eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.802.   Work areas.
   Operators performing routine maintenance on their own aircraft shall keep
the area neat and uncluttered at all times. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14,
1977)
Article 9.
Financial Responsibility
Sec. 4-5.901.   Financial responsibility required: Form.
   All registered owners of aircraft regularly situated at the airport shall be
financially responsible as required by this section. The minimum financial
responsibility required pursuant to this section shall be as follows: single
limit of Three Hundred Thousand and no/100ths ($300,000.00) Dollars per
occurrence for bodily injury, death, and property damage.
   Evidence of financial responsibility shall consist of a certificate of
insurance or a good and sufficient bond issued by an insurance company or a
surety company duly authorized to transact business in the State. (§ 1, Ord.
773, eff. April 14, 1977, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1018, eff. September 12,
1985)
Sec. 4-5.902.   Evidence of financial responsibility, inspections, and
indemnity.
   If, upon a reasonable request by an authorized employee of the County, the
owner of an aircraft regularly situated at the airport fails or refuses to
furnish the County with the required evidence of financial responsibility
within a reasonable time, not exceeding one day, the owner shall thereafter be
prohibited from basing any aircraft which he may own at the airport until such
time as he complies with the provisions of this article. The provisions of this
section shall not be construed as requiring the County, or any of its officers,
agents, or employees, to inspect the evidence of financial responsibility; nor
as imposing any duty to ascertain whether such owner is, in fact, financially
responsible; nor as in any way affecting State laws on the subject of such
owner’s duty to be financially responsible; provided, however, all persons
using the facilities of any airport located in the County shall do so by
license of the County and, by such use, shall be deemed to have agreed with the
County to indemnify and save harmless the County, and its officers, agents, and
employees, from any and all liability against the County arising from the use
of the airport by such person. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Article 10.
Violations: Penalties: Rules: Rulemaking
Sec. 4-5.1001.   Violations of chapter provisions or rules: Penalties.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor on each day during which such violation occurs and, upon
conviction, shall be punished by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period
not to exceed six (6) months, or by a fine not to exceed Five Hundred and no/
100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (§ 1, Ord.
773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.1002.   Rulemaking by Board.
   The Board hereby is authorized to promulgate by resolution any rules or
regulations necessary or convenient in the discretion of the Board to
effectuate the provisions of this chapter. Such rules shall concern the details
of subjects regulated by this chapter, and shall be designed to realize the
legislative intent of such regulations. Such rules may be adopted pursuant to
the procedure required for the adoption of resolutions, shall become effective
on the effective date of resolutions, and shall be prospective in application.
(§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.1003.   Violations: Administrative sanctions: Applications.
   Upon any violation of any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to Section
4-5.1002 of this article by any person, the Airport Director may file an
application with the Clerk of the Board in the manner set forth in Section
2-1.303 of Article 3 of Chapter 1 of Title 2 of this Code, requesting the Board
to impose sanctions pursuant to this article. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14,
1977)
Sec. 4-5.1004.   Violations: Administrative sanctions authorized.
   If the Board after a hearing finds that any provision of this chapter or any
rule or regulation adopted pursuant to Section
4-5.1002 of this article has been violated, the Board hereby is authorized to
impose the following sanctions:
   (a)   Fixed base operators. If the violation was committed by a fixed base
operator, the lease or contract of such fixed base operator shall be rescinded
or otherwise terminated as provided in the lease or contract or, if not so
provided, as provided by the Board in its order.
   (b)   All others. If the violation was committed by a person other than a
fixed base operator, the Board by its order may permanently forbid the use of
the airport by such person.
   The sanctions set forth in this section shall be cumulative to any other
penalty imposed by law or this chapter. The power granted to the Board by this
section expressly is intended and shall include the power to impose lesser
sanctions included within those set forth in this section, which, in the
discretion of the Board are proper in the circumstances. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff.
April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.1005.   Violations: Hearings: Procedure.
   Before any sanction authorized by Section
4-5.1004 of this article is imposed, the Board shall conduct a hearing pursuant
to the procedure for such hearings set forth in Sections
2-1.301 through
2-1.311 of Article 3, entitled “Rules Governing Conduct of Judicial or Quasi-
Judicial Proceedings”, of Chapter 1 of Title 2 of this Code. The decision after
such hearing shall be final; provided, however, the Board by its order may
retain jurisdiction of the proceedings, continue the hearing, and issue such
interim orders as the Board deems appropriate in the case. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff.
April 14, 1977)
Sec. 4-5.1006.   Cease and desist orders: Procedure: Violations constituting
emergencies.
   (a)   The Airport Director hereby is authorized to issue a cease and desist
order at any time he has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of any
provision of Articles 3, 5, or 6 of this chapter, or any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant to this chapter, has occurred or is occurring.
   (b)   Such order shall be served upon the person committing such violation,
and a copy shall forthwith be filed with the Clerk of the Board, along with an
application requesting the Board to impose sanctions pursuant to the provisions
of Sections
4-5.1003 through
4-5.1005 of this article.
   (c)   The cease and desist order shall be effective until the Board holds a
hearing on the application for sanctions and shall specifically forbid the
conduct constituting the violation. Such hearing shall be commenced by the
Board no later than fifteen (15) days after the date of service of the cease
and desist order on the person committing the violation.
   (d)   The violation of the cease and desist order shall be a separate
violation of this chapter.
   (e)   The Board hereby declares that the standards of conduct set forth in
Articles 3, 5, and 6 of this chapter and any rules or regulations adopted
pursuant to this chapter are essential for the public health and safety in that
such standards regulate aspects of airport operations which, if conducted
negligently, result in substantial danger to the residents of the County.
Violations of such standards are therefore deemed by the Board to create a very
hazardous situation which hereby is deemed to be an emergency which justifies
temporary summary abatement by the issuance of a cease and desist order by the
Airport Director without a prior hearing. (§ 1, Ord. 773, eff. April 14, 1977)
Chapter 6
AMBULANCES
Sections:
Article 1. Title and Purpose
   
4-6.101   Title.
   
4-6.102   Intent and scope.
   
4-6.103   Administration.
   
4-6.104   Medical direction.
Article 2. Definitions
   
4-6.201   Definitions.
Article 3. Ambulance Permit Requirements
   
4-6.301   Permits: Required.
   
4-6.302   Permit authorizations: Required.
   
4-6.303   Ambulance service permit: Required information.
   
4-6.304   Ambulance provider permit: Application process.
   
4-6.305   Ambulance service permit: Inspection of operator and equipment.
   
4-6.306   Ambulance service permit: Renewal.
   
4-6.307   Ambulance service permit: Denial.
   
4-6.308   Ambulance service permit: Suspension or revocation.
   
4-6.309   Exclusive operating area.
   
4-6.310   Service regardless of ability to pay.
   
4-6.311   Response only pursuant to request.
   
4-6.312   Response standards.
   
4-6.313   Notice of violation: Service of written notice.
   
4-6.314   Notice of violation: Contents.
   
4-6.315   Notice of violation: Time for appeal, failure to comply.
Article 4. General Requirements Pertaining to the Display and Use of Permits
   
4-6.401   Permits: Display.
   
4-6.402   Permits: Transfer prohibited.
Article 5. Operation Standards and Procedures
   
4-6.501   Additional units: Inspection.
   
4-6.502   Communication equipment: Requirements.
   
4-6.503   Units: Identification lettering.
   
4-6.504   Units: Sanitary standards.
   
4-6.505   Passengers in ambulances.
   
4-6.506   Dispatch protocols.
Article 6. Required Personnel
   
4-6.601   Required personnel: Unit operators.
   
4-6.602   Change in personnel: Notice required.
   
4-6.603   Personnel: Certification required.
   
4-6.604   Ambulance personnel qualifications.
   
4-6.605   Employees: Work hours.
   
4-6.606   Advanced life support: Air unit staffing.
   
4-6.607   Attendants: Ability.
   
4-6.608   Air ambulance attendants: Training required.
   
4-6.609   Medical transport vehicles: Driver and attendant requirements.
   
4-6.610   Personnel standards.
   
4-6.611   Medical control.
Article 7. Insurance Requirements
   
4-6.701   Insurance: Permittee required to obtain.
   
4-6.702   Insurance: Certain entities excepted.
   
4-6.703   Insurance: Effect of cancellation or nonrenewal.
Article 8. Quality Management
   
4-6.801   Quality management.
   
4-6.802   CCT Continuous Improvement Plan.
Article 9. Equipment
   
4-6.901   Personal protective equipment.
   
4-6.902   Equipment inventory list.
   
4-6.903   Medical equipment and supplies: Storage.
Article 10. Requirements for Interior Configuration, Design,
and Dimensions of Ground Units
   
4-6.1001   Ground units: Mechanical and electrical requirements.
   
4-6.1002   Additional requirements.
Article 11. Station Requirements
   
4-6.1101   Station and substations: requirements.
   
4-6.1102   Stations and substations: Inspection.
Article 12. General Requirements Regulating Air Ambulances
   
4-6.1201   Air ambulance: Local compliance.
Article 13. Drugs, Dangerous Drugs and Controlled Substances
   
4-6.1301   Drugs, dangerous drugs and controlled substances: Compliance.
Article 14. Required Reporting
   
4-6.1401   Change in fleet.
   
4-6.1402   Information: Submission required
   
4-6.1403   Records required.
   
4-6.1404   Patient care information: Confidentiality.
   
4-6.1405   Accident involving unit: Notice.
   
4-6.1406   Violation: Report to LEMSA.
Article 15. Inspections
   
4-6.1501   Inspections: LEMSA.
   
4-6.1502   Inspections: Report.
   
4-6.1503   Additional inspections.
Article 16. Enforcement
   
4-6.1601   Violations: Scope, reporting.
   
4-6.1602   Enforcement.
   
4-6.1603   Unprofessional conduct.
   
4-6.1604   Appeals.
Article 17. Complaints
   
4-6.1701   Complaints: Contents.
   
4-6.1702   Complainant: Personal appearance.
   
4-6.1703   Complaints: Investigation.
   
4-6.1704   Complaints: Notice to person or service alleged to be in violation.
   
4-6.1705   Complaint investigation, report.
   
4-6.1706   Documents to complainant.
   
4-6.1707   Disciplinary action: LEMSA to determine.
Article 18. Compliance
   
4-6.1801   Compliance with this chapter.
Article 19. Exemptions from Requirements for Permit
   
4-6.1901   Exemptions.
Article 20. Miscellaneous Requirements
   
4-6.2001   Miscellaneous provisions.
   
4-6.2002   Special events.
   
4-6.2003   Ambulance rates.
   
4-6.2004   Inter-facility transfers.
   
4-6.2005   Disaster operations.
Article 21. Prohibited Acts
   
4-6.2101   Advertisements or representations.
   
4-6.2102   Use of EMT's, paramedics, registered nurses.
   
4-6.2103   Unit operational standards.
   
4-6.2104   Operation of unit while impaired prohibited.
   
4-6.2105   Dispatch of unsanitary unit prohibited.
   
4-6.2106   Drug-free workplace compliance.
Article 22. County Liability
   
4-6.2201   County liability.
Article 23. Severability
   
4-6.2301   Severability.
Article 1. Title and Purpose
Sec. 4-6.101.   Title.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be cited and referred to as the
"Emergency and Prehospital Medical Services System Ordinance of the County of
Yolo."
   (a)   The County of Yolo (hereinafter, "County") has established an
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) system containing an organized pattern of
readiness and response services pursuant to California Health and Safety Code
section 1787.200 et seq.
   (b)   The County has designated a Local EMS Agency (LEMSA) to administer the
County EMS system pursuant to Health and Safety Code section 1797.200, et seq.
   (c)   This chapter shall be administered by the County through its
designated LEMSA. The LEMSA shall administer the EMS system through the use of
agreements with public and private entities as well as policies, procedures and
guidelines in Health and Safety Code section 1797.204, et seq. (§ 1, Ord. 1515,
eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.102.   Intent and scope.
   It is the intent of this chapter for the LEMSA to provide medical control
and management of EMS in the County in conformance with California Health and
Safety Code section 1443, Welfare and Institution Code section 17000, Vehicle
Code section 2512, and Government Code section 37101, Health and Safety Code,
Division 2.5, Chapters 1-11, sections 1797 et seq., Division 12, Chapter 5,
section 13862; The Code of Regulations Title 13, Article I, sections 1100 et
seq., and Title 22, Division 9, Chapters 1-8, sections 100001 et seq.
   The LEMSA shall develop and implement policy, procedure, and guidelines
setting forth minimum requirements for the authorization and operation of
ground and air EMS providers for the purpose of providing organization and
resources required to maintain an EMS system that meets state mandates and the
health and safety needs of the residents of and the visitors to the County.
   The County of Yolo reserves the right to establish exclusive ambulance
zones, in compliance with section 1797.224 of the Health and Safety Code, for
the provision of emergency, non-emergency and inter-facility transport of all
patients that require the service of an ambulance and/or medical transport
vehicle.
   The necessity to establish exclusive ambulance areas is predicated on public
policy and the need for an organized system for emergency and non-emergency
response. Such exclusive operating areas shall be established and awarded in
compliance with the provisions of California Health and Safety Code Division
2.5, section 1797.224.
   An effective ambulance system cannot be assured to the public unless a
reasonable business environment is established that assures the stability of
ambulance service providers.
   The LEMSA shall develop and implement procedures for the training,
education, certification, accreditation and discipline of pre-hospital
personnel in accordance with Health and Safety Code and California Code of
Regulations for the purpose of protecting the health and safety of the
residents of and visitors to the County.
   The LEMSA shall develop and implement additional policy, procedures and
guidelines as appropriate to be consistent with current healthcare practice or
when mandated by Health and Safety Code and/or California Code of Regulations
for the purpose of protecting the health and safety of residents of and the
visitors to the County.
(§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.103.   Administration.
   (a)   This chapter shall be administered by the Yolo County Health and Human
Services Agency's (HHSA) director. The county designates HHSA to be the Local
Emergency Medical Services Agency (LEMSA) for the purpose of the administration
of this chapter. The director of HHSA shall make necessary and reasonable
policies, procedures, and/or protocols for the effective and reasonable
administration of this chapter. These policies, procedures, and/or protocols
shall be codified in the county's LEMSA Administrative Policy and Field
Treatment Guideline Manual and may include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Response time standards for non-emergency responses in each area of
the county;
      (2)   Identification of required clinical or operational reports and
dispatch records;
      (3)   Personnel requirements;
      (4)   Equipment requirements;
      (5)   Vehicle requirements;
      (6)   Other clinical, operational, and dispatch standards;
      (7)   Clinical and operational data reports;
      (8)   Special event stand-by;
      (9)   Emergency and disaster operations.
   (b)   All references herein to LEMSA Administrative Policy and Protocol
("LEMSA Policy Manual") or Administrative Policy and Field Treatment Guideline
Manual or policies and medical orders/direction by the EMS Medical Director
shall be interpreted as referring to the current version and all subsequent
modifications to such policies and regulations. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December
19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.104,   Medical direction.
   All emergency medical technicians (EMT) and paramedic personnel working in
Yolo County are required to provide patient care in accordance with medical
care policies, procedures and protocols promulgated by the EMS medical
director. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 2. Definitions
Sec. 4-6.201.   Definitions.
   (a)   “Agency vehicle” means a vehicle which responds to an emergency, the
attendants of which may treat but not transport patients, and is operated at
the BLS or ALS level by a provider agency under a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter.
   (b)   “Ambulance” means a privately or publicly owned vehicle especially
designed, constructed, modified, equipped, arranged, maintained and operated
for the sole purpose of transporting sick, injured, infirm, convalescent, or
otherwise incapacitated persons, and expectant mothers.
   (c)   “Ambulance dispatch center” means any entity that dispatches
ambulances in response to a request for service through any means of
communication.
   (d)   “Ambulance service provider” means any person or entity who, for
monetary, public services, or other consideration, transports in one or more
air or ground ambulances providing any class of service, one or more persons
needing medical attention or services from any location within the County.
   (e)   “Ambulance service provider permit” means a permit issued by LEMSA in
accordance with LEMSA policy authorizing the holder to act as an ambulance
service provider within the County.
   (f)   “Ambulance permit” means the ambulance service provider has been
granted a permit by the LEMSA to engage in a business or service in which
ambulances are operated.
   (g)   “Applicant” means any person, organization, or service provider who
applies for a permit under this chapter.
   (h)   “Board” means the Yolo County Board of Supervisors.
   (i)   “Class of service” means the level or levels of complexity of field
emergency medical services that may be provided by the permittee and/or
certified persons. These are:
      (1)   “First responder” means a person who provides the initial response
to an emergency.
      (2)   “Emergency medical responder (EMR) level of care” is by a person
who has completed a state-approved EMR course that meets or exceeds national
EMS education standards for EMR and functions within the state and LEMSA
approved scope of practice.
      (3)   “Basic life support (BLS)” as defined in Health and Safety Code
section 1797.60 provided at the EMT scope of practice level, as defined in
Health and Safety Code section 17919.80.
      (4)   “Advanced life support (ALS)” as defined in Health and Safety Code
section 1797.56 provided by a paramedic as defined in Health and Safety Code
section 1797.84.
      (5)   “Critical care transport (CCT)” a level of care during transport
which exceeds the paramedic scope of practice requiring a higher level of
health care licensure.
   (j)   “County” means the County of Yolo.
   (k)   “Critical care transport (CCT) services”, which shall be for
"Specialty Care Transport" as defined in 42 CFR 414.605.
   (l)   “Department” means County of Yolo Department of Health and Human
Services Agency.
   (m)   “Emergency Medical Services” or “EMS” means medical services performed
in response to an emergency call.
   (n)   “EOA” means “exclusive operating area” as defined in Health and Safety
Code section 1797.85 and in Section 4-6.309 below.
   (o)   “EMS aircraft services” means any aircraft services utilized for the
purpose of prehospital emergency patient respond and transport. EMS aircraft
includes air ambulances and all categories of rescue aircraft as defined in
Title 22.
   (p)   “EMS dispatch” means the dispatch center designated by the LEMSA for
the dispatch of EMS responders to emergency calls.
   (q)   “EMS entity” means a public or private organization of any type
providing ambulance services within the County.
   (r)   “EMS system” means a specifically organized arrangement which provides
for the personnel, facilities, and equipment for the effective coordinated
delivery of medical care services under emergency conditions, as described in
Health and Safety Code section 1797 and 1798.
   (s)   “Equipment” means the equipment required inventory set forth by the
LEMSA for any ambulance, air-ambulance or agency vehicle pursuant to this
chapter.
   (t)   “Inter-facility Transportation (IFT)” is defined as transportation
between licensed health care facilities such as:
      (1)   Cancer hospitals;
      (2)   Children's hospitals;
      (3)   Critical access hospitals;
      (4)   Inpatient acute care hospitals;
      (5)   Rehabilitation hospitals;
      (6)   Sole community hospitals;
      (7)   Psychiatric hospitals;
      (8)   Skilled nursing facilities.
   (u)   “LEMSA” means the Local EMS Agency established by the County,
designated by the Board pursuant to Health and Safety Code section 1797 et seq.
   (v)   “Maddy EMS Fund” references funding available through Health and
Safety Code section 1797.98 which compensates health care providers for
emergency medical services for individuals who do not have health insurance and
cannot afford to pay for emergency care and for the discretionary EMS purposes.
   (w)   “Medical transport vehicle” means a vehicle, not an ambulance,
specifically constructed, modified, equipped, or arranged to accommodate a
stretcher or wheelchair and operated for the purpose of transporting sick,
injured, convalescent, infirm, or otherwise incapacitated persons not requiring
urgent transportation.
   (x)   “Patient” means a person who is sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise
incapacitated or helpless and who may be transported in an ambulance, air-
ambulance or medical transport vehicle, or is cared for at the scene of an
emergency by a certified or accredited attendant or a public provider agency,
or who dies following the commencement of such transportation.
   (y)   “Permittee” means a person who holds a permit.
   (z)   “Provider authorization” means an agreement between an EMS entity and
the LEMSA specifying terms and conditions for the provisions of EMS including
but not limited to class of service to be provided, LEMSA approval for optional
scope of practice, participation in LEMSA data and quality improvement
activities and/or performance standards.
   (aa)   “Public entity service” means a service which is provided primarily
as a public service by an agency of local government.
   (bb)   “Station” means an approved facility from which a unit is operated.
   (cc)   “Substation” means an approved subsidiary facility from which a unit
is operated.
   (dd)   “Service” means the operation of an ambulance, air-ambulance, agency
vehicle, or medical transport vehicle to provide medical care or patient
transportation within Yolo County.
   (ee)   “Transfer” means the movement of a patient by ambulance, air-
ambulance, or medical transport vehicle from one hospital to another hospital,
a medical facility, a home or other location.
   (ff)   “Transport” means the movement of a patient by ambulance or air
ambulance from the scene of an emergency to a hospital.
   (gg)   Unit means an ambulance, air-ambulance, agency vehicle, or any
medical transport vehicle.
   (hh)   “Volunteer” means a person who:
      (1)   Acts as a driver or attendant; and
      (2)   Does not receive more than fifty (50%) percent of his or her annual
employment income from the EMS provider that is claiming volunteer status.
   (ii)   “Volunteer service” means a service which:
      (1)   Transports patients without compensation, other than reimbursements
to defray the actual expenses of providing such service;
      (2)   It is either wholly or partly subsidized or otherwise operated
under the auspices of some governmental or public agency, body or group, or any
industrial or non-profit corporation; and
      (3)   Uses volunteers. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 3. Ambulance Permit Requirements
Sec. 4-6.301.   Permits: Required.
   Except as provided in Section
4-6.1901, no person may furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or
otherwise be engaged in, or profess to be engaged in business as an ambulance,
air-ambulance, or medical transport vehicle within Yolo County unless he or she
holds a valid permit issued by the LEMSA pursuant to this chapter.
   A permit will be issued only when the permittee is in compliance with all
applicable federal, state, and County codes and regulations, and LEMSA
application, policies and procedures. Permittees, unless holding a contract
with Yolo County to provide emergency medical service only, shall be approved
by the county prior to beginning service.
   Criminal action may be taken against an applicant who knowingly provides
false information on the permit application. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19,
2019)
Sec. 4-6.302.   Permit authorizations: Required.
   All EMS entities operating in the County shall be authorized by the LEMSA in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and any federal or state law
or regulation governing EMS.
   Authorization shall consist of provider authorization and, if indicated for
the type of EMS entity, an ambulance provider permit.
   Provider authorizations shall be issued in accordance with LEMSA provider
authorization policy.
   Ambulance service provider permits shall be issued in accordance with LEMSA
ambulance service permit policy. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.303.   Ambulance service permit: Required information.
   (a)   Any entity (either as an owner, agent or otherwise) who wishes to
furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, or otherwise engage in, or offer, or
profess to engage in providing ambulance service in the County shall have a
valid ambulance service provider permit in accordance with the LEMSA system
plan and EMS policies, procedures, and guidelines.
   (b)   Permit requirements shall apply to providers of air and ground
ambulances, including BLS, ALS, IFT and CCT vehicles with the following
exceptions:
      (1)   No permit is required of an ambulance service provider engaged in
the transport of patients where the transport is initiated outside county
boundaries for transport into the County.
      (2)   No permit is required of an ambulance service provider responding
to a request from the EMS administrator or designee to calls arising from a
declared multi-casualty incident (MCI) or declared disaster.
      (3)   No permit is required for specialized teams including, but not
limited to: neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and pediatric intensive care
unit (PICU) teams that are permitted by another EMS agency and that pick up
patients within the County for transportation to an acute care, tertiary, or
quaternary care hospital located outside of the County, unless also responding
to other services within the 9-1-1 system or inter-facility calls.
   (c)   Non-transport ALS. Any person, either as owner, agency, or otherwise,
or any agency, who wishes to furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, or otherwise
engage in, offer, or profess to engage in, or offer ALS non-transport services
within the County, shall have a current valid non-transport ALS provider
contract in accordance with the LEMSA's EMS system plan and EMS protocols,
policies, and guidelines.
   (d)   An application for an initial ambulance Certificate of Operation shall
be accompanied by payment of an application fee and an ambulance inspection
fee. These fees are established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, are
listed in the Yolo County EMS Agency Fee Schedule and shall not exceed the
reasonable cost of administering and enforcing this chapter. If the fees are
not paid within thirty (30) days of permit issuance, the provider's permit will
be considered suspended and the provider shall not provide the related service
(s) within the County until the fees are paid in full. If the fees are not paid
within ninety (90) days, the permit will be considered expired and a new
application must be submitted to the LEMSA. Failed ambulance inspections will
require a new inspection fee prior to the re-inspection of that ambulance.
Exceptions to this section may be granted by the LEMSA. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.304.   Ambulance provider permit: Application process.
   (a)   Any EMS entity providing ambulance service, BLS, ALS, CCT or other EMS
services requiring LEMSA authorization in the County, shall secure an ambulance
service permit from the LEMSA specifying terms and conditions for the provision
of EMS including, but not limited to, class of service to be provided, LEMSA
approval for optional scope of practice, participation in LEMSA data and
quality improvement activities and applicable performance standards as defined
in LEMSA policies, procedures and guidelines.
   (b)   Provider authorizations shall not apply to cities or fire districts
providing prehospital emergency medical services subject to and in accordance
with Health and Safety Code section 1797.201. Such agencies providing services
under section 1797.201 shall nonetheless be subject to LEMSA medical control
and applicable performance standards as defined in LEMSA policies, procedures
and guidelines. Compliance of City and Fire District prehospital emergency
service providers with LEMSA medical control and applicable performance
standards pursuant to LEMSA policies, procedures and guidelines shall not
evidence or constitute an "agreement" with such City and Fire Districts for
purposes of section 1797.201, and nothing in this chapter may be so construed.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to affect or may be construed to affect in
any way the rights and obligations of City and Fire District prehospital
emergency service providers pursuant to section 1797.201. Nothing in this
chapter is intended to affect or may be construed to affect the eligibility of
City and Fire District prehospital emergency service providers to enter
exclusive operating agreements under Health and Safety Code section 1797.224.
   (c)   Permit application.
      (1)   Applicants for an ambulance service permit or non-transporting ALS
provider permit shall complete the LEMSA application process, which includes:
         A.   A LEMSA ambulance service provider permit application.
         B.   Provide a detailed description of company logo, color scheme used
to designate the ambulance and attach a photo image.
         C.   A list of each ambulance including the following: make, model,
year, mileage, VIN and license plate number.
         D.   Description of the company's program for vehicle maintenance.
         E.   Description of the company's vehicle radio/communication
capabilities.
         F.   Copies of California Highway Patrol (CHP) inspection reports for
each vehicle.
         G.   Portfolio of the company's experience and training in the
transportation and care of patients.
         H.   List of employee's name and certification level with issued and
expiration dates (EMT, paramedic, registered nurse, etc.).
         I.   Description of the company's training and orientation program for
EMS personnel.
         J.   Applicants shall submit their planned work schedule for
employees, including scheduled breaks and related staffing levels,
         K.   ePCR system description which is NEMSIS compliant.
         L.   A letter stating the willingness to share data with the LEMSA and
participate in the Clinical Quality Improvement (CQI) process.
         M.   Current copy of the company's business license(s) and/or permits
required by state law and regulations,
         N.   Recent financial statement (revenue, expenditures, balance sheet)
stating total assets and liabilities.
         O.   Providing all transport and mileage billing rates.
         P.   Current insurance face sheet for: general liability for vehicle
operation, comprehensive medical liability, workers compensation.
            1.   For general and comprehensive medical liability, the County
shall be named as a co-insured. A valid certificate to self-insure from State
of California Director of Industrial Relations is acceptable for workers
compensation insurance. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.305.   Ambulance service permit: Inspection of operator and equipment.
   (a)   Upon receipt of a completed application, the LEMSA shall conduct an
inspection of the permit requester, including the applicant, any partner,
officer, director, company and its ownership, to determine if there are any
concerns related to the health, safety and welfare of the public. The
inspection includes each vehicle, and its equipment and premises. A vehicle
inspection fee is required per vehicle and the fee is approved by the board of
supervisors. This required inspection shall be in addition to any other safety
or motor vehicle inspections required or made under state, federal or local
law.
   (b)   After the LEMSA has completed its inspection, it may issue the permit
to be valid for a period of up to one year. The permit sticker must be placed
on the window of the rear driver window of each permitted vehicle.
   (c)   Failed ambulance inspections will require a new inspection fee prior
to the re-inspection of that ambulance. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19,
2019)
Sec. 4-6.306.   Ambulance service permit: Renewal.
   (a)   Permits shall be renewed annually by the LEMSA upon application of the
permittee if the LEMSA determines the permit holder has within the operating
period of the expiring permit, acted in conformity with this chapter and the
protocols and polices of the LEMSA.
   (b)   Applicants for permit renewal must be made at least thirty (30) days
prior to the expiration date of the existing permit. The renewal fee must be
included with the application for renewal. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19,
2019)
Sec. 4-6.307.   Ambulance service permit: Denial.
   (a)   The LEMSA may deny an ambulance services provider permit for any of
the following reasons:
      (1)   Lack of approval by the LEMSA;
      (2)   Failure to provide a complete application or a determination by the
LEMSA that the applicant fails to meet the requirements of this chapter;
      (3)   If the applicant has previously had an applicable permit or license
revoked or the status is directly at issue, which affects the applicant's
present ability to serve;
      (4)   If the applicant has a criminal or health record which reasonably
indicates that the applicant would be unlikely to properly accept the
responsibilities of operating a service;
      (5)   If there is reasonable cause to believe that the applicant will not
provide emergency medical services or medical transport in a manner that will
promote the health and general welfare of persons within the County who may
need to utilize the applicant's proposed services;
      (6)   If the applicant does not have the required equipment for its
units;
      (7)   If the applicant has not demonstrated, utilizing standard
accounting practices and principles, sufficient financial stability or
capitalization of a service to assure that the service will be run in an
efficient and business-like manner for a period of at least one year or cannot
meet the insurance requirements of Section 4-6.700 et seq.;
      (8)   If the applicant proposes to operate a service within a service
area where another ambulance service or entity has been granted an exclusive
operating area;
      (9)   Failure to comply with all applicable federal, state and county
codes and regulations and LEMSA policies and procedures. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.308.   Ambulance service permit: Suspension or revocation.
   The LEMSA may, and is authorized to, suspend or revoke any permit issued
under this chapter for failure of a permittee to comply and to maintain
compliance with, or for violation of the requirements of this chapter, or any
other applicable laws or ordinances or regulations, or LEMSA policies,
procedures, or protocols promulgated thereunder. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December
19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.309.   Exclusive operating area.
   (a)   The LEMSA, as designated by the Board, may establish one or more
exclusive operating areas (EOAs), as defined in Health & Safety Code section
1797.85, pursuant to a competitive process (a "competitive EOA"), provided the
requirements of Health and Safety Code section 1797.224 are met.
   (b)   An EMS entity granted an EOA shall enter into an agreement with the
County (an "EOA Agreement") setting forth the terms on which the EMS entity
shall provide services within the EOA, including the level and type of
ambulance services covered by the EOA Agreement.
   (c)   No EMS entity shall render any type or level of services considered
exclusive within an EOA, unless the EMS entity has entered into an EOA
Agreement with the County to provide such services.
   (d)   Nothing in this chapter or in any rule or regulation enacted by the
County shall be construed as requiring the County to establish either a
competitive or non-competitive EOA. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.310.   Service regardless of ability to pay.
   A service permitted in accordance with this chapter must provide emergency
care to and transport any emergency patient regardless of the patient's ability
to pay. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.311.   Response only pursuant to request.
   No permittee under this chapter shall cause or allow its units to respond to
a location without receiving a specific request for that service. (§ 1, Ord.
1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.312.   Response standards.
   (a)   Any private call requesting service for a life threatening emergency
or a call requiring ALS level care where ALS care is timely, appropriate and
available shall be immediately referred to the 9-1-1 emergency operators.
   (b)   If a BLS ambulance responds to a patient who appears to have a medical
emergency, the crew shall call 9-1-1 and request a 9-1-1 response, and render
appropriate care within their scope of practice until the ALS ambulance is on-
scene.
   (c)   The permittee or their employees shall report any response to a non-
emergency request for ambulance service that is responded to by a unit not
permitted, staffed or equipped at the appropriate service level to the county
EMS agency on an unusual occurrence form within ten (10) days of the incident.
(§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.313.   Notice of violation: Service of written notice.
   Whenever the LEMSA has reasonable cause to believe that any section of this
chapter has been violated, he or she shall cause written notice to be served
upon the person or persons responsible for the alleged violation. Such notice
shall be sent to the person or persons' address of record and a copy to the
employer of record. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.314.   Notice of violation: Contents.
   The notice shall specify:
   (a)   The section or sections of this chapter alleged to be violated;
   (b)   The facts alleged to constitute the violation; and
   (c)   An order to take corrective action within a specified time. (§ 1, Ord.
1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.315.   Notice of violation: Time for appeal, failure to comply.
   Such an order becomes final unless, within ten (10) working days from the
date of the notice, it is appealed in writing to the LEMSA. Upon receipt of an
appeal, the LEMSA shall initiate the administrative appeal process.
   Failure to comply with a Notice of Violation shall result in the issue being
referred to the administrative appeal process by the LEMSA. (§ 1, Ord. 1515,
eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 4. General Requirements Pertaining to the Display and Use of Permits
Sec. 4-6.401.   Permits: Display.
   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be prominently displayed on
each unit, and be visible from the outside, and not be altered or defaced in
any way. If any official entry on any such permit is defaced, removed,
obliterated or altered in any way, the permit shall be rendered immediately
null and void and of no force and effect whatsoever. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.402.   Permits: Transfer prohibited.
   No permit issued pursuant to this chapter is transferable. (§ 1, Ord. 1515,
eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 5. Operation Standards and Procedures
Sec. 4-6.501.    Additional units: Inspection.
   An additional unit, in order to be placed into service, shall have a current
statement of safe operating condition and shall be inspected by the California
Highway Patrol and the Health and Human Services Agency to determine if it
complies with this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.502.   Communication equipment: Requirements.
   Each ambulance shall have radio access to all three bands (800MHz, VHF, and
UHF) for establishing and maintaining radio contact with county dispatch and
county hospitals as prescribed by the county and in compliance with Federal
Communication Commission regulations. Back up communication with a cellular
telephone is acceptable. All communication equipment must meet manufacturers'
specifications for power, output, and antenna. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December
19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.503.   Units: Identification lettering.
   Each unit shall have printed on each side and the rear thereof, or in the
case of an aircraft, on a sign in the window of the aircraft, the unit number
and name of the service. The lettering for such identification shall be at
least four (4") inches in height. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.504.   Units: Sanitary standards.
   Each unit operated in Yolo County shall be in a clean and sanitary condition
subject to such sanitary standards as are prescribed by the LEMSA. (§ 1, Ord.
1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.505.    Passengers in ambulances.
   Relatives of a patient and other persons may ride in an ambulance or medical
transport vehicle at the discretion of the attendant(s). Three point restraints
for use by each passenger riding in an ambulance or medical transport vehicle
must be available in ambulances or medical transport vehicles purchased after
the effective date of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.506.    Dispatch protocols.
   Each ambulance company providing service under this chapter shall assign at
least one person or an agency to be responsible for receiving calls and
dispatching ambulances. The permittee shall have a dispatcher training program
that includes prioritizing tasks including, but not limited to: call intake,
unit assignment, documentation and reporting; communication equipment; and
compliance with the LEMSA Administrative Policy and Field Treatment Guideline
Manual covering ambulance service operation, ambulance transport, equipment,
ambulance personnel, and standards of dispatch. Dispatchers shall be certified
in CPR/AED.
   An ambulance service or entity granted an exclusive operating area as part
of the LEMSA plan shall adopt dispatch protocols and procedures which must be
approved by the LEMSA. Each permittee shall file a copy of its dispatch
protocols with the LEMSA. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 6. Required Personnel
Sec. 4-6.601.    Required personnel: Unit operators.
   In addition to any other requirements contained herein, no service may
utilize a driver or pilot to operate a unit unless:
   (a)   He or she is familiar with the geographic area of the organization's
service area;
   (b)   He or she has adequate knowledge of all the hospitals within the
service's operating area;
   (c)   He or she can operate a two-way radio;
   (d)   He or she can operate a unit under emergency conditions. (§ 1, Ord.
1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.602.   Change in personnel: Notice required.
   Each service or agency must provide written notice to the Ambulance
Licensing Officer within ten (10) days of any change in personnel or units
unless an alternate plan has been approved by the LEMSA. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.603.    Personnel: Certification required.
   Services may utilize only those drivers and attendants who are appropriately
licensed, certified and accredited. In the case of paramedics and registered
nurses, ALS services may utilize only those attendants who currently meet state
and LEMSA guidelines. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.604.    Ambulance personnel qualifications.
   (a)   All personnel while on duty must carry all applicable certificates and
permittee identification, and comply with the LEMSA Administrative Policy and
Field Treatment Guideline Manual.
   (b)   All EMT and paramedic personnel who operate ambulances and CCT units
must have a current California driver's license, California ambulance driver's
certificate, and a medical examiner's certificate.
   (c)   Permittee's EMT personnel assigned to provide BLS service under this
chapter must meet the minimum qualifications:
      (1)   EMTs must hold current, valid EMT certification in the State of
California.
      (2)   EMTs shall be certified in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR/AED)
according to the policies of the LEMSA and State of California.
      (3)   EMTs assigned to provide CCT driver/assistant service must meet the
additional qualifications specified in the county's CCT policy.
   (d)   Permittee's paramedic personnel assigned to provide CCT service under
this chapter must meet the minimum qualifications:
      (1)   Paramedics must hold current, valid paramedic licensure in the
State of California.
      (2)   Paramedics shall be accredited by the LEMSA and hold current and
valid ALS certifications.
      (3)   Paramedics assigned to provide CCT patient care must meet the
additional qualifications specified in the LEMSA's CCT policy.
   (e)   Permittee's registered nurse personnel assigned to provide CCT service
under this chapter must meet the minimum qualifications specified in the
LEMSA's CCT policy.
   (f)   All drivers must complete an Emergency Vehicle Operation Course (EVOC)
driver training course, or its equivalent.
   (g)   The permittee shall retain on file at all times copies of all current
and valid licenses, certifications, and/or accreditations of all emergency
medical personnel performing services under this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.605.    Employees: Work hours.
   An emergency ambulance service shall submit to the LEMSA any changes to
their work schedule for employees, including scheduled breaks and related
staffing levels, for approval prior to implementation. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.606.   Advanced life support: Air unit staffing.
   An operational air ALS unit should be staffed by two (2) paramedics or two
(2) registered nurses and, as a minimum, must be staffed by no fewer than one
paramedic or authorized registered nurse and one EMT. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.607.    Attendants: Ability.
   Services must insure that their attendants are free of physical defects or
diseases which may impair their ability to attend to patients. No person,
service, or agency shall be out of compliance with Government Code section 8355
in matters relating to providing a drug-free workplace. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.608.    Air ambulance attendants: Training required.
   Air ambulance attendants used by a service must have training in aeromedical
physiology, aircraft safety, emergency aeromedical procedures, and any other
specialized training required by the LEMSA based on current Association of Air
Medical Services (AAMS) national standards. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19,
2019)
Sec. 4-6.609.    Medical transport vehicles: Driver and attendant requirements.
   Drivers and attendants utilized on medical transport vehicles shall be at
least eighteen (18) years of age, shall hold a current certificate in level C
basic cardiac life support from the American Heart Association/ American Red
Cross, and first aid from the American Red Cross, and shall demonstrate
compliance with all applicable state and local laws and regulations. (§ 1, Ord.
1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.610.    Personnel standards.
   Ambulance companies shall maintain personnel standards that include
orientation to the LEMSA Administrative Policy and Field Treatment Guideline
Manual, special training (as deemed necessary by the EMS Medical Director),
uniforms and appearances, safety apparel, identification, driver training,
work-hour scheduling limitations, with due consideration for collective
bargaining agreements and/or state and federal regulations where they apply. (§
1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.611.    Medical control.
   All ambulance personnel are to provide patient care in accordance with the
LEMSA Administrative Policy and Field Treatment Guideline Manual and as
directed by standing or specific orders issued by the EMS Medical Director, or
his or her designee. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 7. Insurance Requirements
Sec. 4-6.701.    Insurance: Permittee required to obtain.
   The permittee shall obtain and keep in force during the term of said permit
the following insurance coverage issued by a company authorized to do business
in the State of California. The required insurance coverage may be revised as
deemed necessary by the Board.
   (a)   Comprehensive General Liability Insurance (Occurrence Form CG0001) to
include coverage for bodily injury, property damage, blanket contractual, and
personal injury. Minimum limits of liability shall be at least Five Million and
no/100ths ($5,000,000.00) Dollars per occurrence, combined Single Limit Bodily
Injury and Property Damage;
   (b)   Workers' Compensation Insurance as required by the State of
California. Employer's Liability Insurance with limits not less than One
Million and no/100ths ($1,000,000.00) Dollars per occurrence;
   (c)   Comprehensive Auto Liability at a minimum of Five Million and no/
100ths ($5,000,000.00) Dollars per occurrence, combined Single Limit Bodily
Injury and Property Damage. The coverage for all permittees must include owned
auto, non-owned auto, hired auto, Insurance Industry Code 1, and cross-
liability or severability of interest clause in policy; and
   (d)   Professional Liability for all employees providing service. Error or
omission and failing to render professional services coverage shall be Five
Million and no/100ths ($5,000,000.00) Dollars.
   Said insurance shall contain coverage expressly recognizing the
indemnification obligations assumed by the permittee or applicant in accordance
with this chapter, but shall not be construed to limit in any manner the amount
of ambulance business or applicant's liability thereunder; providing further,
that said insurance shall expressly name County, its governing board, agents,
officers, and employees as additional insured, which shall be evidenced by
endorsements to the policy.
   Said insurance shall not be subject to cancellation or reduction without
thirty (30) days prior written notice to the County. The insurance carrier
shall serve written notice on the LEMSA.
   Each unit placed in operation by a permittee shall be included within the
scope of the required insurance coverage and limits and shall be operated
pursuant to the permit issued in accordance with this chapter.
   Certificate(s) of insurance and policy endorsements satisfactory to the
LEMSA must be approved before ambulance service commences. (§ 1, Ord. 1515,
eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.702.   Insurance: Certain entities excepted.
   The provisions of section 4-6.701 regarding liability insurance do not apply
to services provided by the State. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.703.    Insurance: Effect of cancellation or nonrenewal.
   Upon receipt of any notice of cancellation or non-renewal of an insurance
policy, the LEMSA shall do one of the following:
   (a)   Confirm that the permittee has reinstated insurance coverage prior to
cancellation;
   (b)   Procure substitute ambulance service provider coverage and order the
permittee to cease service in Yolo County and to surrender any permit issued
pursuant to this chapter;
   (c)   Arrange for insurance to be reinstated at the permittee's expense; or
   (d)   Obtain substitute ambulance service provider coverage until the matter
is resolved at permittee's expense. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 8. Quality Management
Sec. 4-6.801.   Quality management.
   To ensure that ambulances are operating in the best interest of the public
health and safety, and that ambulance companies are utilizing properly trained
staff, each permittee will be required to have a quality management program
that:
   (a)   Utilizes a physician, registered nurse, or paramedic with experience
in quality management to direct and coordinate quality improvement activities
(exceptions to this may be made on an individual basis by the LEMSA).
   (b)   Reviews patient care provided by their employees.
   (c)   Meets the requirements of the State Emergency Medical Services
Authority's Quality Improvement Program contained in the California Code of
Regulations, Title 22, Division 9.
   (d)   Identifies problems or issues regarding patient care and proposes
solutions for corrective action.
   (e)   Participates in the LEMSA's collection of data regarding quality of
patient care.
   (f)   Includes disciplinary procedures to be used when appropriate.
   (g)   Maintains an audio recording of all calls for ambulance services
requested, all dispatch instructions given, and all communications between the
dispatch center and the ambulance unit until the ambulance run is completed.
Recordings must be stored for a period of at least one hundred eighty (180)
days.
   (h)   Ensures that all drivers have completed an Emergency Vehicle Operation
Course (EVOC) driver training course, or its equivalent, related to responding
to calls for emergency medical service that includes, but is not limited to,
the following didactic and practical components: legal aspects of the emergency
ambulance operation, the practice of defensive driving, accident avoidance,
principles of vehicle control, routine vehicle safety checks, breaking and
stopping, acceleration, and steering.
   (i)   Requires the use of the LEMSA's approved Prehospital Care Report, the
Unusual Occurrence form, and/or other approved reports that include all
required data elements for all emergency medical and those runs and refusal of
service against medical advice.
   (j)   Requires staff to attend, at no expense to the county, EMS
orientation, and other education and training programs as may be reasonably
requested by the LEMSA.
   (k)   Is consistent with the LEMSA's Quality Assurance/Quality Improvement
Plan.
   (l)   Actively participates in any committees, at the request of the LEMSA,
to provide for continued system performance.
   (m)   Submits documentation outlining the quality management program to the
county as part of the ambulance service permit application process. (§ 1, Ord.
1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.802.    CCT Continuous Quality Improvement Plan.
   CCT ambulance companies are additionally responsible for submitting a
Continuous Quality Improvement plan according to the specifications in the
LEMSA's CCT policy. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 9. Equipment
Sec. 4-6.901.    Personal protective equipment.
   (a)   Permittee shall supply and maintain standardized personal protective
equipment and supplies to ensure safety and readiness, according to Cal/OSHA
guidelines.
   (b)   Permittee shall ensure that all personnel receive training in all
available equipment, including fit testing, according to Cal/OSHA guidelines.
(§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.902.    Equipment inventory list.
   All services must adhere to the LEMSA equipment inventory list. (§ 1, Ord.
1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.903.    Medical equipment and supplies: Storage.
   All medical equipment and supplies on an agency vehicle must be stored to
promote security and protection from the elements. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Article 10. Requirements for Interior Configuration, Design,
and Dimensions of Ground Units
Sec. 4-6.1001.    Ground units: Mechanical and electrical requirements.
   Each ground ambulance unit placed in service after July 1, 1991, must when
purchased be configured to meet the mechanical and electrical standards
established by the United States Department of Transportation in its
specifications designated Docket KKK-A-1822, as amended from time to time. (§
1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.1002.    Additional requirements.
   In addition to meeting the requirements in Section
4-6.901 and Section
4-6.1001 BLS and ALS units must, where noted:
   (a)   Have space as required by Docket KKK-A-1822, as amended from time to
time;
   (b)   Have additional shelf and other storage space sufficient for
controlled substances including locked storage in accordance with Section
4-6.901;
   (c)   Have proper storage of other medical equipment and supplies to prevent
patient injury in transit and to meet approved procedures for management of
patients; and
   (d)   Have a system which will control temperature adequately to maintain
the integrity of the medical supplies and drugs as well as the health and
safety of the patients and attendants. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 11. Station Requirements
Sec. 4-6.1101.    Station and substations: Requirements.
   Every station and substation used by a commercial or public entity permittee
must meet the following requirements:
   (a)   The station or substation must meet local building and fire codes;
   (b)   The station must be a structure with a system to communicate with each
unit operating from the station or substation and have adequate sanitary
storage space for equipment and material to be used in the operation of the
service;
   (c)   The substation must have both primary and secondary communication
systems with which the substation can communicate with a central dispatch
facility (Yolo Emergency Communications Agency, the City of Davis Dispatch or
other facility designated by LEMSA);
   (d)   Each station and substation must be properly located to permit any
ambulance operating there from rapid and safe egress to a main thoroughfare;
   (e)   Each station and substation must have adequate off street parking
space for all units operating therefrom;
   (f)   Each station, unless the service participates in a central dispatch
facility approved by the LEMSA, must be attended by a dispatcher on a twenty-
four (24) hour basis;
   (g)   Each station and substation must have a sufficient supply of clean
uniforms (with respect to OSHA Blood Borne Pathogen regulations, as amended
from time to time) for each on-duty attendant, one lavatory, one shower, and
one toilet with sanitary and wiping materials and soap for hand washing; and
   (h)   Every station and substation must be in clean and sanitary condition
and have suitable sleeping quarters for attendants who are scheduled to work a
twenty-four (24) hour shift which are private and separate from operational
areas. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.1102.    Stations and substations: Inspection.
   Every station and substation shall be inspected prior to the issuance of any
permit and thereafter shall be inspected once yearly by the LEMSA for the
purpose of determining whether or not the station or substation is in
compliance with this chapter and any other Health Department regulations. (§ 1,
Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 12. General Requirements Regulating Air Ambulances
Sec. 4-6.1201.    Air ambulance: Local compliance.
   An air ambulance must, in addition to other requirements in this chapter,
comply with LEMSA policies and procedures. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19,
2019)
Article 13. Drugs, Dangerous Drugs and Controlled Substances
Sec. 4-6.1301.    Drugs, dangerous drugs and controlled substances: Compliance.
   All administration, supply, resupply, documentation, storage and security
measures and destruction of drugs, dangerous drugs, controlled substances and
hypodermic devices must be in compliance with all laws and regulations of the
state and federal government and the LEMSA. As used in this section, drugs,
dangerous drugs and controlled substances have the meaning ascribed to them in
State Board of Pharmacy Regulations. Any permittee that stores drugs shall have
a medical director or clinical pharmacist. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19,
2019)
Article 14. Required Reporting
Sec. 4-6.1401.    Change in fleet.
   Any change in a permittee's ambulance fleet must be filed by the permittee
with the LEMSA within ten (10) days of its occurrence. Any new fleet will need
to meet the requirements of ambulance service permit requirements and
inspection. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.1402.    Information: Submission required.
   Each service shall submit operational information as required by the LEMSA.
(§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.1403.    Records required.
   A run report/patient care record must be completed, as required by the
LEMSA, by an attendant whenever a unit responds to a request for patient care,
including dry runs. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.1404.    Patient care information: Confidentiality.
   (a)   Patient care information submitted to the LEMSA is confidential but
may be used for quality assurance.
   (b)   The hospital copy of the patient care record must be completed and
submitted to the receiving medical facility as specified in LEMSA policy.
   (c)   The patient care record prepared by a permittee shall use the
electronic patient care record (ePCR), ambulance run form, or a form approved
by the LEMSA. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.1405.    Accident involving unit: Notice.
   Whenever a unit is involved in a collision and/or experiences mechanical
failure(s), the LEMSA shall be notified immediately. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.1406.    Violation: Report to LEMSA.
   Any known violation of this chapter shall be reported to the LEMSA. (§ 1,
Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 15. Inspections
Sec. 4-6.1501.    Inspections: LEMSA.
   The LEMSA shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, every unit before it is
placed into use, and annually thereafter. Such inspections do not duplicate,
and shall not be in lieu of, inspections performed or required by the
California Highway Patrol. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.1502.    Inspections: Report.
   After inspection, a written report shall be prepared indicating every
violation or omission of any requirements, standards, or provisions contained
in this chapter with respect to the unit inspected. The report shall set a time
period for correction of each violation or omission. A copy of the report shall
be given to the permittee concerned. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.1503.    Additional inspections.
   In addition to the routine inspections required in Section 4-6.1501, the
LEMSA may make additional inspections of any unit, attendant, volunteer, pilot,
air attendant, station, or substation regulated hereunder, for the purpose of
determining whether or not any aspect of a permittee's service subject to this
chapter is, or is not, in compliance with this chapter. A written report shall
be prepared pursuant to Section 4-6.1502. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19,
2019)
Article 16. Enforcement
Sec. 4-6.1601.    Violations: Scope, reporting.
   This section pertains only to permits issued by Yolo County. Any alleged
violations of this chapter will be reported to the LEMSA. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.1602.    Enforcement.
   Primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter lies with the LEMSA.
(§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.1603.    Unprofessional conduct.
   A person exhibits unprofessional conduct if he or she fails to maintain that
standard of performance, to exercise that degree of skill, care, diligence and
expertise or to manifest that professional demeanor and attitude which is
ordinarily exercised and possessed by other persons in similar positions in
California. Unprofessional conduct includes, without limitation:
   (a)   The use of obscene, abusive, slanderous or threatening language;
   (b)   The use of unreasonable force which unnecessarily increases or
inflicts pain upon a patient;
   (c)   Conviction of an offense, a diversion status, a nolo contendere or
guilty plea if the acts involved have a direct bearing on entrusting the person
to serve the public;
   (d)   Disclosing the contents of examinations for certification or
recertification;
   (e)   Violation of the confidentiality of health records except as allowed
or required by law or regulation;
   (f)   Possessing, diverting, or using medical supplies, equipment or drugs
for personal or unauthorized use;
   (g)   Possession of any firearm or other weapon while on duty or engaged in
the performance of prehospital care duties. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19,
2019)
Sec. 4-6.1604.    Appeals.
   An administrative appeal process shall be established by the LEMSA. (§ 1,
Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 17. Complaints
Sec. 4-6.1701.    Complaints: Contents.
   Complaints regarding alleged violations of this chapter shall be made in
writing. The LEMSA may require the complainant to specify:
   (a)   The section of the chapter alleged to have been violated;
   (b)   The date, time and location of alleged violation;
   (c)   The person and/or service involved; and
   (d)   The circumstances or details which support the allegation of a
violation. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.1702.    Complaint: Personal appearance.
   The complainant may be requested to personally present additional
information to substantiate the complaint. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19,
2019)
Sec. 4-6.1703.    Complaints: Investigation.
   Based upon information obtained from the complainant, the LEMSA shall make a
determination whether to proceed with the investigation and shall set a
priority for conducting the investigation. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19,
2019)
Sec. 4-6.1704.    Complaints: Notice to person or service alleged to be in
violation.
   The person or service alleged to be in violation shall be notified by the
LEMSA of the complaint. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.1705.    Complaint investigation: Report.
   The complaint investigation may include a review of any applicable records,
tapes, personal statements or affidavits or other items deemed relevant by the
LEMSA. A summary report detailing the findings of the investigation shall be
prepared. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.1706.    Documents to complainant.
   At the conclusion of the investigation, the complainant shall be afforded
the opportunity to receive, to the extent permitted by law, copies of documents
associated with the complaint investigation. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19,
2019)
Sec. 4-6.1707.    Disciplinary action: LEMSA to determine.
   The LEMSA shall determine if any disciplinary action should be taken at any
time during the complaint investigation process. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December
19, 2019)
Article 18. Compliance
Sec. 4-6.1801.    Compliance with this chapter.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, every service must be in compliance
with this chapter by January 1, 2020. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 19. Exemptions from Requirements for Permit
Sec. 4-6.1901.    Exemptions.
   The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   (a)   The occasional use of a vehicle or aircraft not ordinarily used in the
business of transporting persons who are sick or injured when an authorized
form of approved medical transportation is not available and there is
substantial risk to the life of the sick or injured person;
   (b)   A vehicle or aircraft not ordinarily used as a unit in case of a major
catastrophe or emergency, when services with permits are insufficient to render
the services required;
   (c)   Persons rendering service as attendants or air attendants in case of a
major catastrophe or emergency when permitted attendants cannot be secured;
   (d)   An ambulance or medical transport vehicle based and properly permitted
outside the County shall be authorized to transport a patient to or through the
County but shall not be authorized to transport patients originating in the
County;
   (e)   A volunteer ambulance service which is being operated from a location,
station or headquarters outside of Yolo County, does not conduct the majority
of its business within the boundaries of Yolo County, and the patients
transported by said service are picked up at a point outside the boundaries of
Yolo County and transported to a medical facility within Yolo County;
   (f)   Volunteer units based outside Yolo County, except that any such unit
receiving a patient within Yolo County for transport to a location within Yolo
County shall comply with the provisions of this chapter;
   (g)   Volunteer attendants based outside Yolo County;
   (h)   Units owned and operated by search and rescue organizations chartered
by the State as corporations not for profit or otherwise existing as nonprofit
associations which are not regularly used to transport patients except as part
of rescue operations. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 20. Miscellaneous Requirements
Sec. 4-6.2001.    Miscellaneous provisions.
   The following miscellaneous provisions on the operation of units within Yolo
County apply with respect to any permit:
   (a)   No county, city or other political subdivision within Yolo County may
operate a service in violation of this chapter.
   (b)   Personnel records of all certified or licensed personnel are
confidential and may only be made available to the person who is the subject of
the records and the LEMSA.
   (c)   A registered nurse employed by a permittee is subject to this chapter.
Any violation of this chapter by a registered nurse may result in investigation
by the LEMSA and/or a referral to the California State Board of Registered
Nurses.
   (d)   It is the responsibility of the permittee who is employer of record to
forward any notice issued under this chapter to any of the permittee's
employees, if the notice is undeliverable to the employee's address of record,
it will be provided to the employee at his or her next work shift.
   (e)   Medical transport vehicles shall carry portable oxygen to supplement
patients whose own oxygen supply may run out and shall also carry a first aid
kit approved by the LEMSA.
   (f)   Public entity services shall demonstrate availability of mutual and/or
automatic aid agreements, with adjacent ambulance service areas, which ensure
dispatch of the nearest appropriate ambulance. Mutual and/or automatic aid
agreements must be reviewed and filed with the LEMSA.
   (g)   Commercial services shall participate with adjacent ambulance service
areas in mutual aid agreements which are developed and approved by the LEMSA.
(§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.2002.    Special events.
   Permittees providing special event standby coverage shall comply with the
county's special event requirements set forth in policy and complete an EMS
Special Event Notification form. This form shall be submitted to the county for
approval at least seven (7) days prior to the beginning of the coverage. Non-
county approved transport providers shall pay a special event non-emergency
ambulance permit fee. The county may impose conditions on the approval of the
request, which are necessary to ensure the safety of the public, including, but
not limited to, notification of the local public safety jurisdiction, county
communications, and appropriate emergency or 9-1-1 first responder providers.
This provision shall help to ensure that adequate and integrated emergency
medical services are available to the public and event participants. Any
unauthorized standby service provided by a private EMS service may result in a
fine, permit suspension or revocation. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.2003.    Ambulance rates.
   (a)   The permittee shall submit their service charges and rates to the
county with their application for a Certificate of Operation with each renewal.
Any change to the service charges and rates must be reported to the county at
least fifteen (15) days prior to such changes.
   (b)   All service charges and rates must be defined in sufficient detail so
as to be understandable to the public. A list of all ambulance rates will be
posted on the county website for public viewing. At least annually, the county
will notify local healthcare providers, including hospitals and long-term care
facilities of current ambulance rates.
   (c)   The county reserves the option, with Board approval, to set maximum
allowable rates for ambulance services.
   (d)   The Board may adopt procedures for reviewing and regulating ambulance
rates in the County. If regulated, permittees shall not charge more than the
rates adopted by the Board.
      (1)   If regulated, the schedule of rates may be adjusted by the Board
upon receipt of a request from a permittee. The Board shall hold a public
hearing regarding the requested rate increase.
      (2)   A rate change approved by the Board, as applicable, shall be
effective on the date of approval.
   (e)   Proposed special rates or proposed changes in such rates shall be
submitted to the LEMSA.
   (f)   Current rate categories and charges shall be posted at each
permittee's place of business.
   (g)   This section shall not apply to agencies whose rates are set by public
hearing procedure. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.2004.    Inter-facility transfers.
   (a)   Each ambulance provider participating in the transfer of patients with
an ambulance will conform to all laws, rules and regulations set forth in the
California Health and Safety Code and LEMSA policies applicable to inter-
facility transfer of patients, and pursuant to any formal transfer agreements
between transferring and receiving facilities involved.
   (b)   Transport performed by an ambulance for the patient in transport shall
be provided with appropriate medical care, including personnel and equipment,
according to the California Health and Safety Code and applicable LEMSA
policies. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.2005.    Disaster operations.
   (a)   In the event of a disaster or mass-casualty incident, the ability of
the emergency ALS ambulance providers to provide necessary prehospital
emergency ambulance care and transportation may be disrupted or be inadequate
for the number of casualties. It is expected that permittees assist the county
by providing additional ambulances. In the event of a disaster or mass-casualty
incident, the county will determine the amount of assistance needed. The county
will contact each permitted service to determine availability of ambulances and
may request the permittee to dispatch available ambulances to the county to aid
in the disaster or mass-casualty incident. The county shall coordinate all
medical mutual aid requests through the county Centralized Emergency Medical
Dispatch, the medical mutual aid system, and the county Public Health Officer
when applicable.
   (b)   Permittees shall have on file with the county its disaster response
plan which includes a personnel call-back plan and continuity of operations
plan.
   (c)   All management and field personnel of the permittee shall follow the
county's Multi Casualty Incident (MCI) Plan during an MCI.
   (d)   The county may assist the permittee in seeking reimbursement for its
costs from any disaster relief monies. The county shall have no financial
responsibility for these costs or charges.
   (e)   When requested by the county (via a minimum ninety (90) day notice),
every permittee shall participate in a county organized disaster exercise by
sending one fully staffed ambulance. All costs associated with their
participation in the disaster exercise shall be the sole responsibility of the
permittee.
   (f)   Each permittee shall make ambulances available to the County during
times of disaster or large-scale system emergencies in accordance with the Yolo
County MCI Plan. Ambulances shall report to a county designated dispatch center
via radio for direction. The designated dispatch center shall coordinate all
dispatch functions for said ambulances during the event. All ambulances shall
remain under the control of the County until released.
   (g)   All management and field personnel of each permittee shall follow the
guidelines and directions of the Yolo County MCI Plan during the event.
   (h)   At least once a year, each permittee shall participate in a county-
organized disaster exercise. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 21. Prohibited Acts
Sec. 4-6.2101.    Advertisements or representations.
   No person or service may represent, advertise, or imply that it is
authorized to provide ambulance or medical transport services unless the
service has a current authorization for operation from the LEMSA.
   (a)   Permitting the operation of an ambulance in any manner contrary to the
provisions of this chapter or contrary to any applicable statute, rule, or
regulation.
   (b)   Responding to a call when not requested to respond to that call by an
individual requesting that service or the appropriate dispatch center.
   (c)   Causing or allowing its ambulances to respond to an emergency call
location without first receiving a specific request from a Yolo County approved
dispatch center.
   (d)   Providing ALS service without being authorized by the county to
provide such service.
   (e)   Providing CCT services without possessing a current and valid CCT
Certificate of Operation and associated ambulance permit(s).
   (f)   No person or organization shall announce, advertise, offer, or in any
way claim that it provides nonemergency ambulance service unless it possesses a
current, valid ALS, BLS or CCT ambulance Certificate of Operation.
   (g)   No person or organization shall announce, advertise, offer, or in any
way claim that it provides emergency service unless it has been approved as an
emergency provider by the LEMSA.
   (h)   Any use of a telephone number on an ambulance for non-emergency
ambulance service shall include the phrase "FOR EMERGENCIES, CALL 9-1-1" in
capital letters that are at least as big as the letters used for the telephone
number. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.2102.    Use of EMTs, paramedics, registered nurses.
   No permittee or agency may use EMTs, paramedics and/or registered nurses
unless the permittee or agency has a current permit authorized by the LEMSA and
the permittee operates in accordance with all provisions of this chapter. (§ 1,
Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.2103.    Unit operational standards.
   No person may operate a unit within Yolo County unless the unit meets the
following operation standards:
   (a)   No unit may be dispatched unless it is fully operational; and
   (b)   The unit at the time it is in use or on call contains equipment and
supplies, such as are applicable for any specific unit and specified in this
chapter, whichever may be applicable. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.2104.    Operation of unit while impaired prohibited.
   No person shall operate any unit while under the influence of any
intoxicating liquor or controlled substance or any drugs that impair the
ability to carry out responsibilities. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.2105.    Dispatch of unsanitary unit prohibited.
   No unit may be dispatched with any soiled, dirty or contaminated bandages,
dressings, bedding, materials, or equipment contained in the patient
compartment, unless properly bagged. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Sec. 4-6.2106.    Drug-free workplace compliance.
   No person, permittee, service, or agency shall be out of compliance with
Government Code section 8355 in matters relating to providing a drug-free
workplace. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 22. County Liability
Sec. 4-6.2201.    County liability.
   Unless expressly agreed in writing, the County of Yolo, the LEMSA, HHSA, its
officers, employees and volunteers shall not be liable for any permittee costs
or charges associated with compliance under this chapter or the rules or
regulations promulgated hereunder. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Article 23. Severability
Sec. 4-6.2301.    Severability.
   Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be
declared unconstitutional or invalid, for any reason, the remainder of the
chapter shall not be affected thereby. (§ 1, Ord. 1515, eff. December 19, 2019)
Chapter 7
PORT OF SACRAMENTO
Sections:
   
4-7.01   Smoking: Restrictions: Violations: Penalties.
Sec. 4-7.01.   Smoking: Restrictions: Violations: Penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke any cigarette or other
substance, or strike any match, or kindle any flame whatsoever within the
fenced area of the Port of Sacramento, including vessels moored to the Port’s
facilities, except within offices and those areas designated “SMOKING AREA.”
   (b)   Any person violating any of the provisions set forth in subsection
(a)of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a
misdemeanor under the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine
of not more than Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or by
imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. (§ 1, Ord. 845, eff. June 7, 1979)
Title 5
PUBLIC WELFARE, MORALS, AND CONDUCT
Chapters:
1.   Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled, or Inoperative Vehicles
2.   Card Rooms
3.   False Reports
4.   Intoxication
5.   Loitering
6.   Massage Parlor Permits (Repealed)
7.   Motel and Motor Court Advertising Signs
8.   Parades and Assemblages
9.   Underground Utilities
10.   Weapons
11.   Zane Probation Center
12.   Outdoor Festivals
13.   Certain Obnoxious Conduct
14.   Private Patrols
15.   Rewards
16.   Bingo
17.   Taxicabs
18.   Drug Paraphernalia
19.   Adult Picture Arcades
Chapter 1
ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
Sections:
   
5-1.01   Findings and determinations.
   
5-1.02   Definitions.
   
5-1.03   Exceptions.
   
5-1.04   Effect on other laws.
   
5-1.05   Administration and enforcement.
   
5-1.06   Right of entry of certain persons.
   
5-1.07   Administrative costs.
   
5-1.08   Hearings: Notice.
   
5-1.09   Hearings: Determinations.
   
5-1.10   Removal.
   
5-1.11   Removal: Notice.
   
5-1.12   Assessment of costs.
   
5-1.13   Violations.
Sec. 5-1.01. Findings and determinations.
   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the State pursuant to the provisions of Section 22660 of
the Vehicle Code of the State to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, as public nuisances, the Board hereby
makes the following findings and declarations:
   The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property, not
including highways, is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the
value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite
plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance
creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for
rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety, and general
welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private or public property, not
including highways, except as expressly permitted by the provisions of this
chapter, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated
as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 585)
Sec. 5-1.02. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Highway” shall mean a way or place of whatever nature, publicly
maintained and open to the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular
travel. “Highway” shall include “street”.
   (b)   “Public property” shall not include “highway”.
   (c)   “Vehicle” shall mean a device by which any person or property may be
propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power
or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (§ 1, Ord. 585)
Sec. 5-1.03. Exceptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (a)   A vehicle, or part thereof, which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
   (b)   A vehicle, or part thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or
parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or
commercial enterprise.
   The provisions of this section shall not authorize the maintenance of a
public or private nuisance as defined pursuant to provisions of law other than
Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code
of the State and this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 585)
Sec. 5-1.04. Effect on other laws.
   The provisions of this chapter are not the exclusive regulation of
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within the
unincorporated area of the County. The provisions of this chapter shall
supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and laws
heretofore or hereafter enacted by the County, the State, or any other legal
entity or agency having jurisdiction. (§ 3, Ord. 585)
Sec. 5-1.05.   Administration and enforcement.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the Sheriff-Coroner. In the enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter, such officer and his deputies may enter upon
private or public property to examine a vehicle, or parts thereof, or obtain
information as to the identity of a vehicle, declared to be a nuisance pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter. (§ 4, Ord. 585)
Sec. 5-1.06.   Right of entry of certain persons.
   When the Board has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person,
such person shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public
property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle, or parts thereof,
declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (§ 5,
Ord. 585)
Sec. 5-1.07. Administrative costs.
   The Board shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed
as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle,
or part thereof) for the purposes of administering the provisions of this
chapter. (§ 6, Ord. 585)
Sec. 5-1.08. Hearings: Notice.
   A public hearing shall be held on the question of abatement and removal of
the vehicle, or part thereof, as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicle and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost
of removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, against the property on which it is
located. Notice of such hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days before
the hearing by certified mail, with a five (5) day return requested, to the
owner of the land as shown on the last equalized County assessment roll and to
the last registered and legal owner of record unless the vehicle is in such
condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.
If any of such notices are returned undelivered by the United States Post
Office, the hearing shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days
from the date of such return.
   Notice of such hearing shall also be given to the Highway Patrol of the
State identifying the vehicle, or part thereof, proposed for removal. Such
notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. (§§
7 and 8, Ord. 585)
Sec. 5-1.09. Hearings: Determinations.
   All hearings held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be held
before the Board which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent.
Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle,
or part thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on private
property or public property. The Board shall not be limited by the technical
rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may
appear in person at the hearing, or present a written statement in time for
consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the
vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial.
   The Board may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems
appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, if, in its
opinion, the circumstances so justify. At the conclusion of the public hearing,
the Board may find that a vehicle, or part thereof, has been abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property, order the
same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided
in this chapter, and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal
to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle, or
part thereof, is located. The order requiring removal shall include a
description of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the correct identification
number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.
   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land
without the consent of the land owner and that he has not subsequently
acquiesced in its presence, the Board shall not assess costs of administration
or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is
located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such land owner.
   If an interested person makes a written presentation to the Board but does
not appear, such interested person shall be notified in writing of the
decision. (§ 9, Ord. 585)
Sec. 5-1.10. Removal.
   Five (5) days after the adoption of the order declaring the vehicle, or
parts thereof, to be a public nuisance, or five (5) days from the date of
mailing of the notice of the decision, if such notice is required by the
provisions of Section
5-1.09 of this chapter, the vehicles, or parts thereof, may be disposed of by
removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has
been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. (§ 10,
Ord. 585)
Sec. 5-1.11. Removal: Notice.
   Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle, or part
thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State
identifying the vehicle, or part thereof, removed. At the same time there shall
be transmitted to said Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of
registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of
title, and license plates. (§ 11, Ord. 585)
Sec. 5-1.12. Assessment of costs.
   If the administrative costs and the costs of removal which are charged
against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of Section
5-1.09 of this chapter are not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of
the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be
assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of Section 25845
of the Government Code of the State and shall be transmitted to the Treasurer-
Tax Collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as
other County taxes. (§ 12, Ord. 585)
Sec. 5-1.13. Violations.
   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park,
store, or leave, or permit the abandonment, parking, storing, or leaving of,
any licensed or unlicensed vehicle, or part thereof, which is in an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative condition upon any private property or
public property, not including highways, within the County for a period in
excess of five (5) days unless such vehicle, or part thereof, is completely
enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible
from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is
stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the
business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard.
   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to
remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or part
thereof, or to refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in
accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or State law where
such State law is applicable. (§§ 13 and 14, Ord. 585)
Chapter 2
CARD ROOMS*
*   Sections
5-2.01 through
5-2.10, codified from Ordinance No. 355, amended in their entirety by Section
1, Ordinance No. 728, effective September 17, 1975.
Sections:
   
5-2.01   Interpretation.
   
5-2.02   Card room defined.
   
5-2.03   Licenses: Required.
   
5-2.03.5   License: Participation in more than one license.
   
5-2.04   Licenses: Participation in the business.
   
5-2.05   Licenses: Fees.
   
5-2.06   Licenses: Fees: Exemptions.
   
5-2.07   Licenses: Bonds.
   
5-2.08   Licenses: Transfer.
   
5-2.09   Licenses: Applications: Form.
   
5-2.09.5   License: Applications: Lotteries.
   
5-2.10   Licenses: Inactive.
   
5-2.11   Licenses: Applications: Approval.
   
5-2.12   License: Issuance: Conditions.
   
5-2.12.1   Licenses: Number.
   
5-2.12.2   Licenses: Hours of Operation.
   
5-2.13   Licenses: Temporary suspension by the Sheriff-Coroner: Applications to
the Board
   
5-2.14   Licenses: Revocation
   
5-2.15   Licenses: Temporary suspension by the Sheriff-Coroner: Applications to
the Board.
   
5-2.16   Card tables limited.
   
5-2.17   Inspections of the premises.
   
5-2.18   Licensed premises: Rules.
   
5-2.19   Employees of licensees: Registration: Permits.
   
5-2.20   Employee permits: Approval by the Sheriff-Coroner.
   
5-2.21   Employee permits: Revocation.
   
5-2.22   Employee permits: Revocation: Appeals.
   
5-2.23   Discrimination.
Sec. 5-2.01. Interpretation.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to permit the
licensing of any card game declared unlawful by the provisions of the Penal
Code of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.02. Card room defined.
   For the purposes of this chapter, “card room” shall mean any place where
games of cards are played and to which the public is invited to participate in
card games with or without the payment of consideration. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff.
September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.03. Licenses: Required.
   No person shall operate or conduct a card room, nor participate in the
business of operating or conducting a card room, unless he holds a valid and
subsisting license to do so duly issued by the Sheriff-Coroner upon approval of
the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975, as amended by § 1, Ord.
953, eff. July 1, 1983)
Sec. 5-2.03.5.   Licenses: Participation in more than one license.
   No person defined and designated by this chapter as a person required to be
licensed as a participant in the business of the operation or conducting of a
card room, either individually or as a joint licensee, shall participate in
more than one such business or be a joint licensee in more than one license
issued pursuant to this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 892, eff. October 9, 1980)
Sec. 5-2.04. Licenses: Participation in the business.
   The following designated persons, firms, or entities are hereby defined and
designated as persons required to be licensed as participants in the business
of the operation or conducting of a card room as joint licensees:
   (a)   All lessees, tenants, co-tenants, or subtenants of the real property
upon which the card room is conducted;
   (b)   All persons, firms, or entities which are licensed to conduct other
businesses upon or within the premises within which the card room is operated
or conducted;
   (c)   All persons, firms, or entities which receive remuneration from a
licensee by way of a share or percentage of the gross or net receipts from the
card room operation;
   (d)   All general and limited partners of the licensee or any participant as
defined in this section; and
   (e)   All officers of a corporate licensee or corporate participant in the
business as defined in this section. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.05. Licenses: Fees.
   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be issued upon
the payment to the County of an annual license fee of Two Hundred Fifty-Two and
no/100ths ($252.00) Dollars for each card table, beginning on January 1 of each
year. When a license is issued after January 1 of any year, a prorated
deduction shall be made in the amount of the fee for each whole calendar month
which has expired since January 1 of such year.
   Such license fees shall be collected by the Sheriff-Coroner, who shall issue
the license upon Board approval and the filing of a bond pursuant to the
provisions of Section
5-2.07 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975, as amended by
§ 2, Ord. 953, eff. July 1, 1983)
Sec. 5-2.06. Licenses: Fees: Exemptions.
   Card games played or held by fraternal or veterans’ organizations, lodges,
church groups, or farm associations for the members or bona fide guests thereof
shall be exempt from the provisions of Section
5-2.05 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.07. Licenses: Bonds.
   The licensee shall furnish and deposit with the Clerk of the Board a bond in
the sum of One Thousand and no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars to assure the County
of the faithful performance of his obligations under the terms of the license.
(§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.08. Licenses: Transfer.
   Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be valid
only as to the persons and premises designated thereon, and a licensee shall
not assign, transfer, or hypothecate the license, or his interest therein, or
change the location of the card room without the express approval of the Board.
(§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.09.   Licenses: Applications: Form.
   The applicant for a license to conduct a card room shall file with the
Sheriff-Coroner a verified application setting forth the following:
   (a)   The name and address of all persons interested in the operation of the
card room;
   (b)   The location of the card room;
   (c)   All necessary facts indicating that the place in which the card room
is to be conducted and the persons conducting the card room are of good moral
character;
   (d)   A statement as to whether any state, municipality, governing body, or
licensing authority has ever refused to issue to the applicant, or renew, any
license requiring a showing of good moral character or has revoked any such
license and, if so, the circumstances in connection with such revocation or
refusal;
   (e)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant or any person
interested in the proposed card room has ever been convicted of any crime and,
if so, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor; and
   (f)   Such further information as may be required by the Sheriff-Coroner. (§
1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.09.5.   Licenses: Applications: Lotteries.
   (a)   Upon the filing of an application for a license to be issued pursuant
to this chapter, the Sheriff-Coroner shall report such filing to the Board.
   (b)   Upon the receipt of a report of filing, the Board shall determine
whether the provisions of Section
5-2.12.1 of this chapter concerning the number of licenses permit the issuance
of an additional license.
   (c)   If the determination is in the negative, the application shall be
denied summarily.
   (d)   If the determination is in the affirmative, the Board shall set a
filing period for further applications of at least thirty (30) days in duration
and give notice thereof by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in
the County once a week for two (2) weeks.
   (e)   Within the filing period so set, additional applications may be filed
with the Sheriff-Coroner for a license. At the conclusion of the filing period,
any additional filings shall be reported by the Sheriff-Coroner to the Board.
All such applications shall be filed in the form specified by this chapter.
   (f)   Upon the receipt of a report from the Sheriff-Coroner as to such
filings, the Board shall determine whether the total number of applications on
file exceeds the limit imposed by Section
5-2.12.1 of this chapter. If the determination is in the negative, the Board
shall direct the Sheriff-Coroner to proceed to review the applications for a
report to the Board. If the number of applications exceeds the limit, the Board
shall determine the applications to be reviewed and considered for issuance by
lot.
   (g)   If any of the applications so selected by lot is rejected by the Board
after recommendation and review, the Board shall determine by lot the identity
of a further application to be eligible for review, report, and issuance of a
license. (§ 2, Ord. 892, eff. October 9, 1980)
Sec. 5-2.10. Licenses: Inactive.
   Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become
immediately void if the licensee fails to commence the operation of the card
room so licensed within forty-five (45) days after the issuance of the license,
discontinues the operation of the licensed card room for more than ninety (90)
days, or fails to renew his license before February 15 of any year. (§ 1, Ord.
728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.11.   Licenses: Applications: Approval.
   All persons required to be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall jointly apply for a license, which shall be approved and issued
by the Board if it finds that the application is complete and accurate in its
statement of facts, that the persons to be licensed are persons of good moral
character and have never been convicted of a crime or public offense involving
moral turpitude, and that the issuance of the license is consistent with the
preservation of the public peace, health, safety, and welfare. (§ 1, Ord. 728,
eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.12. Licenses: Issuance: Conditions.
   Upon considering the application for a license pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, the Board shall consider the nature and location of the site of
the card room, the presence or absence of compatible or incompatible land uses
or activities in the area, and the number of card rooms in existence in the
area, and the Board may issue the license subject to conditions, including the
hours of operation and locations of tables. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17,
1975)
Sec. 5-2.12.1.   Licenses: Number.
   The number of card room licenses issued shall be limited to one license for
each 20,000 or fraction thereof of inhabitants of the unincorporated territory
of the County. Not more than one card room shall be located at any one address.
(§ 3, Ord. 892, eff. October 9, 1980)
Sec. 5-2.12.2. Licenses: Hours of operation.
   No card room licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
operate between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. (§ 4, Ord. 892, eff.
October 9, 1980)
Sec. 5-2.13. Licenses: Temporary suspension by the Sheriff-Coroner.
   Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be suspended
by the Sheriff-Coroner for a period of fifteen (15) days in the event the
Sheriff-Coroner finds that any of the conditions or events described in Section
5-2.14 of this chapter exist or have occurred. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September
17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.14. Licenses: Revocation.
   All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
issued subject to revocation or suspension by the Board, and shall be subject
to a temporary suspension by the Sheriff-Coroner as provided in Section
5-2.13 of this chapter, if it is found that:
   (a)   The conditions of the license or the provisions of this chapter have
been violated;
   (b)   The license was obtained by fraudulent misrepresentation;
   (c)   The licensee is, or has caused the card room to be conducted by, a
person who is not of good moral character;
   (d)   Minors are permitted to frequent the card room;
   (e)   The card room is not open to the public during any portion of the time
card games are played therein; or
   (f)   The license has been used to operate the card room in a disorderly
manner or in such a manner as to be prejudicial to the public welfare. (§ 1,
Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.15. Licenses: Temporary suspension by the Sheriff-Coroner:
Applications to the Board.
   Upon issuing his order temporarily suspending the license, the Sheriff-
Coroner may apply to the Board for further suspension or revocation pursuant to
the provisions of Section
5-2.14 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.16. Card tables limited.
   Each card room licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
have on the premises no more than five (5) card tables seating seven (7)
players each. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.17. Inspections of the premises.
   The Sheriff-Coroner may, at any time, inspect the licensed premises and
investigate the manner of the operation of the licensee in order to determine
whether the conduct of the licensee is contrary to the public welfare. (§ 1,
Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.18. Licensed premises: Rules.
   The licensee shall prominently post upon the licensed premises the license
and a complete set of rules and regulations for the playing of the games and
the required conduct of the players, which rules and regulations shall have
been previously approved by the Sheriff-Coroner. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September
17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.19. Employees of licensees: Registration: Permits.
   No person may be employed by a licensee in the conduct or operation of a
card room, or work in the licensed card room as a card dealer, shill, cashier,
supervisor, manager, or clerk, unless and until such person, within five (5)
days of the commencement of work, registers his identity with the Sheriff-
Coroner giving full personal particulars, as required by the Sheriff-Coroner,
including a photograph and fingerprints, and pays a fee for such registration
of Ten and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars, and receives a permit from the Sheriff-
Coroner. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.20.   Employee permits: Approval by the Sheriff-Coroner.
   The Sheriff-Coroner shall approve the application for an employee permit if
he finds that the applicant is a person of good moral character and has never
been convicted of a crime or public offense involving moral turpitude. (§ 1,
Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.21. Employee permits: Revocation.
   An employee permit may be revoked by the Board, upon the recommendation of
the Sheriff-Coroner, if it is determined that:
   (a)   The permit was obtained by fraudulent misrepresentation; or
   (b)   The permittee has operated the card room, or assisted in the operation
of the card room, in a disorderly manner or in a manner determined to be
prejudicial to the public welfare. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.22.   Employee permits: Revocation: Appeals.
   An employee aggrieved by the revocation of his permit may appeal the
decision of the Sheriff-Coroner to the Board by filing a written notice of
appeal with the Clerk of the Board within fifteen (15) days after such
revocation. The Clerk of the Board shall then set the appeal for a public
hearing within thirty (30) days after the filing. The Board shall then hear the
appeal and determine whether such revocation by the Sheriff-Coroner was based
upon good cause. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.23. Discrimination.
   A licensee shall maintain the licensed premises open to all members of the
public without discrimination as to race, creed, color, sex, or national
origin. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17, 1975)
Sec. 5-2.24. Violations: Penalties.
   Any violation of the provisions of Section
5-2.03 of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set
forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. (§ 1, Ord. 728, eff. September 17,
1975)
Chapter 3
FALSE REPORTS
Sections:
   
5-3.01   Unlawful.
Sec. 5-3.01. Unlawful.
   (a)   Statements. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly falsify
or conceal any fact or make any false or fraudulent statement or
misrepresentation in any matter or proceeding within the jurisdiction of any
department or agency of the County.
   (b)   Writings and documents. It shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly use any false or misleading writing or document in any matter or
proceeding within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the County.
(§§ 1 and 2, Ord. 338)
Chapter 4
INTOXICATION
Sections:
   
5-4.01   Inhaling, breathing, and drinking certain substances.
   
5-4.02   Public consumption of alcoholic beverages.
Sec. 5-4.01.   Inhaling, breathing, and drinking certain substances.
   (a)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to inhale, breathe,
drink, or in any manner use any product or substance, or combination thereof,
containing organic solvents or aromatic, fuming, vaporous, or gaseous
substances which, when so consumed, cause intoxication, elation, paralysis, a
dazed condition, or irrational behavior, or in any manner a change, distortion,
or disturbance of eyesight, thinking process, balance, or coordination, or an
effect upon the central nervous system of such person, including, but not
limited to, such substances as amyl acetate, trichlor ethylene, acetone, or
other closely related or similar compounds used as solvents for products
referred to as “glue”, “adhesive cement”, “mucilage”, or “dope”, gasoline,
ether, glue, lacquer, or paint thinner, with the intent of causing any such
condition or effect. For the purposes of this section, any such condition so
induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition.
   (b)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not pertain to any
person who inhales, breathes, drinks, or uses such product or substance
pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, physician, surgeon,
dentist, or podiatrist authorized to so direct or prescribe. (§ 1, Ord. 566)
Sec. 5-4.02.   Public consumption of alcoholic beverages.
   (a)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any beer, wine,
or other alcoholic beverage, or to possess any open alcoholic beverage
container on any public parking lot, on any private parking lot held open to
the public, on any public street, sidewalk, alley or walkway, or in any place
held open to the public within 250 feet of any establishment selling alcoholic
beverages.
   This section shall not apply to any public parking lot adjoining a public
park where drinking is permitted.
   (b)   Exception. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit any act which
is prohibited by any laws of the State of California. (§ 1, Ord. 1063, eff.
December 3, 1987)
Chapter 5
LOITERING
Sections:
   
5-5.01   Public highways and sidewalks.
   
5-5.02   Places of public assemblage.
   
5-5.03   Definitions for curfew provisions.
   
5-5.04   Minors: Curfew; Responsibility of parents and guardians.
   
5-5.05   Penalty.
Sec. 5-5.01.   Public highways and sidewalks.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or stand or sit in or upon any
public highway, alley, sidewalk, or crosswalk in the unincorporated territory
of the County so as in any manner to hinder or obstruct the free passage
therein or thereon of persons or vehicles passing along the same or so as in
any manner to annoy or molest persons passing along the same. (§ 1, Ord. 140)
Sec. 5-5.02.   Places of public assemblage.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or stand or sit in or at the
entrance of any church, hall, theater, or other place of public assemblage in
the unincorporated territory of the County so as to in any manner obstruct such
entrance. (§ 2, Ord. 140)
Sec. 5-5.03.   Definition for curfew provisions.
   For the purposes of Sections
5-5.04 and
5-5.05:
   “Curfew hours” means the period from 10:00 p.m. any evening of the week, or
11:00 p.m. daylight savings time, until 6:00 a.m. the following day.
   “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   “Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place
of amusement or entertainment.
   “Guardian” means: (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of a
minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
the court.
   “Minor” means any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-
parent of the minor.
   “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to streets, highways,
and common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
   “Responsible adult” means a person eighteen (18) years of age or older,
authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
   “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk
of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (§ 1, Ord.
327, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1358, effective May 31, 2007)
Sec. 5-5.04.   Minors: Curfew; Responsibility of parents and guardians.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the County of Yolo during curfew
hours.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly
permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the County during
curfew hours.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Section
5-5.04(a) or (b)that the minor was:
   (1)   accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian, or by a responsible
adult;
   (2)   on an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, or
the responsible adult, without any detour or stop;
   (3)   in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
   (4)   engaged in employment activity, or going to or returning home from an
employment activity, without any detour or stop;
   (5)   involved in, or acting in response to, an emergency;
   (6)   on the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence;
   (7)attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the County of Yolo, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
   (8)   exercising First amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution; or
   (9)   emancipated pursuant to law.
   (d)   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, police
officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the
public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The
officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless
the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on
any response and other circumstances, no defense under Section
5-5.04 (c)is present or applicable.
   (e)   Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense for
the purposes of Section
5-5.05 (§ 2, Ord. 327; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1358, effective May 31, 2007)
Sec. 5-5.05.   Penalty.
   Any minor violating the provisions of Section
5-5.04 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be dealt with in accordance
with juvenile court law and procedure.
   Any parent, guardian or other adult person, having the care and custody of a
minor, who knowingly and willfully allows such minor to violate Section
5-5.04 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (§ 3, Ord. 327 as amended by § 2, Ord.
1358, effective May 31, 2007)
Chapter 6
MASSAGE PARLOR PERMITS*
*   Chapter 6 entitled “Massages and Massage Parlors”, consisting of Sections
5-6.01 through 5-6.15, codified from Ordinance No. 516, repealed by Section 1,
Ordinance No. 805, effective June 29, 1978; Sections 5-6.201 through 5-6.802,
codified from Ordinance No. 805, repealed in their entirety by § 6, Ord. 1275,
eff. December 6, 2001.
Chapter 7
MOTEL AND MOTOR COURT ADVERTISING SIGNS
Sections:
   
5-7.01   Scope.
   
5-7.02   Definitions.
   
5-7.03   Posting rates.
   
5-7.04   Violations.
Sec. 5-7.01. Scope.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to operators and owners of
motels, motor courts, and like establishments within the unincorporated area of
the County. (§ 1(d), Ord. 592)
Sec. 5-7.02. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Operator” or “owner” shall mean and include a manager or any person
in charge of the operation of a motel, motor court, or like establishment.
“Operator’ or “owner” shall include natural persons, firms, and corporations.
   (b)   “Outdoor sign” or “outside sign” shall mean any sign visible to
passersby, whether such sign is located within or without a building.
   (c)   “Room rates” shall mean the rates at which rooms or other
accommodations are rented to occupants. (§ 1(a), (b), and (c), Ord. 592)
Sec. 5-7.03. Posting rates.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any motel, motor court, or
like establishment located within the unincorporated area of the County to post
or maintain posted on any outdoor or outside advertising sign pertaining to
such establishment any rates for accommodations offered in such establishment.
(§ 2, Ord. 592)
Sec. 5-7.04. Violations.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of
not less than One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars nor more than Five
Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment of not less than
ten (10) days nor more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (§ 3, Ord. 592)
Chapter 8
PARADES AND ASSEMBLAGES
Sections:
   
5-8.01   Permits: Required.
   
5-8.02   Permits: Application: form.
   
5-8.03   Permits: Applications: Accompanying certificates.
   
5-8.04   Permits: Issuance.
   
5-8.05   Permits: Conditions: Nontransferable
   
5-8.06   Permits: Revocation.
   
5-8.07   Separate permits required.
Sec. 5-8.01. Permits: Required.
   (a)   Parades, processions, and musical demonstrations. It shall be unlawful
for any person to hold, manage, conduct, carry on, or to cause or permit to be
held, managed, conducted, or carried on, any parade, march, or procession of
any kind, other than a funeral procession, or to make any display of, or to
use, beat, or operate, any wind instrument, stringed instrument, or musical
instrument in or upon any public highway, public park, or public place in the
unincorporated territory of the County without having first obtained from the
Board a written permit so to do.
   (b)   Assemblages and speeches. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold,
conduct, or address any assemblage, meeting, or gathering of persons, or to
make or deliver any public speech, lecture, or discourse, or to conduct or take
part in any public debate or discussion in or upon any public highway, alley,
sidewalk, cross-walk, or public park in the unincorporated territory of the
County without having first obtained from the Board a written permit so to do.
(§§ 3, 4, and 5, Ord. 140)
Sec. 5-8.02. Permits: Applications: Form.
   Every person, before commencing, carrying on, engaging in, or doing any of
the acts set forth in Section
5-8.01 of this chapter, shall first make a written application to the Board for
a written permit therefor. Such application shall be made by such person
personally or, in the case of a corporation, by the manager or officer in
actual charge of such business. Such application shall specify the place, park,
public highway, alley, sidewalk, or cross-walk where it is intended or proposed
to carry on such act. (§ 6, Ord. 140)
Sec. 5-8.03. Permits: Applications: Accompanying certificates.
   An application for the permit required by the provisions of Section
5-8.01 of this chapter shall be accompanied by a certificate, signed by at
least three (3) reputable residents of the County, certifying to the good moral
character and reputation of the person making such application. (§ 6, Ord. 140)
Sec. 5-8.04. Permits: Issuance.
   No permit required by the provisions of this chapter shall be granted to any
person who does not bear a good character and reputation for peace and quiet in
the neighborhood in which he resides.
   The Board, before issuing any such permit, shall first satisfy itself that
the holding, managing, conducting, and carrying on of any proposed parade,
march, or procession of any kind, other than a funeral procession, or the
proposed use of any wind instrument, stringed instrument, or musical
instrument, or the proposed holding or conducting of any assemblage, or the
proposed making or delivering of any public speech, lecture, discourse, debate,
or discussion will not seriously affect the public peace, health, or safety
and, for such purpose, may consider any facts or evidence bearing on the place
where the assembly, speech, public debate, or other proposed act or action is
to be held or delivered or is to occur or take place, with due regard to
traffic congestion at that particular point and, in addition thereto, any other
facts or evidence tending to enlighten the Board in such respect. The Board
shall issue such permit in accordance with the provisions of this section. (§§
6, 9, and 10, Ord. 140)
Sec. 5-8.05. Permits: Conditions: Nontransferable.
   Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall apply
only to the person in whose name it is issued and to the location, public
highway, public park, or public place therein specified. Such permit shall not
be transferable or assignable in any manner. (§ 8, Ord. 140)
Sec. 5-8.06. Permits: Revocation.
   The Board shall have, and it hereby retains, the right, power, and privilege
of revoking for good cause any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. (§ 10, Ord. 140)
Sec. 5-8.07. Separate permits required.
   Only one parade, march, procession, meeting, display, address, public
speech, lecture, discourse, public debate, or discussion shall be held,
conducted, carried on, or engaged in under a single permit. (§ 7, Ord. 140)
Chapter 9
UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Sections:
   
5-9.01   Definitions.
   
5-9.02   Public necessity and welfare: Hearings.
   
5-9.03   Designation of Districts.
   
5-9.04   Unlawful acts.
   
5-9.05   Exceptions: emergencies and unusual circumstances.
   
5-9.06   Other exceptions.
   
5-9.07   Designation of Districts: Notice to property owners and utilities.
   
5-9.08   Responsibility of utility companies.
   
5-9.09   Responsibility of property owners.
   
5-9.10   Responsibility of County.
   
5-9.11   Extension of time.
Sec. 5-9.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Clerk” shall mean the Clerk of the Board.
   (b)   “Commission” shall mean the Public Utilities Commission of the State.
   (c)   “Director” shall mean the Director of Public Works of the County.
   (d)   “Person” shall mean and include individuals, firms, corporations,
partnerships, and their agents and employees.
   (e)   “Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures” shall mean
poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms,
braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located aboveground within a
District and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, or similar or
associated service.
   (f)   “Underground Utility District” or “District” shall mean that area in
the unincorporated areas of the County within which poles, overhead wires, and
associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a
resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section
5-9.03 of this chapter.
   (g)   “Utility” shall mean and include all persons or entities supplying
electric, communication, or similar associated service by means of electrical
materials or devices. (§ 1, Ord. 596)
Sec. 5-9.02. Public necessity and welfare: Hearings.
   The Board may, from time to time, call public hearings to ascertain whether
the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires the removal of poles,
overhead wires, and associated overhead structures within designated areas of
the unincorporated area of the County and the underground installation of wires
and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated
service. The Clerk shall notify all affected property owners, as shown on the
last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned by mail of the time and
place of such hearings at least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. Each
such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to
time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity
to be heard. The decision of the Board shall be final and conclusive. (§ 2,
Ord. 596)
Sec. 5-9.03. Designation of Districts.
   If, after any such public hearing, the Board finds that the public
necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires such removal and such
underground installation within a designated area, the Board shall, by
resolution, declare such designated area an Underground Utility District and
order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include
a description of the area comprising such District and shall fix the time
within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished
and within which affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground
service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground
installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and
equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such
underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (§ 3, Ord. 596)
Sec. 5-9.04. Unlawful acts.
   Whenever the Board creates an Underground Utility District and orders the
removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures therein,
as provided in Section
5-9.03 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to
erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or operate poles,
overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in the District after the
date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by resolution,
except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an
owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or
occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to
continue to receive utility service, as provided in Section
5-9.09 of this chapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove the
facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided
in this chapter. (§ 4, Ord. 596)
Sec. 5-9.05.   Exceptions: Emergencies and unusual circumstances.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, overhead facilities may
be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten (10) days, without
the authority of the Board in order to provide emergency service. The Board may
grant special permission, on such terms as the Board may deem appropriate, in
cases of unusual circumstances without discrimination as to any person or
utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use, or operate poles,
overhead wires, and associated overhead structures. (§ 5, Ord. 596)
Sec. 5-9.06. Other exceptions.
   The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to the
provisions of Section
5-9.03 of this chapter, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, shall not
apply to the following types of facilities:
   (a)   County facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to
the satisfaction of the Director;
   (b)   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
   (c)   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a District within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a District, when such wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited;
   (d)   Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used for the
transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;
   (e)   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means
of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without
crossing or overhanging any public right-of-way;
   (f)   Antennae, associated equipment, and supporting structures used by a
utility for furnishing communication services;
   (g)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface
mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and
concealed ducts; and
   (h)   Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures
used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (§ 6, Ord. 596)
Sec. 5-9.07.   Designation of Districts: Notice to property owners and
utilities.
   Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted
pursuant to the provisions of Section
5-9.03 of this chapter, the Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all
persons owning real property within the District created by such resolution of
the adoption thereof. The Clerk shall further notify such affected property
owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property
desires to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or
associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility
changes on his premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the
supplying utility or utilities at a new location subject to the applicable
rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file
with the Commission.
   Notification by the Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution
adopted pursuant to the provisions of said Section
5-9.03, together with a copy of the provisions of this chapter, to affected
property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to
the affected utilities. (§ 7, Ord. 596)
Sec. 5-9.08.   Responsibility of utility companies.
   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a
District created by any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of
Section
5-9.03 of this chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the
conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it
under its applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs on file with the
Commission. (§ 8, Ord. 596)
Sec. 5-9.09.   Responsibility of property owners.
   (a)   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a
building or structure within a District shall construct and provide that
portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities set
forth in Section
5-9.08 of this chapter and the termination facility on or within the building
or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules,
regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with
the Commission. If such construction is not accomplished by any person within
the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of
Section
5-9.03 of this chapter, the Director shall give notice in writing to the person
in possession of such premises and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as
shown on the last equalized assessment roll to provide the required underground
facilities within ten (10) days after the receipt of such notice.
   (b)   The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given
either by personal service or by mail. In the event of service by mail on
either of such persons, the notice shall be deposited in the United States mail
in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in
possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice shall be addressed
to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and shall be addressed to
such owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized
assessment roll. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to
have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight
(48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the
owner or occupant of such premises, the Director shall, within forty-eight (48)
hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not
less than eight (8”) inches by ten (10”) inches in size, to be posted in a
conspicuous place on such premises.
   (c)   The notice given by the Director to provide the required underground
facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and
shall state that if such work is not completed within thirty (30) days after
receipt of such notice, the Director will provide such required underground
facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof shall be assessed
against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property.
   (d)   If, upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, such required
underground facilities have not been provided, the Director shall forthwith
proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and
no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the
Director shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have
the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead
service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such
property. Upon completion of the work by the Director, he shall file a written
report with the Board, setting forth the fact that the required underground
facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with the legal
description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The
Board shall, thereupon, fix a time and place for hearing protests against the
assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be
less than ten (10) days thereafter.
   (e)   The Director shall, forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests
having been fixed, give notice in writing to the person in possession of such
premises and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner
provided in subsection (b)of this section for the giving of the notice to
provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the
Board will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such
assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed
assessment.
   (f)   Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Board
shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then
proceed to affirm, modify, or reject the assessment.
   (g)   If any assessment is not paid within five (5) days after its
confirmation by the Board, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien
upon the property against which the assessment is made by the Director, and the
Director is here directed to turn over to the Assessor and Tax Collector a
notice of lien on each of such properties on which the assessment has not been
paid, and the Assessor and Tax Collector shall add the amount of such
assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon
which the assessment was not paid. Such assessment shall be due and payable at
the same time as such property taxes are due and payable and, if not paid when
due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six (6%) percent per annum.
(§ 9, Ord. 596)
Sec. 5-9.10. Responsibility of County.
   The County shall remove at its own expense all County-owned equipment from
all poles required to be removed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in
ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within
the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of
Section
5-9.03 of this chapter. (§ 10, Ord. 596)
Sec. 5-9.11. Extension of time.
   In the event any act required by the provisions of this chapter or by a
resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section
5-9.03 of this chapter cannot be performed within the time provided on account
of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor
disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control
of the actor, the time within such act shall be accomplished shall be extended
for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (§ 11, Ord. 596)
Chapter 10
WEAPONS
Sections:
   
5-10.01   Discharging rifles at game in certain areas.
   
5-10.02   Discharging weapons in certain areas.
   
5-10.03   Concealed weapons: Additional fees.
   
5-10.04   Discharging firearms near populated areas.
   
5-10.05   Discharging firearms on lands of other persons.
   
5-10.06   Safe storage of firearms.
   
5-10.07   Violations: Penalties.
Sec. 5-10.01.   Discharging rifles at game in certain area.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to protect the health and
safety of all persons in the County from the danger resulting from the
discharging of rifles during the deer hunting season in an area heavily
populated with harvest workers.
   (b)   Rifle defined. “Rifle” shall not include 22-caliber rim fire rifles,
shotguns, or shotguns firing rifle slugs.
   (c)   Prohibited area. It shall be unlawful during the deer hunting season
for any person to discharge a rifle at game in that portion of the County which
lies east of U.S. Highway 99-W. (§§ 1, 2, and 3, Ord. 483)
Sec. 5-10.02.   Discharging weapons in certain areas.
   (a)   Prohibited areas. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)of
this section, it shall be unlawful to discharge a weapon in the prohibited
areas of the unincorporated territory of the County described as follows:
   (1)   East Yolo Area. Beginning at the intersection of the center line of
the Sacramento River and at a point 45 feet northerly of the center line of
County Road 126; thence westerly along a line parallel to the center line of
County Road 126 and the extension thereof to the center line of the east levee
of the East Yolo Bypass; thence southerly and westerly along the center line of
the east levee of the East Yolo Bypass to the extension of the center line of
Thorpe Road; thence easterly along the extension of the center line of Thorpe
Road to the center line of the Sacramento River Deep Water Ship Channel; thence
southerly along the center line of the Sacramento River Deep Water Ship Channel
to the extension of the center line of the north levee of Lisbon Slough; thence
easterly along the westerly extension of the center line of the north levee of
Lisbon Slough and along the center line of the north levee of Lisbon Slough and
the easterly extension of the center line of Lisbon Slough to the center line
of the Sacramento River; thence along the center line of the Sacramento River
to the point of beginning;
   (2)   Guinda Dump and Park. Lot 36 of Guinda Colony Tract, said tract being
filed in Map Book 1 at page 47 in the office of the County Clerk-Recorder;
   (3)   Esparto Park. A parcel of land being a portion of the Plaza of the
town of Esperanza as shown on said Town map filed in Map Book 1 at page 23 in
the office of the County Clerk-Recorder, more fully described as follows:
   Commencing at the northwest comer of Lot 9 of Block 22; thence north east
65.00 feet to the southwest corner of the Esparto Park, the true point of
beginning; thence northerly along the west line of said Park, being the east
line of Yolo Avenue (State Highway No. 16), north 10º03’00” east 275.00 feet to
the north line of said Park; thence south 79º57’00” east 155.00 feet to the
east line of said Park; thence south 10º03’00” west 275.00 feet to the south
line of said Park; thence north 79º57’00” west 155.00 feet to the true point of
beginning;
   (4)   Airport. The west one-half of Section 34, Township 9 North, Range 1
East, M.D.B. & M., the northwest one-quarter of Section 3, and the north 240.5
feet of the southwest one-quarter of Section 3, Township 8 North, Range 1 East,
M.D.B. & M., being approximately 294.3 acres, more or less.
   Excepting therefrom the following described property:
   A parcel of land being a portion of the northwest one-quarter of Section 34,
Township 9 North, Range 1 East, M.D.B. & M., Yolo County, California, more
fully described as follows:
   Beginning at the northeast comer of the said northwest one-quarter of
Section 34; thence along the north line of said northwest one-quarter south
89º47’25” west 1550.00 feet; thence south 00º06’06” west 825.00 feet; thence
south 16º37’23” east 1042.47 feet; thence north 89º47’25” east 1250 feet, more
or less, to the east line of said northwest one-quarter; thence northerly along
said east line to the northeast comer of said northwest one-quarter, the point
of beginning, containing 61.5 acres;
   (5)   Sam Combs Park. Beginning at the northeast corner of Silva’s
Subdivision as the same appears of record in Map Book 4, pages 68 and 69, Yolo
County Records; thence north 89º22’08” east along the south line of Stone
Boulevard 903.26 feet to the northwesterly line of State Highway 99 Yolo
Section B, also known as Jefferson Boulevard; thence along a curve to the right
having a radius of 999.50 feet and distant 15 feet northwesterly and radially
from the center line of the main track of the Sacramento-Yolo Port Belt Line
Railroad, a distance along the arc of 590.54 feet, the chord of which bears
south 61º43’43” west, 581.99 feet; thence south 89º22’08” west, 389.49 feet to
the southeast comer of Silva’s Subdivision; thence north 0º14’59” west along
the east line of said subdivision, 270.00 feet to the point of beginning,
containing 4.394 acres of land;
   (6)   Clarksburg Boat Ramp. All that certain real property situate, lying,
and being in Township 6 North, Range 4 East, M.D.B. & M., more particularly
described as follows:
   Beginning at a point on the center line of County Road No. 140 of Yolo
County at Station 142+00 which bears the following courses and distances from
the southwest comer of Swamp Land Survey No. 756 of said Yolo County: south
74º20’ east, 2,605 feet to the intersection of the center line of said County
Road and the south line of said Swamp Land Survey; thence north 24º20’ east,
558 feet; thence north 42º48’ east 520 feet to Station 142+00 of said County
road, the true point of beginning; thence from said true point of beginning
south 82º00’ east, 68.59 feet; north 52º36’ east, 85.00 feet; south 34º55’
east, 65 feet, more or less, to the mean high tide of the west bank of the
Sacramento River; thence in a northeasterly direction along said mean high tide
of the Sacramento River, 1,270 feet, more or less, to a point which bears south
35º49’30” east, 90 feet, more or less, from center line station 128+00 of said
County road No. 140; thence north 35º49’30” west, 90 feet, more or less, to the
center line of County road No. 140 at Station 128+00; thence along the center
line of said County road south 54º10’30” west, 430.40 feet; thence south
51º42’30” west, 617.79 feet to Station 138+48.19 B.C., thence continuing along
said center line of an arc conclave to the left and having a central angle of
3º 15’30” and a radius of 3,700 feet, a distance of 210.83 feet to Station
140+59.03 E.C., thence continuing along said center line south 48º27’ west
140.98 feet to the point of beginning.
   Excepting a parcel of land 15 feet in width and being parallel to and
contiguous with the center line of the above described County road from Station
128+00 to Station 142+00, the boundaries of said parcel being shortened or
lengthened to terminate on the boundaries of the 3.9 acre parcel above
described; said parcel con-taming 3.9 acres, more or less;
   (7)   Knights Landing Boat Ramp. Beginning at a point on the westerly line
of State Highway 48 right-of-way, said point being a distance of 40 feet
measured at right angles from the intersection of the center line of said
right-of-way of State highway and the center line of Sycamore Slough, as
defined by Grant of Right-of-Way by River Gardens Farm of California, dated
September 8, 1938, recorded September 22, 1938, in Book 117 at page 335, of
official records of the County of Yolo; thence from said point of beginning
north 38º07’30” west 83.00 feet; thence along the arc of a curve to the left, a
distance of 229.23 feet, said curve having a central angle of 32º02’ and a
radius of 410.00 feet; thence tangent to the preceding curve north 70º09’30”
west 166.93 feet to the intersection of the southwesterly line of said State
highway right-of-way and the easterly line of the abandoned River Farms Branch
of the Southern Pacific Rail-road right-of-way; thence continuing along said
line north 70º09’30” west, 113.0 feet; thence south 68º30’ west, 55 feet;
thence along a curve to the left, having a chord bearing south 15º24’ east,
radius of 1,507.69 feet, an arc length of 314 feet; thence south 24º17’ east,
235 feet, more or less, to the center line of Sycamore Slough; thence in an
easterly direction along the center line of Sycamore Slough, a distance of 450
feet, more or less, to the westerly line of State Highway 45 right-of-way to
the point of beginning, said parcel containing 3.9 acres, more or less; and
   (8)   Putah Creek Fishing Access. Beginning at a point which is situated on
the east line of the northwest one-quarter of Section 28, Township 8 North,
Range 2 West, where said line intersects the southerly right-of-way line of
State Highway 128; and running thence southerly along the east line of the
northwest one-quarter of Section 28 to the center line of Putah Creek, thence
easterly along said center line to its intersection with the south line of the
northeast one-quarter of Section 26, Township 8 North, Range 2 West, thence
easterly along the south line of the northeast one-quarter of Section 26 to the
southerly right-of-way line of State Highway 128, thence westerly along said
right-of-way line to the point of beginning.
   (b)   Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
following:
   (1)   Persons set forth in subsection (b)of Section 12031 of the Penal Code
of the State;
   (2)   The discharge of shotguns in that portion of the East Yolo area
described in subsection (1) of subsection (a)of this section lying south and
east of the Sacramento River Deep Water Channel and the Barge Canal and also
within an agricultural zone as designated by the zoning regulations of the
County; and
   (3)   The operation of indoor shooting ranges or shooting galleries where
permitted by law. (§§ 2, 3, and 5, Ord. 598, and § 2, Ord. 610, as amended by §
1, Ord. 612, § 1, Ord. 621, §§ 1 and 2, Ord. 676, eff. November 14, 1972, § 1,
Ord. 785, eff. September 15, 1977, and § 1, Ord. 786, eff. October 20, 1977)
Sec. 5-10.03.   Concealed weapons: Additional fees.
   As well as the fee determined by the State Department of Justice to be
sufficient to reimburse the State Department of Justice for the direct cost of
furnishing the report required by Section 12052 of the Penal Code of the State,
each applicant for a new license to carry a concealed pistol, revolver, or
other firearm, or for the renewal thereof, shall pay to the Sheriff-Coroner at
the time of filing his application an additional fee in the sum of Two and no/
100ths ($2.00) Dollars. The Sheriff-Coroner shall transmit all such additional
fees to the County Treasury. (§ 1, Ord. 662, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-10.04.   Discharging firearms near populated areas.
   (a)   Areas described. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)of this
section, it shall be unlawful to discharge a firearm in the prohibited areas of
the unincorporated territory of the County described as follows:
   (1)   Davis Area. Beginning at the intersection of County Road 98 and Putah
Creek; thence northerly along the center line of County Road 98 to its
intersection with County Road 30; thence easterly along an extension of the
center line of County Road 30 to its intersection with County Road 99; thence
northerly along the center line of County Road 99 to its intersection with
County Road 29; thence easterly along the center line of County Road 29 to its
intersection with County Road 104; thence southerly along the center line of
County Road 104 to its intersection with County Road 30; thence easterly along
the center line of County Road 30 to its intersection with County Road 105;
thence southerly along the center line of County Road 105 and an extension
thereof to the easterly extension of the center line of County Road 32D; thence
easterly along the extension of the center line of County Road 32D and County
Road 32D to its intersection with County Road 103; thence southerly along the
extension of the center line of County Road 103 to its intersection with the
South Fork of Putah Creek; thence along the center line of the South Fork of
Putah Creek and Putah Creek to its intersection with County Road 98; but
excepting therefrom all territory lying within the City of Davis and all
territory of the Regents of the University of California.
   (2)   West    Sacramento Area. Beginning at the intersection of a line 45
feet north of the center line of County Road 126 and an easterly extension
thereof with the center line of the Sacramento River; thence along the center
line of the Sacramento River to its intersection with an extension of the
center line of Babel Sough; thence westerly along the center line of Babel
Slough and the extension thereof to its intersection with the Sacramento-Yolo
Deep Water Channel; thence northerly along the center line of the Deep Water
Channel until its intersection with the center line of Thorpe Road; thence
westerly along the center line of Thorpe Road to its intersection with the
center line of the east levee of the Yolo Bypass; thence northerly along the
center line of the east levee of the Yolo Bypass to a line 45 feet northerly of
the north right-of-way of County Road 126; thence easterly along a line 45 feet
north of the center line of County Road 126 to the point of beginning,
excepting therefrom all territory lying within the City of West Sacramento. (As
amended by § 1, Ord. 1419, eff. May 10, 2012)
   (3)   Woodland Area. Beginning at the intersection of County Road 25A and
County Road 97; thence northerly along the center line of County Road 97 to its
intersection with County Road 20; thence easterly along the center line of
County Road 20 to its intersection with County Road 97; thence northerly along
the center line of County Road 97A to a point one mile north of County Road 20;
thence easterly on a line one mile north of County Road 20, which is also the
extension of the center line of County Road 18C, easterly to its intersection
with County Road 102; thence southerly along the center line of County Road 102
to its intersection with County Road 25; thence westerly along an extension of
the center line of County Road 25 to its intersection with County Road 101;
thence southerly along the center line of County Road 101 to its intersection
with County Road 25A; thence westerly along the center line of County Road 25A
to the point of beginning, excepting therefrom all territory lying within the
City of Woodland.
   (b)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
following:
   (1)   Persons set forth Section 25900 of the Penal Code of the State;
   (2)   Persons necessarily acting in the lawful defense of persons or
property; and
   (3)   The discharge of firearms on the premises of any shooting gallery,
practice range, skeet field or similar place conducted at a fixed location,
either indoors or outdoors, and with respect to which adequate safeguards have
been provided to protect persons and property from injuries. (§ 1, Ord. 900,
eff. January 15, 1981, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1419, eff. May 10, 2012)
Sec. 5-10.05.   Discharging firearms on lands of other persons.
   (a)   Areas described. It shall be unlawful to discharge a firearm from
lands belonging to or occupied by another person without the written permission
of the owner of such land, his agent, or the person in lawful possession in the
unincorporated territory of the County described as follows: Beginning at the
intersection of the center line of the Sacramento River and the southerly
boundary of the County of Yolo; thence westerly along the southerly boundary of
the County of Yolo to the center line of the Sacramento-Yolo Deep Water
Channel; thence northerly along the center line of the Deep Water Channel to
its intersection with the extension of the center line of Babel Slough; thence
easterly along the extension of the center line of and center line of Babel
Slough to its intersection with the center line of the Sacramento River; thence
southerly along the center line of the Sacramento River to the point of
beginning.
   (b)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
following:
   (1)   Persons set forth in subsection (b)of Section 12031 of the Penal Code
of the State;
   (2)   The discharge of a firearm by persons on land owned by the United
States of America, the State, or the County;
   (3)   Persons necessarily acting in the lawful defense of persons or
property; and
   (4)   The discharge of firearms on the premises of any shooting gallery,
practice range, skeet field, or other similar place conducted at a fixed
location, either indoors or outdoors, and with respect to which adequate
safeguards have been provided to protect persons and property from injuries. (§
2, Ord. 900, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 5-10.06.   Safe Storage of Firearms.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall be defined as follows:
   (1)   “Close proximity and control” means within close reach of a person so
that they can gain control of the weapon before a child or unauthorized person
could access the weapon.
   (2)   “Firearm” means a firearm as defined in California Penal Code Section
16520, as amended from time to time.
   (3)   “Locked container” means a locked container as defined in California
Penal Code Section 16850, as amended from time to time, and is listed on the
California Department of Justice Bureau of Firearms roster of approved firearm
safety devices.
   (4)   “Residence” means any structure intended or used for human habitation,
including but not limited to houses, apartments, condominiums, rooms, in-law
units, accessory dwelling units, motels, hotels, single room occupancy units
(SROs), timeshares, mobile homes, and recreational and other vehicles where
human habitation occurs.
   (5)   “Tethered” means attaching a firearm to a permanent structure in the
interior or trunk of a vehicle with a cable lock or similar mechanism in order
to ensure that the firearm cannot easily be removed.
   (6)   “Trigger lock” means a trigger lock that is listed on the California
Department of Justice’s roster of approved firearms safety devices and that is
identified as appropriate for that firearm by reference to either the
manufacturer and model of the firearm or to the physical characteristics of the
firearm that match those listed on the roster for use with the device under
California Penal Code Section 23635.
   (7)   “Vehicle” means a vehicle as defined in California Vehicle Code
Section 415, as amended from time to time.
   (8)   “Unattended vehicle” means that a person aged eighteen (18) or over
who owns or is authorized to use the vehicle is not present in or within sight
of the vehicle.
   (b)   Safe storage in residences. No person shall keep a firearm in any
residence unless the firearm is stored in a locked container or the firearm is
equipped with a trigger lock.
   (c)   Safe storage in vehicles.
   (1)   No person shall leave a firearm, not including handguns, in an
unattended vehicle unless: (a) the firearm is stored in a locked container that
is either in the locked trunk of the vehicle or affixed or secured to the
interior of the vehicle; or (b) the firearm is tethered to a permanent
structure in the interior or trunk of the vehicle with a cable lock or similar
mechanism.
   i.   If not stored in a locked trunk of the vehicle, the locked container or
tethered non-handgun firearm must be underneath a seat or covered or otherwise
outside of plain view from the outside of the vehicle.
   ii.   For vehicles with fewer than four (4) wheels, the non-handgun firearm
must be stored in a locked container that is affixed or secured to the vehicle.
   (2)   Notwithstanding subsection (c)(1), no person may place, store, or
leave a firearm, not including handguns, overnight in an unattended vehicle.
   (3)   This subsection is not intended to conflict with state law on the
storage of handguns in vehicles, as governed by Penal Code Section 25140.
   (4)   Nothing in this subsection shall apply to on-duty peace officers,
police vehicles, federal officers, or military personnel who are acting within
the scope of their authority and discharging their official duties.
   (d)   Exception. The storage requirements in this Section shall not apply
when the firearm is carried on the person of an individual not prohibited from
the ownership or possession of a firearm or when the firearm is in the close
proximity and control of such a person.
(§ 2, Ord. 1552, eff. October 13, 2022; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1556, eff.
December 22, 2022)
Sec. 5-10.07.   Violations: Penalties.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. (§ 3, Ord. 900,
eff. January 15, 1981, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1552, eff. October 13, 2022)
Chapter 11
ZANE PROBATION CENTER
Sections:
   
5-11.01   Communicating with inmates.
   
5-11.02   Conveying certain articles to and from inmates.
   
5-11.03   Conveying weapons and explosives.
   
5-11.04   Loitering on grounds.
   
5-11.05   Escaping from custody.
   
5-11.06   Escaping from custody: Aiding.
Sec. 5-11.01.   Communicating with inmates.
   Any person not authorized by law who, without the permission of the officer
in charge of the Zane Probation Center, communicates with any person detained
or sheltered therein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (§ 1, Ord. 509)
Sec. 5-11.02.   Conveying certain articles to and from inmates.
   Any person not authorized by law who, without the permission of the officer
in charge of the Zane Probation Center, brings therein or takes therefrom any
letter, writing, literature, reading matter, or tobacco in any form to or from
any person detained or sheltered therein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (§
1, Ord. 509)
Sec. 5-11.03.   Conveying weapons and explosives.
   Any person not authorized by law who brings into the Zane Probation Center
or within the grounds belonging or adjacent thereto any firearms, weapons, or
explosives of any kind shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (§ 2, Ord. 509)
Sec. 5-11.04.   Loitering on grounds.
   Any person who loiters, prowls, or wanders upon the grounds belonging to the
Zane Probation Center, or adjacent thereto, without visible or lawful business
with any occupant thereof, or who, while loitering, prowling, or wandering upon
such grounds, passes or attempts to pass objects of any kind to any person
confined therein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (§ 3, Ord. 509)
Sec. 5-11.05.   Escaping from custody.
   Any person who, while in the temporary custody of a probation officer
pursuant to the provisions of Sections 625 et. seq. of Article 6 of Chapter 2
of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Welfare and Institutions Code of the State,
escapes or attempts to escape therefrom shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (§ 4,
Ord. 509)
Sec. 5-11.06.   Escaping from custody: Aiding.
   Any person who knowingly permits or aids any person in the custody of a
probation officer to escape therefrom, or who conceals such person with the
intent of enabling him to elude pursuit, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (§
5, Ord. 509)
Chapter 12
OUTDOOR FESTIVALS
Sections:
   
5-12.01   Outdoor festival defined.
   
5-12.02   Prohibitions.
   
5-12.03   Applications for licenses and fees.
   
5-12.04   Fixing the time for hearings, investigations, and reports.
   
5-12.05   Hearings.
   
5-12.06   Standards and conditions.
   
5-12.07   Issuance of licenses.
   
5-12.08   Exemptions from applications and fee payments.
   
5-12.09   Revocation.
   
5-12.10   Suspension of operations.
   
5-12.11   Licenses: Nontransferable.
   
5-12.12   Violations.
Sec. 5-12.01.   Outdoor festival defined.
   For the purposes of this chapter, “outdoor festival” shall mean any musical
festival, dance festival, “rock” festival, exhibition, sporting event, or other
outdoor activity, not including parades, which is held at any place other than
in a permanent building or permanent installation which has been constructed
for the purpose of conducting such activities or similar activities, and to
which members of the public are invited or admitted for a charge or free of
cost, attended by more than 1,000 persons. (§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. January 19,
1970)
Sec. 5-12.02.   Prohibitions.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain, conduct,
advertise, sell, or furnish tickets or other types of written authority to
admission to an outdoor festival in the unincorporated area of the County
unless he shall first obtain a license from the County to operate or conduct
such festival. (§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-12.03.   Applications for licenses and fees.
   Applications for licenses to conduct outdoor festivals shall be made in
writing to the Clerk of the Board at least sixty (60) days prior to the time
indicated for the commencement of the outdoor festival. The application shall
be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of One Hundred and no/100ths
($100.00) Dollars and shall contain the following information:
   (a)   Identity. The name, age, residence, mailing address, and telephone
number of the applicant and the applicant’s legal nature, such as individual,
partnership, corporation, et cetera. If the application is made by a
partnership, the names and addresses of all general partners shall be included.
If the application is made by a corporation, the application shall be signed by
the president and secretary thereof and shall contain the names and addresses
of all corporate officers, and a certified copy of the Articles of
Incorporation shall be attached to the application;
   (b)   Location. The location and legal description of the premises where the
outdoor festival is proposed to be conducted, including all lands to be used
for parking or other uses incidental to the outdoor festival. The applicant
shall submit proof that he owns such premises or the written consent of all
owners thereof for the proposed use;
   (c)   Dates. The date or dates and the hours during which the festival is to
be conducted;
   (d)   Estimate of numbers. An estimate of the minimum and maximum numbers of
customers, spectators, participants, and other persons expected to attend the
outdoor festival for each day it is conducted; and
   (e)   Program and plans. A detailed explanation of the applicant’s program
and his plans to provide the following:
   (1)   Water for human consumption in a manner and amount sufficient to serve
the anticipated customers;
   (2)   A detailed description of the proposed portable or permanent sanitary
facilities;
   (3)   The location of parking area necessary to serve the anticipated
customers, together with provisions for grading, marking, and separation of the
area by physical barriers from the area where patrons will watch the
performance, together with provisions for parking attendants at the entrances
and exits and within the parking lots;
   (4)   A map or diagram of the interior access ways showing provisions for
the availability of emergency vehicles, such as ambulance, fire, or police,
together with the clear delineation by means of buffers on the ground;
   (5)   The location, nature, and type of medical and first aid facilities,
accompanied by agreements or contracts showing the specific doctors, first aid
attendants, and ambulances which will be available at the time and place of the
performance;
   (6)   The provisions for parking area and interior private police
protection, accompanied by agreements by which the arrangements have been made;
   (7)   The provisions for fire protection and fire safety measures;
   (8)   The provisions for adequate lighting, including the location of all
light standards and electrical switches;
   (9)   The provisions for public liability and property damage insurance;
   (10)   The provisions for a cleanup of the premises and adjoining property
of litter and garbage resulting from the festival;
   (11)   The provisions for an emergency communications system;
   (12)   The provisions for food supplies and facilities;
   (13)   If it is proposed or expected that spectators or participants will
remain at night or overnight, the arrangements for camping or similar
facilities;
   (14)   The plans to provide for any numbers of spectators in excess of the
estimate;
   (15)   The plans and specifications of any temporary or permanent
structures, including, but not limited to, bandstands or staging; and
   (16)   A detailed explanation of the plans for policing the activity, with
particular emphasis on the control and prevention of alcoholic beverage and
drug consumption. (§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-12.04.   Fixing the time for hearings, investigations, and reports.
   Upon receipt of a complete application and the application fee, the Clerk
shall request the Board to set a time and date for a public hearing, and the
Board shall set the application for a public hearing at a regular meeting of
the Board not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days thereafter
and shall give not less than ten (10) days’ written notice thereof to the
applicant. The Clerk of the Board shall give notice of the hearing and copies
of the application to the Sheriff, the Public Health Director, the Director of
Public Works, the Planning Director, and the Chief Building Inspector who shall
investigate the matter and report in writing to the Board not later than the
time set for hearing with appropriate recommendations concerning the activity.
(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-12.05.   Hearings.
   (a)   The Board shall consider the documentary and testimonial evidence of
witnesses presented at such hearing, including all reports of investigation,
and thereafter the Board, in accordance with the standards set forth in this
chapter, shall grant the license in accordance with the application and program
and plans approved by the Board, deny the license, or set conditions which
shall be met, or security given that they will be met, before a license may be
granted.
   (b)   If conditions are imposed by the Board, the applicant shall furnish,
or cause to be furnished, to the Clerk proof that all conditions have been met,
or that security has been given that they will be met, before the license may
be issued by the Clerk. (§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-12.06.   Standards and conditions.
   (a)   Protection. No license shall be granted unless the evidence at the
hearing shows that the applicant has adopted a program and plans which he has
the reasonable capability of carrying out which provide the necessary
protection for the health, safety, and general welfare of persons and property
in the County, including spectators and participants, the County itself, and
owners of property adjoining the outdoor festival site, which protection shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
   (1)   The site of the outdoor festival shall be owned by the applicant, or
the written consent of all owners thereof for the proposed use shall be
obtained.
   (2)   Water for human consumption shall be provided in a manner and amount
as is approved by the Public Health Director sufficient to serve the expected
spectators or participants.
   (3)   Portable or permanent sanitary facilities sufficient to serve the
anticipated spectators and participants shall be provided in a ratio to be
determined by the Public Health Director, and in at least a minimum number set
by the Board based upon such ratio.
   (4)   Parking areas necessary to serve the expected spectators or
participants shall be provided, together with provisions for the grading,
marking, and separation of the area by physical barriers from the area where
patrons will watch the performance, together with provisions for parking
attendants at the entrances and exits and within the parking lots.
   (5)   Interior access ways shall be provided for the availability of
emergency vehicles, such as ambulance, fire, or police, together with their
clear delineation by means of buffers on the ground, and the occupation of any
such buffer space by patrons shall be prohibited.
   (6)   Medical and first aid facilities shall be provided sufficient to serve
the expected spectators or participants.
   (7)   Parking areas and interior private police protection shall be provided
sufficient to serve the expected spectators or participants.
   (8)   Fire protection and fire safety measures shall be provided sufficient
to serve the expected spectators or participants.
   (9)   Adequate lighting shall be provided sufficient to serve the expected
spectators or participants.
   (10)   Public liability and property damage insurance shall be provided in a
reasonable amount.
   (11)   Provision shall be made for a cleanup of the premises and adjoining
property of the litter and garbage resulting from the festival.
   (12)   An emergency communications system shall be provided.
   (13)   Food supplies and facilities shall be provided sufficient to serve
the expected spectators or participants.
   (14)   If it is proposed or expected that spectators or participants will
remain at night or overnight, arrangements for camping or similar facilities
shall be provided sufficient for such service.
   (15)   Adequate plans shall be made to provide for numbers of spectators in
excess of the estimate.   
   (16)   Any temporary or permanent structures, including, but not limited to,
bandstands or staging, shall be structurally adequate for the purpose for which
they are used.
   (17)   Policing, with particular emphasis on the control and prevention of
alcoholic beverage and drug consumption, shall be provided sufficient to serve
the expected spectators or participants.
   (b)   Conditions. The Board may impose conditions to be performed at the
applicant’s expense when the evidence shows that such conditions are necessary
to secure compliance with the standards required by the provisions of this
chapter and may require security for the performance of these conditions.
   (c)   Security against loss. Security required by the Board may include the
posting of an indemnity bond and/or a performance bond in favor of the County
in connection with the operation of a public outdoor festival as defined in
Section
5-12.01 of this chapter. Such bonds shall be prepared by a corporate bonding
company authorized to do business in the State by the Department of Insurance
in an amount determined by the Board. Such bonds shall indemnify the County,
its agents, officers, employees, and the Board, against any and all loss,
injury, and damage of any nature whatsoever arising out of or in any way
connected with such outdoor festival and shall indemnify against loss, injury,
and damage to both persons and property.
   (d)   Security: Cleanup. The Board may also require the applicant to provide
a corporate surety bond prepared by a corporate bonding company authorized to
do business in the State by the Department of Insurance indemnifying the County
and the owners of property adjoining the outdoor festival site for all costs
necessitated by such activity to clean up and/or remove debris, trash, garbage,
or other waste from, in, and around the premises. Such a bond shall be in an
amount determined by the Board as in its discretion will adequately provide for
such indemnification. (§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-12.07.   Issuance of licenses.
   Upon determining that the Board has ordered the issuance of the license
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and that the conditions, including
conditions for security, if any, imposed by the Board have been complied with
by the applicant, the Clerk shall collect a license fee of One Hundred Fifty
and no/100ths ($150.00) Dollars per day for each day the festival is scheduled
to be held, and he shall issue a license to the applicant for the specific
location authorized for the festival and for the specific days for which the
festival is authorized in accordance with the program and plans approved by the
Board and the conditions, if any, imposed by the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 627, eff.
January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-12.08.   Exemptions from applications and fee payments.
   A neighborhood or community benefit organization, organized for charitable,
religious, or eleemosynary purposes, shall be exempt from paying the
application and license fees provided for in this chapter provided the net
proceeds from any such activity does not inure to the benefit of any private
persons. (§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-12.09.   Revocation.
   The Board shall have the right to revoke any license issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter after a public hearing held after written notice is
given to the licensee at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to such hearing for
any of the following causes:
   (a)   If the licensee fails, neglects, or refuses to fulfill any of the
conditions imposed upon the granting of a license;
   (b)   If the licensee fails, neglects, or refuses to fulfill any of the
provisions of the program or plans approved by the Board;
   (c)   If the licensee knowingly permits the outdoor festival to be conducted
in a disorderly manner or knowingly allows any person to remain on the premises
while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any narcotic or dangerous
drug;
   (d)   If the licensee violates, or attempts to violate, any law of the
State, the provisions of this chapter, or any other law of the County; or
   (e)   If the licensee has previously made a false, misleading, or fraudulent
statement of material fact in the application for such license or any other
document required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   Written notice of such revocation shall be forwarded by the Clerk to the
Sheriff and the licensee at the address given in the application. Such
revocation shall become effective immediately after ordered by the Board. (§ 1,
Ord. 627, eff. January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-12.10.   Suspension of operations.
   The Sheriff may suspend operations and close any outdoor festival prior to
the expiration of the license granted pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter in the event of the occurrence of a riot, major disorder, or serious
breach of the peace when, in his opinion, it becomes necessary to prevent
injury to persons and/or damage to property. (§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. January 19,
1970)
Sec. 5-12.11.   Licenses: Nontransferable.
   No license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
transferable or removable to another location or another licensee. (§ 1, Ord.
627, eff. January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-12.12.   Violations.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. (§ 1, Ord. 627,
eff. January 19, 1970)
Chapter 13
CERTAIN OBNOXIOUS CONDUCT
Sections:
   
5-13.01   Legislative authorization.
   
5-13.02   Theater defined.
   
5-13.03   Prohibitions against the display of female breasts.
   
5-13.04   Prohibitions against the display of private parts.
   
5-13.05   Accessories.
   
5-13.06   Exceptions.
   
5-13.07   Violations.
Sec. 5-13.01.   Legislative authorization.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Sections 318.5 and
318.6 of the Penal Code of the State. All words used in this chapter which also
are used in said Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of said Code are used in the same
sense and shall mean the same as the same respective words used in said
Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of said Code. (§ 1, Ord. 626, eff. January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-13.02.   Theater defined.
   As used in this chapter, and in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code
of the State, the phrase “theater, concert hall, or other similar establishment
which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances” shall mean a building,
playhouse, room, hall, or other place having permanently affixed seats so
arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage
upon which theatrical or vaudeville or similar performances are given and in
which the serving of food and/or beverages is clearly incidental to such
performances. This definition shall not supersede the provisions of Section
5-13.01 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 626, eff. January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-13.03.   Prohibitions against the display of female breasts.
   Every female shall be guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in
any live act, demonstration, or exhibition in any public place, place open to
the public, or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or
both to any customer:
   (a)   Exposes any portion of either breast which has a different
pigmentation than that of the main portion of the breasts; or
   (b)   Employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate such
portions of the breast; or
   (c)   Wears any type of clothing so that any portion of such part of the
breast may be observed. (§ 1, Ord. 626, eff. January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-13.04.   Prohibitions against the display of private parts.
   Every person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor who:
   (a)   Exposes his or her private parts, or employs any device or covering
which is intended to simulate the private parts or pubic hair of such person,
while participating in any live act, demonstration, or exhibition in any public
place, place open to the public, or place open to public view, or while serving
food or drink or both to any customer; or
   (b)   Permits, procures, or assists any person to so expose himself or
herself, or to employ any such device. (§ 1, Ord. 626, eff. January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-13.05.   Accessories.
   Every person who permits, counsels, or assists any person to violate any
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (§ 1, Ord. 626,
eff. January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-13.06.   Exceptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (a)   A theater, concert hall, or similar establishment which is primarily
devoted to theatrical performances; or
   (b)   Any act authorized or prohibited by any State statute. (§ 1, Ord. 626,
eff. January 19, 1970)
Sec. 5-13.07.   Violations.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as set
forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. (§ 1, Ord. 626, eff. January 19,
1970)
Chapter 14
PRIVATE PATROLS
Sections:
Article 1. General Provisions
   
5-14.101   Definitions: Scope.
   
5-14.102   Private patrol enterprise defined.
   
5-14.103   Exempt employee defined.
   
5-14.104   Nonexempt employee defined.
   
5-14.105   Public information.
   
5-14.106   Confidential information.
   
5-14.107   Street patrol defined.
Article 2. Regulations
   
5-14.201   Private patrol permits required.
   
5-14.202   Surrender of private patrol permits.
   
5-14.203   State licenses required.
   
5-14.204   Registration permits required to employ nonexempt employees.
   
5-14.205   Violations of private patrol permit conditions.
   
5-14.206   Client lists.
   
5-14.207   Registration permits required to serve as nonexempt employees.
   
5-14.208   Surrender of registration permits.
   
5-14.209   Violations of registration permit conditions.
   
5-14.210   Employees: State licenses required.
   
5-14.211   Employees: Private patrol permits required.
   
5-14.212   Employees: State licenses revoked.
   
5-14.213   Employees: State licenses of associates revoked.
   
5-14.214   Information required for permits.
   
5-14.215   Supplementary statements required for permits.
   
5-14.216   Bad moral character.
   
5-14.217   Intemperate habits.
   
5-14.218   Bad reputation.
   
5-14.219   Dishonesty or fraud.
   
5-14.220   Criminal convictions.
   
5-14.221   Uniforms.
   
5-14.222   Vehicles.
   
5-14.223   False statements.
   
5-14.224   Firearms: Use of restricted.
   
5-14.225   Firearms: Permitting use of restricted.
Article 3. Permits
   
5-14.301   Applications: Filing.
   
5-14.302   Applications: Contents.
   
5-14.303   Applications: Contents: Private patrol operator permits.
   
5-14.304   Applications: Contents: Registration permits.
   
5-14.305   Investigations: Issuance: Denial.
   
5-14.306   Permit numbers.
   
5-14.307   Assignability.
   
5-14.308   Fees.
Article 4. Suspension, Revocation, and Appeals
   
5-14.401   Suspension of permits.
   
5-14.402   Suspension of permits: Notices.
   
5-14.403   Appeals.
   
5-14.404   Automatic revocation of permits.
Article 1.
General Provisions
Sec. 5-14.101.   Definitions: Scope.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined in this
article. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.102.   Private patrol enterprise defined.
   “Private patrol enterprise” shall mean, for any consideration whatsoever,
agreeing to furnish, or furnishing, a watchman, guard, patrolman, or other
person to protect persons or property, or to prevent the theft, unlawful
taking, loss, embezzlement, misappropriation, or concealment of any goods,
wares, merchandise, money, bonds, stocks, notes, documents, papers, or property
of any kind, or performing the service of such watchman, guard, patrolman, or
any other person for any of such purposes. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12,
1972)
Sec. 5-14.103.   Exempt employee defined.
   “Exempt employee” shall mean an employee of a private patrol enterprise who
is:
   (a)   Engaged exclusively in stenographic, typing, filing, and clerical
work; and
   (b)   Engaged in private patrol work other than street patrol work,
activities, and services. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972, as amended by
§ 1, Ord. 685, eff. September 12, 1973, and § 1, Ord. 702, eff. April 17, 1974)
Sec. 5-14.104.   Nonexempt employee defined.
   “Nonexempt employee” shall mean any employee of a private patrol enterprise,
other than an exempt employee, and shall include those employees who engage in
street patrol work or activity. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972, as
amended by § 2, Ord. 685, eff. September 12, 1973, and § 2, Ord. 702, eff.
April 17, 1974)
Sec. 5-14.105.   Public information.
   All applications, supplementary statements, and the information contained
therein or annexed thereto shall be public records. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff.
January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.106.   Confidential information.
   The lists of employers or clients required by this chapter, and any
information set forth therein or annexed thereto, shall be deemed to be records
of investigations conducted by the County for law enforcement or licensing
purposes, and shall not be public records, and shall remain confidential. (§ 1,
Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.107.   Street patrol defined.
   “Street patrol” work or activity shall mean that work or activity for or on
behalf of a private patrol enterprise of walking or operating a motor vehicle
on or about, or in any way patrolling, the public streets, highways, or
thoroughfares in the County as a security, surveillance, or guard service. (§
3, Ord. 685, eff. September 12, 1973, as amended by § 3, Ord. 702, eff. April
17, 1974)
Article 2.
Regulations
Sec. 5-14.201.   Private patrol permits required.
   No person shall operate or manage a private patrol enterprise unless there
is in force a private patrol permit issued in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter to the private patrol enterprise. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12,
1972)
Sec. 5-14.202.   Surrender of private patrol permits.
   No person shall cease to operate or manage a private patrol enterprise
without surrendering to the Sheriff-Coroner within five (5) days thereafter the
private patrol permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.203.   State licenses required.
   No person shall hold a private patrol permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter unless there is in force a private patrol operator’s
license issued to him by the State in accordance with the provisions of the
Private Investigator and Adjuster Act set forth in Sections 7500, et seq. of
the Business and Professions Code of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January
12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.204.   Registration permits required to employ nonexempt employees.
   No person shall, in the operation or management of a private patrol
enterprise, employ or retain in employment a nonexempt employee who does not
have in force a registration permit issued in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.205.   Violations of private patrol permit conditions.
   No person shall operate or manage a private patrol enterprise in violation
of the conditions set forth in the private patrol permit issued in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.206.   Client lists.
   No person shall operate or manage a private patrol enterprise without filing
with the Sheriff-Coroner and keeping current a list of the names, addresses,
and telephone numbers of all employers and clients. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff.
January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.207.   Registration permits required to serve as nonexempt employees.
   No person shall serve as a nonexempt employee of a private patrol enterprise
unless there is in force a registration permit issued to him in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.208.   Surrender of registration permits.
   No person shall cease to be a nonexempt employee of a private patrol
enterprise without surrendering to the Sheriff-Coroner within five (5) days
thereafter any registration permit issued in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.209.   Violations of registration permit conditions.
   No person shall violate the conditions set forth in any registration permit
issued to him pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff.
January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.210.   Employees: State licenses required.
   No person shall serve as a nonexempt employee of a private patrol enterprise
unless there is in force a private patrol operator’s license issued to the
operator of that private patrol enterprise in accordance with the provisions of
the Private Investigator and Adjuster Act set forth in Sections 7500, et seq.
of the Business and Professions Code of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January
12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.211.   Employees: Private patrol permits required.
   No person shall serve as a nonexempt employee of a private patrol enterprise
unless there is in force a private patrol permit issued to that private patrol
enterprise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 661,
eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.212.   Employees: State licenses revoked.
   No person shall serve as a nonexempt employee of a private patrol enterprise
if a private patrol operator’s license issued to him in accordance with the
provisions of the Private Investigator and Adjuster Act set forth in Sections
7500, et seq. of the Business and Professions Code of the State has ever been
revoked. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.213.   Employees: State licenses of associates revoked.
   No person shall serve as a nonexempt employee of a private patrol enterprise
if he has been a partner, officer, director, or manager of any person whose
private patrol operator’s license issued pursuant to the provisions of the
Private Investigator and Adjuster Act set forth in Sections 7500 et seq. of the
Business and Professions Code of the State has been revised. (§ 1, Ord. 661,
eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.214.   Information required for permits.
   No person shall operate or manage or serve as a nonexempt employee of a
private patrol enterprise without furnishing to the Sheriff-Coroner all the
information required in an application for a permit required by the provisions
of this chapter, or things required to accompany such an application. (§ 1,
Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.215.   Supplementary statements required for permits.
   No person shall operate or maintain or serve as a nonexempt employee of a
private patrol enterprise without filing with the Sheriff-Coroner a
supplementary statement setting forth any changes or subsequent or additional
information that would be required of a new applicant for a permit required by
the provisions of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.216.   Bad moral character.
   No person of bad moral character shall operate, manage, or serve as a
nonexempt employee of a private patrol enterprise. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January
12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.217.   Intemperate habits.
   No person with intemperate habits shall operate, manage, or serve as a
nonexempt employee of a private patrol enterprise. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January
12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.218.   Bad reputation.
   No person of bad reputation for truth, honesty, or integrity shall operate,
manage, or serve as a nonexempt employee of a private patrol enterprise. (§ 1,
Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.219.   Dishonesty or fraud.
   No person who has committed any act constituting dishonesty or fraud shall
operate, manage, or serve as a nonexempt employee of a private patrol
enterprise. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.220.   Criminal convictions.
   No person who has been convicted of a felony or of a crime involving moral
turpitude or the illegal use, carrying, or possession of a dangerous weapon
shall operate, manage, or serve as a nonexempt employee of a private patrol
enterprise. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.221.   Uniforms.
   (a)   Wearing of uniforms. A uniform substantially similar to the official
uniform of a member of the Yolo County Sheriff’s Department shall not be worn
by any person, except a peace officer, if it is his official uniform, or a
person authorized to do so by the Sheriff of the County.
   (b)   Substantially similar uniforms defined. A substantially similar
uniform to the official uniform of the Yolo County Sheriff’s Department is
defined as one which so resembles the official uniform as might cause an
ordinary and reasonable person to believe that the person wearing such uniform
is a member of the Yolo County Sheriff’s Department.
   (c)   Type of uniform. A substantially similar uniform is further defined as
one consisting of a forest green cap, tan shirt, and forest green trousers with
a black and gold stripe on the leg.
   (d)   Violations. A uniform described in subsection (c)of this section is
presumed, for the purposes of this chapter, to be substantially similar to the
Yolo County Sheriff’s Department uniform, and the wearing of same shall be a
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
   (e)   Misdemeanors. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be
a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of
this Code. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972, as amended by § 4, Ord. 685,
eff. September 12, 1973, and § 4, Ord. 702, eff. April 17, 1974)
Sec. 5-14.222.   Vehicles.
   No person shall use, or cause to be used, in the operation or management of
a private patrol enterprise a motor vehicle or motorcycle containing lettering,
markings, or insignia that:
   (a)   Is not distinctly different from that employed by the County or any
city located in the County;
   (b)   Employs a star or shield; or
   (c)   Fails to contain the designation “Private Patrol” in letters at least
four (4”) inches in height on the front doors. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12,
1972)
Sec. 5-14.223.   False statements.
   No person shall file an application, supplementary statement, or list of
clients or employers that contains a false statement. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff.
January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.224.   Firearms: Use of restricted.
   No person not in uniform shall use any firearm in the employment, operation,
or management of a private patrol enterprise without establishing to the
satisfaction of the Sheriff-Coroner reasonable proficiency in the use of such
firearm. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.225.   Firearms: Permitting use of restricted.
   No person shall permit or cause any other person not in uniform to use a
firearm in the employment, operation, or management of a private patrol
enterprise without establishing to the satisfaction of the Sheriff-Coroner
reasonable proficiency in the use of such firearm. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January
12, 1972)
Article 3.
Permits
Sec. 5-14.301.   Applications: Filing.
   Applications for the permits required by the provisions of this chapter
shall be made in writing to the Sheriff-Coroner and shall be accompanied by the
following:
   (a)   The fee provided for in Section
5-14.308 of this article;
   (b)   Two (2) recent photographs of the applicant and of each partner,
officer, director, or manager thereof;
   (c)   (Repealed by § 5, Ord. 685, eff. September 12, 1973, and § 5, Ord.
702, eff. April 17, 1974);
   (d)   Unless such are already on file or have been approved by the Sheriff-
Coroner, examples or diagrams showing the color and design of any uniform,
insignia, or identification card and the lettering, identification, markings,
or insignia for motor vehicles or motorcycles proposed for use by the applicant
in the private patrol enterprise. Any sample submitted to the Sheriff-Coroner
shall be returned by him to the applicant upon the expiration of the appeal
period, upon an order of the Sheriff-Coroner without appeal, or upon the final
order of the Board determining the appeal; and
   (e)   A list of the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all clients
and employers. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972, as amended by § 5, Ord.
685, eff. September 12, 1973, and § 5, Ord. 702, eff. April 17, 1974)
Sec. 5-14.302.   Applications: Contents.
   The application shall be verified and shall include:
   (a)   The name, age, residence, mailing address, home and business telephone
numbers, social security number, and place of birth of the applicant and each
partner, director, and manager thereof;
   (b)   Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership, or corporation;
   (c)   Whether or not the applicant has or has ever had a private patrol
operator’s license issued pursuant to the provisions of the Private
Investigator and Adjuster Act of the State, and whether such a license has ever
been refused, suspended, or revoked, and the dates of issuance, surrender,
refusal, suspension, or revocation of such license, and a description of the
facts and reasons therefor;
   (d)   Whether or not the applicant or any partner, officer, director, or
manager thereof is or has been of bad moral character, together with a complete
description of all incidents evidencing such bad moral character;
   (e)   Whether or not the applicant or any partner, officer, director, or
manager thereof possesses or has ever possessed intemperate habits, together
with a description of the habit and the nature, extent, and duration thereof;
   (f)   Whether or not the applicant or any partner, officer, director, or
manager thereof is of bad reputation for truth, honesty, or integrity, together
with a description of the circumstances and locality where such reputation is
held;
   (g)   Whether or not the applicant or any partner, officer, director, or
manager thereof has committed any act constituting dishonesty or fraud,
together with the time, place, and description of the act;
   (h)   Whether or not the applicant or any partner, officer, director, or
manager thereof has ever been convicted of a felony or any crime involving
moral turpitude or the illegal use, carrying, or possession of a dangerous
weapon, together with a specification of the crime, the date and location of
the conviction, the nature of any sentence served, and a description of the
surrounding circumstances;
   (i)   A statement listing any and all names used by the applicant, or any
partner, officer, director, or manager thereof, other than the name by which
such persons are currently known, together with an explanation setting forth
the places where each such name was used, the dates of such use, and the full
explanation of the reasons for which such name was used. If such a person has
never used a name other than that by which he is currently known, this fact
shall be set forth;
   (j)   The name and address of the employer and the date employment commenced
and the termination of each employer, past or present, of the applicant, or any
partner, officer, director, or manager thereof; and
   (k)   Whether the applicant or any partner, officer, director, manager, or
nonexempt employee thereof will use a firearm while not in uniform and, if so,
the kind of firearm and a description of the user’s proficiency in its use. (§
1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.303.   Applications: Contents: Private patrol operator permits.
   In addition to the requirements set forth in Sections
5-14.301 and
5-14.302 of this article, an application for a private patrol permit shall
include the following:
   (a)   A full description of the location and operation of the applicant’s
private patrol enterprise, including the place of business and radio
operations;
   (b)   Whether or not the applicant, or any partner, officer, director, or
manager thereof, is licensed by the Bureau of Collection and Investigative
Services of the State pursuant to the provisions of the Private Investigator
and Adjuster Act and, if so, the class and number of such license, whether or
not any proceedings have ever been commenced for the suspension or revocation
of such license, and the outcome thereof; and
   (c)   The title and position occupied by the applicant and each partner,
director, manager, and nonexempt employee thereof and a description of the
duties of each. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.304.   Applications: Contents: Registration permits.
   In addition to the information required by the provisions of Sections
5-14.301 through
5-14.303 of this article, an application for a registration permit shall set
forth the title of the position occupied by the applicant and a description of
his duties. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.305.   Investigations: Issuance: Denial.
   The Sheriff-Coroner shall cause an investigation to be made of the facts
stated in the permit application and the data accompanying the application. If
the application involves the use of a firearm while a person is not in uniform,
the Sheriff-Coroner may require such person to demonstrate his proficiency in
the use of such firearm. Within thirty (30) days, the Sheriff-Coroner shall
make his order upon the application. If he finds that the applicant is in
compliance with all the regulations imposed by this chapter, the Sheriff-
Coroner shall order the issuance of the permit. If he finds that compliance
with such regulations can be obtained by the applicant, the Sheriff-Coroner may
issue a permit subject to reasonable conditions. If he finds that the applicant
cannot comply with the regulations imposed by this chapter, the Sheriff-Coroner
shall deny the permit. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.306.   Permit numbers.
   Upon making his order granting a permit or granting a permit subject to
conditions, the Sheriff-Coroner shall issue a permit to the applicant. Each
permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall bear a number.
Once a permit number has been assigned, it shall not be reassigned to any other
permittee. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.307.   Assignability.
   Permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be
assignable. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.308.   Fees.
   The permit application fees shall be as follows:
   (a)   For a private patrol operator’s permit $25.00;
   (b)   For a registration permit $10.00. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12,
1972)
Article 4.
Suspension, Revocation, and Appeals
Sec. 5-14.401.   Suspension of permits.
   The Sheriff-Coroner may make an order suspending any permit issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter upon determining that there exists any fact
which would have been a ground for refusal to issue the permit, or when there
has been a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or rules
promulgated pursuant thereto, or if the applicant shall have failed to file a
supplementary application or list of his clients or employers, and a list of
his employees, within thirty (30) days after a request to do so, or after any
occurrence or change in employers, clients, or employees, or shall fail to file
a complete list or roster of all employees, both exempt and nonexempt, every
thirty (30) days, commencing on the date of the issuance of the permit. (§ 1,
Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972, as amended by § 6, Ord. 685, eff. September
12, 1973, and § 6, Ord. 702, eff. April 17, 1974)
Sec. 5-14.402.   Suspension of permits: Notices.
   No order of suspension shall become effective until the Sheriff-Coroner
shall cause a copy thereof to be mailed to the applicant by United States
certified mail, postage prepaid, and returned receipt requested, at the address
set forth in his application or latest supplemental statement. (§ 1, Ord. 661,
eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.403.   Appeals.
   The applicant or permittee may appeal an order of the Sheriff-Coroner
denying a permit, issuing a permit subject to conditions, or suspending a
permit to the Board by filing a written notice of appeal with the Clerk of the
Board, who shall deliver a copy thereof to the Sheriff-Coroner and inform the
Board of the appeal. The Board shall set the matter for public hearing and
shall give notice thereof to the parties. After the conclusion of the hearing,
the Board shall render its decision and may:
   (a)   Reinstate or order the issuance of the permit with or without
conditions; or
   (b)   Revoke or deny the issuance of the permit or suspend the permit with
or without terms and conditions to secure compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Sec. 5-14.404.   Automatic revocation of permits.
   If no appeal shall be taken within the time specified for an appeal
following an order of suspension of a permit, the permit shall be deemed
revoked. (§ 1, Ord. 661, eff. January 12, 1972)
Chapter 15
REWARDS
Sections:
Article 1. General Purpose
   
5-15.101   Declaration of purpose.
Article 2. Rewards
   
5-15.201   Offer of rewards.
   
5-15.202   Sharing of rewards.
   
5-15.203   Multiple rewards.
   
5-15.204   Excepted persons.
   
5-15.205   Applications for rewards.
   
5-15.206   Reimbursement to county for rewards paid.
   
5-15.207   Reimbursement of damages.
   
5-15.208   Amount of rewards.
Article 1.
General Purpose
Sec. 5-15.101.   Declaration of purpose.
   The Board hereby declares that vandalism and the destruction of County-owned
property is increasing in rate and severity of loss and enacts the provisions
of this chapter in an effort to encourage the citizens of the County to report
to law enforcement authorities all incidents of such vandalism and identify the
perpetrators of such offenses. (§ 1, Ord. 683, eff. August 1, 1973)
Article 2.
Rewards
Sec. 5-15.201.   Offer of rewards.
   The Board does hereby irrevocably and continuously offer to pay, and shall
pay, a cash reward to any person, save those excepted by the provisions of this
chapter, who furnishes information to any law enforcement authority within the
County which leads to the arrest and conviction of any person of any violation
of the Penal Code of the State, which violation consists in whole or in part of
the destruction, mutilation, or material damage of any real or personal
property owned or leased by the County, provided an application for the reward
is made within ninety (90) days after the date of such conviction. (§ 1, Ord.
683, eff. August 1, 1973)
Sec. 5-15.202.   Sharing of rewards.
   In the event more than one person furnishes such information about the same
incident or offense, each person who does so shall share in the sum of such
reward and shall not be entitled to a separate reward in the sum set forth in
this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 683, eff. August 1, 1973)
Sec. 5-15.203.   Multiple rewards.
   The reward in the sum set forth in this chapter shall be paid for the
information so furnished as to each person convicted of the offenses described
in this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 683, eff. August 1, 1973)
Sec. 5-15.204.   Excepted persons.
   This offer of reward is not an offer to any of the following designated
persons:
   (a)   Persons who are designated as peace officers in the Penal Code of the
State; or
   (b)   Persons in the employ of the County whose official duties involve the
identification or detection of persons who have so materially damaged,
mutilated, or destroyed County-owned or leased property. (§ 1, Ord. 683, eff.
August 1, 1973)
Sec. 5-15.205.   Applications for rewards.
   An applicant for a reward pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
submit his request for such reward to the Sheriff, who shall thereupon, or upon
the conviction of the person charged with the offense, forward such claim to
the Board with his statement or recommendation as to payment. (§ 1, Ord. 683,
eff. August 1, 1973)
Sec. 5-15.206.   Reimbursement to County for rewards paid.
   Whenever it appears that a reward is claimed or might be claimed for such
information furnished, the Sheriff is hereby directed to so inform the office
of the District Attorney. The purpose of this directive is to inform the court
before which a charge is pending and to encourage it to order the person
convicted to reimburse the County in the amount of the reward paid, or to be
paid, as a condition of probation, if probation is granted. (§ 1, Ord. 683,
eff. August 1, 1973)
Sec. 5-15.207.   Reimbursement of damages.
   Whenever such a charge is pending before any court, the County officer,
department head, or employee in charge of or in possession of such damaged,
destroyed, or mutilated County property is hereby ordered to furnish the office
of the District Attorney with a complete statement of the financial damages or
losses to the County caused by the offense. The purpose of this directive is to
inform the court before which a charge is pending and to encourage it to order
the person convicted to reimburse the County in the amount of the damages
sustained as a condition of probation, if probation is granted. (§ 1, Ord. 683,
eff. August 1, 1973)
Sec. 5-15.208.   Amount of rewards.
   Upon the conviction of each offender, the amount of the reward shall be One
Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars. (§ 1, Ord. 683, eff. August 1, 1973)
Chapter 16
BINGO
Sections:
   
5-16.01   Bingo authorized.
   
5-16.02   Definitions.
   
5-16.03   Licenses: Required.
   
5-16.04   Licenses: Applications.
   
5-16.05   Licenses: Fees.
   
5-16.06   Licenses: Applications: Investigations.
   
5-16.07   Licenses: Term.
   
5-16.08   Licenses not transferable.
   
5-16.09   Limitations.
   
5-16.10   Inspections.
   
5-16.11   Licenses: Denial, suspension, and/or revocation.
   
5-16.12   Appeal procedure.
   
5-16.13   Violations and penalties.
   
5-16.14   Severability.
Sec. 5-16.01.   Bingo authorized.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, this chapter is adopted
pursuant to the provisions of Section 19 of Article IV of the Constitution of
the State and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State in order to make the
game of bingo lawful under the terms and conditions of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord.
769, eff. January 27, 1977)
Sec. 5-16.02.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Bingo” shall mean a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the
basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or
symbols selected at random.
   (b)   “Authorized organization” shall mean an organization exempted from the
payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d,
23701e, 23701f, 23701g, and 23701l of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the
State, a mobile home park association, or a senior citizens organization.
   (c)   “Minor” shall mean any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   (d)   “Renewal license” shall mean a license issued pursuant to this chapter
within six (6) months after the expiration of the term of an earlier license
issued pursuant to this chapter to the same applicant organization.
   (e)   “Initial license” shall mean any license issued pursuant to this
chapter which is not a renewal license. (§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 27, 1977,
as amended by § 1, Ord. 993, eff. December 20, 1984)
Sec. 5-16.03.   Licenses: Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any bingo game in the
unincorporated area of the County unless such person is an authorized
organization and holds a valid, unexpired, unrevoked license issued in
accordance with this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
section, a senior citizens organization or mobile home park association which
conducts bingo games which have twenty-five (25) or fewer participants and
which do not generate any net proceeds shall not be required to obtain a
license in accordance with this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 27, 1977,
as amended by § 2, Ord. 993, eff. December 20, 1984, and § 1, Ord. 1000, eff.
March 14, 1985)
Sec. 5-16.04.   Licenses: Applications.
   Applications for bingo licenses shall be made to the Sheriff-Coroner on
forms prescribed by him and shall be filed not less than thirty (30) days prior
to the proposed date of the bingo game or games. Such application form shall
require from the applicant at least the following:
   (a)   The name of the applicant and a statement that the applicant is an
authorized organization;
   (b)   The name and address of at least two (2) officers, including the
presiding officer, of the applicant organization;
   (c)   The particular property within the unincorporated territory of the
County, including the street number, owned or leased by the applicant for an
office or for the performance of the purposes for which the applicant is
organized on which bingo games are to be conducted, together with the occupancy
capacity of such place;
   (d)   Whether the premises used for bingo are leased or owned by the
applicant;
   (e)   The proposed day of the week and hours of the day for the conduct of
bingo games; and
   (f)   A list of all officers and directors of the applicant and of the
person or persons designated by the applicant as being responsible for the
operation of bingo games, including for each the full name, date of birth,
place of birth, physical description, and driver’s license number.
   The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of determination of
exemption under Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, or
23701l of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State or a letter of good
standing, either issued by the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax Board of
the State, showing an exemption under one of said sections, or by satisfactory
proof that the applicant is a mobile home park association or a senior citizens
organization, as applicable.
   The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of the Fire Chief of
the agency with fire suppression and prevention responsibility for the premises
to be used for bingo games that the premises comply with all the laws,
ordinances, rules, or regulations of such agency. Such certificate shall
include any terms and conditions necessary to maintain such compliance.
   (g)   Each person who will be responsible for the operation of bingo games
for an applicant shall be fingerprinted by the Sheriff-Coroner, and the
applicant shall pay to the Sheriff-Coroner such fees as may be required by the
Sheriff-Coroner to make a background check based upon such fingerprints.
   If, after a license has been issued, an additional person or persons become
responsible for the operation of a licensee’s bingo games, such additional
person or persons shall be fingerprinted by the Sheriff-Coroner, and the
licensee shall pay to the Sheriff-Coroner such fees as may be required by the
Sheriff-Coroner to make a background check based on such fingerprints. (§ 1,
Ord. 769, eff. January 27,1977, as amended by § 3, Ord. 953, eff. July 1, 1983,
and § 3, Ord. 993, eff. December 20, 1984)
Sec. 5-16.05.   Licenses: Fees.
   (a)   The initial application fee for a bingo license shall be Fifty and no/
100ths ($50.00) Dollars. For an authorized organization which does not award
cash prizes in bingo games and does not charge a cash entry fee to play, the
fee shall be Twenty-Five and no/100ths ($25.00) Dollars. The license fee shall
accompany the application and shall be nonrefundable.
   (b)   There shall be no fee for the renewal of a license if the renewal
application is submitted prior to the expiration of the preceding license. If
the preceding license has expired, the fee shall be Fifty and no/100ths
($50.00) Dollars.
   (c)   Each licensee shall pay, in addition to the fee required by subsection
(a)of this section, a fee of one percent of the monthly gross receipts over
Five Thousand and no/100ths ($5,000.00) Dollars derived from bingo games. Such
fee shall be paid within thirty (30) days following the close of each calendar
month to the Sheriff-Coroner and shall be accompanied by a copy of the monthly
report provided for in subsection (m)of section 5-16.09 of this chapter. (§ 1,
Ord. 769, eff. January 27, 1977, as amended by § 1, Ord. 874, eff. May 8, 1980,
§ 4, Ord. 953, eff. July 1, 1983, § 4, Ord. 993, eff. December 20, 1984, and §
2, Ord. 1000, eff. March 14, 1985)
Sec. 5-16.06.   Licenses: Applications: Investigations.
   (a)   Upon the receipt of an application and fee, the Sheriff-Coroner shall
send copies of such application to any office or department which he deems
essential in order to carry out a proper investigation of the applicant.
   (b)   The Sheriff-Coroner and every officer and/or department to which an
application is referred shall investigate the truth of the matters set forth in
the application and the character of the applicant and may examine the premises
to be used for a bingo game.
   (c)   Upon the approval of an application for a bingo license, the Sheriff-
Coroner shall issue the license. (§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 27, 1977, as
amended by § 5, Ord. 953, eff. July 1, 1983)
Sec. 5-16.07.   Licenses: Term.
   The term of all bingo licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire
on July 1 of each year. (§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 27, 1977, as amended by §
3, Ord. 1000, eff. March 14, 1985)
Sec. 5-16.08.   Licenses not transferable.
   Each license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be used
by a specific authorized organization to conduct a bingo game at a specific
location and shall in no event be transferred from one organization to another
or from one location to another. (§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 27, 1977, as
amended by § 5, Ord. 993, eff. December 20, 1984)
Sec. 5-16.09.   Limitations.
   (a)   An authorized organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property
both owned or leased by it, or on property whose use is donated to the
organization, and which property is used by such organization for an office or
for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized.
   (a-1) No authorized organization shall conduct bingo games in excess of the
following time limits:
   (1)   Weekly maximum. No authorized organization shall conduct bingo games
at any one location in excess of four (4) hours per week.
   (2)   More frequent operators. No authorized organization conducting bingo
games more frequently than set forth in subsection (3) of this subsection shall
conduct a bingo game for more than one hour for each ten (10) hours of service
by its volunteers or employees at that property to run the office or for the
performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized (exclusive
of conducting bingo games). The hours of service shall be within the same
calendar month in which the bingo game is conducted.
   (3)   Less frequent operators. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
(2) of this subsection, if:
   (i)   An authorized organization conducts no more than four (4) bingo games
per year; and
   (ii)   The property owned or leased by it or whose use is donated to the
organization will be the location of no more than three (3) bingo games
conducted within the same calendar week by any operator, the authorized
organization may conduct a bingo game for no more than two (2) hours for each
ten (10) hours of service by its volunteers or employees at that property to
run the office or for the performance of the purposes for which the
organization is organized (exclusive of conducting bingo games). The hours of
service shall be within the same calendar month in which the bingo game is
conducted. No such authorized organization shall conduct bingo games in excess
of such limit.
   (4)   Sole location. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (3) of
this subsection, an authorized organization which conducts a bingo game only on
property which is also the sole location used by it for an office or for the
performance of the purposes for which it is organized may conduct bingo games
for up to four (4) hours per week.
   (5)   Additional hours. Notwithstanding the limit set forth in subsection
(1) of this subsection, once per each calendar year the Sheriff-Coroner may
permit a licensee who is a more frequent operator to conduct bingo games for
additional time up to four (4) hours; provided, however, such permission shall
be limited to bingo games.
   (b)   No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.
   (c)   All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to members of
the authorized organization.
   (d)   A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by the members of the
authorized organization which organized it. Such members shall be approved by
the Sheriff-Coroner and shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any
bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall
operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other
phase of such game. This subsection shall not preclude the employment of
security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at such
bingo games by the organization conducting the games. No person who has been
convicted of any crime involving fraud or theft shall participate in the
operation of a bingo game.
   (e)   No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, except
the organization authorized to conduct a game, shall hold a financial interest
in the conduct of a bingo game.
   (f)   With respect to organizations exempt from the payment of the bank and
corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the
State, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or
account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such
profits shall be used only for charitable purposes.
   (f-1) With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games
pursuant to this chapter, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept
in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or
account. For the purposes of this subsection, “proceeds” shall mean the
receipts of bingo games conducted by organizations not coming within the
provisions of subsection (f)of this section. Such proceeds shall be used only
for charitable purposes, except as follows:
   (1)   Such proceeds may be used for prizes.
   (2)   A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty (20%) percent of the
proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or One Thousand and no/100ths
($1,000.00) Dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for the rental of
property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative
expenses, security equipment, and security personnel.
   (3)   Such proceeds may be used to pay license fees.
   (g)   No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the
person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is
being conducted.
   (h)   The total value of the prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo
game shall not exceed Two Hundred Fifty and no/100ths ($250.00) Dollars in cash
or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held.
   (i)   No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of midnight and 8:
00 a.m.
   (j)   The licensee shall report to the Sheriff-Coroner in writing each
change in officers or directors and shall furnish in writing such information
as to each new officer or director as is required of officers or directors in a
license application.
   (k)   No intoxicated person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game.
   (l)   No alcoholic beverages shall be served or consumed on the premises on
which a bingo game is conducted.
   (m)   Within thirty (30) days following the close of each calendar month,
the licensee shall file with the Sheriff-Coroner a report, on forms prescribed
by the Sheriff-Coroner, setting forth all moneys collected from games held
during the month, all moneys deposited in connection therewith, the moneys
remaining for charitable purposes, the number of hours per week bingo games
were conducted, and the number of hours of service per week by its volunteers
or employees at the location where bingo games were conducted, exclusive of
conducting bingo games.
   (n)   No bingo game shall be conducted unless a person designated as
responsible for operating the game is present physically on the premises at all
times at the time and place in which the bingo game is being operated.
   (o)   The licensee shall report to the Sheriff-Coroner in writing each
change in designation of such information as to each new responsible person as
required of responsible persons in a license application. (§ 1, Ord. 769, eff.
January 27, 1977, as amended by §§ 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12, Ord. 993, eff.
December 20, 1984)
Sec. 5-16.10.   Inspections.
   Any peace officer of the County shall have free access to any bingo game
licensed pursuant to this chapter. The licensee shall have the bingo license
and lists of approved staff available for inspection at all times during any
bingo game. (§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 27, 1977)
Sec. 5-16.11.   Licenses: Denial, suspension, and/or revocation.
   (a)   Grounds. The Sheriff-Coroner may deny an application for a bingo
license or suspend or revoke a bingo license if he finds the applicant or
licensee, or any agent or representative thereof, has:
   (1)   Knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a
material fact in the application or in any record or report required to be
filed pursuant to this chapter; or
   (2)   Violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Procedure. If, after an investigation, the Sheriff-Coroner determines
that a bingo license should be suspended or revoked or an application for such
license denied, he shall prepare a notice of suspension, revocation, or denial
of the application, setting forth the reasons for such suspension, revocation,
or denial of the application. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to
the applicant’s last address provided in the application or be personally
delivered. Any person who has had an application for a bingo license denied by
the Sheriff-Coroner, or who has had a bingo license suspended or revoked by the
Sheriff-Coroner, may appeal the decision of the Sheriff-Coroner in the manner
provided in this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 27, 1977)
Sec. 5-16.12.   Appeal procedure.
   Whenever an appeal is provided for in this chapter, such appeal shall be
filed and conducted as prescribed in this section.
   (a)   Within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of any denial,
suspension, revocation, or other decision of the Sheriff-Coroner, an aggrieved
party may appeal such action by filing with the Clerk of the Board a written
appeal briefly setting forth the reasons why such denial, suspension,
revocation, or other decision is not proper.
   (b)   Upon the receipt of such written appeal, the Clerk of the Board shall
cause the appeal to be set for a hearing before the Board. At least one week
prior to the date of the hearing on the appeal, the Clerk of the Board shall
notify the appellant and Sheriff-Coroner of the date and place of the hearing.
At such hearing, the Sheriff-Coroner and the appellant may present evidence
relevant to the denial, suspension, revocation, or other decision of the
Sheriff-Coroner.
   (c)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board may uphold the denial,
suspension, revocation, or other decision of the Sheriff-Coroner, or the Board
may allow that which has been denied, reinstate that which has been suspended
or revoked, or modify or reverse any other decision of the Sheriff-Coroner
which is the subject of the appeal. (§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 27, 1977)
Sec. 5-16.13.   Violations and penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to receive a profit, wage, or
salary from any bingo game authorized by this chapter.
   (b)   Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with
any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed Five
Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail
for a period of not more than six (6) months, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
   All sanctions provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and not
exclusive. (§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 27, 1977)
Sec. 5-16.14.   Severability.
   If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall be held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of the
provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable. (§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 27, 1977)
Chapter 17
TAXICABS
Sections:
Article 1. Title and Authority
   
5-17.101   Title.
   
5-17.102   Authority.
   
5-17.103   Effect on other laws.
Article 2. Definitions
   
5-17.201   Scope.
   
5-17.202   Taxicab.
   
5-17.203   Automobile.
   
5-17.204   Owner.
   
5-17.205   Drive or operate.
Article 3. Prohibitions
   
5-17.301   Licenses: Required.
   
5-17.302   Licenses: Revoked or expired: Effect.
   
5-17.303   Taxicabs: Operating requirements.
Article 4. Licenses
   
5-17.401   Applications.
   
5-17.402   Applications: Issuance: Denial.
   
5-17.403   Term.
   
5-17.404   Fees: Issuance: Renewal.
   
5-17.405   Cancellation.
   
5-17.406   Denial or cancellation: Appeals.
   
5-17.407   Denial or cancellation: Decisions: Finality.
   
5-17.408   Denial or cancellation: Appeals: Procedure.
   
5-17.409   Denial or cancellation: Appeals: Hearings: Determinations.
   
5-17.410   Nontransferability.
Article 5: Standards
   
5-17.501   Scope.
   
5-17.502   Licenses: Requirements.
   
5-17.503   Licenses: Public liability insurance: Requirements.
Article 6. Violations: Penalties
   
5-17.601   Violations: Penalties.
Article 1.
Title and Authority
Sec. 5-17.101. Title.
   This chapter shall be known and cited and referred to as the “Taxicab Law of
the County of Yolo.” (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980)
Sec. 5-17.102. Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7 of Article
11 of the Constitution of the State and Chapter 5 of Division 7 of the Vehicle
Code of the State (commencing with Section 16500). (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff.
November 1, 1980)
Sec. 5-17.103. Effect on other laws.
   The provisions of this chapter are not the exclusive regulation of taxicabs
within the unincorporated area of the County. The provisions of this chapter
shall supplement and be in addition to the regulatory Codes, statutes, and laws
heretofore or hereafter enacted by the County, the State, or any other legal
entity or agency having jurisdiction. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980)
Article 2.
Definitions
Sec. 5-17.201. Scope.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as set
forth in this article. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980)
Sec. 5-17.202. Taxicab.
   “Taxicab” shall mean an automobile used in the transportation of passengers
for hire, on call or demand, over the public highways of the unincorporated
area of the County and not over a defined route or upon a fixed schedule. (§ 1,
Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980)
Sec. 5-17.203. Automobile.
   “Automobile” shall mean a motor-propelled vehicle used, designed, or
maintained primarily for the transportation of persons over public streets. (§
1, Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980)
Sec. 5-17.204. Owner.
   “Owner” shall mean a person, firm, or corporation having the use or control
of a taxicab, whether as the legal owner, lessee, or in any other capacity. (§
1, Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980)
Sec. 5-17.205. Drive or operate.
   “Drive or operate” shall mean:
   (a)   The pick up or discharge of passengers within the unincorporated area
of the County; and/or
   (b)   Passage over the public highways of the unincorporated area of the
County with passengers; or without passengers if the taxicab is enroute to pick
up passengers or has just discharged passengers. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff. November
1, 1980)
Article 3.
Prohibitions
Sec. 5-17.301. Licenses: Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner of a taxicab to drive or operate, or
cause or permit another person to drive or operate, a taxicab on the public
highways of the unincorporated areas of the County without having a valid
taxicab license. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980)
Sec. 5-17.302.   Licenses: Revoked or expired: Effect.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner of a taxicab to drive or operate, or
cause or permit another person to drive or operate, a taxicab on the public
highways of the unincorporated areas of the County with an expired or revoked
taxicab license. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980)
Sec. 5-17.303.   Taxicabs: Operating requirements.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab in violation of the
terms and conditions imposed by this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff. November 1,
1980)
Article 4.
Licenses
Sec. 5-17.401. Applications.
   Any person required to apply for and obtain a license under the provisions
of this chapter shall prepare and submit to the Sheriff-Coroner an application,
and other information or documentation as may be required, on forms provided
for such purpose by the County. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980, as
amended by § 6, Ord. 953, eff. July 1, 1983)
Sec. 5-17.402.   Applications: Issuance: Denial.
   If the Sheriff-Coroner finds that the applicant is in compliance with the
standards specified by this chapter, he shall issue a taxicab license to the
applicant. If the Sheriff-Coroner finds that the applicant has not complied
with the standards specified by this chapter, he shall deny the license. (§ 1,
Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980, as amended by § 7, Ord. 953, eff. July 1,
1983)
Sec. 5-17.403. Term.
   The term of a taxicab license shall be one year beginning on October 1 of
each year and ending on September 30 of the succeeding year. (§ 1, Ord. 893,
eff. November 1, 1980)
Sec. 5-17.404.   Fees: Issuance: Renewal.
   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be issued upon
the payment of a fee of Twenty and no/100ths ($20.00) Dollars for the initial
issuance and for renewal; provided, however, if a renewal application is filed
after the expiration of the preceding license, the fee for renewal shall be
Thirty and no/100ths ($30.00) Dollars. Licenses shall not be renewed without
proof that the public liability insurance required by this chapter remains in
full force and effect. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980)
Sec. 5-17.405. Cancellation.
   (a)   The Sheriff-Coroner shall cancel any license issued pursuant to this
chapter when any of the following occurs:
   (1)   The owner fails to maintain the public liability policy specified in
Article 5 of this chapter in full force and effect; or
   (2)   Upon cancellation of such policy for any other reason than as set
forth in subsection (1) of this subsection; or
   (3)   If the public liability policy does not meet the requirements of
Article 5 of this chapter; or
   (4)   The renewal fee is not paid.
   (b)   The Sheriff-Coroner shall not cancel any license issued pursuant to
this chapter without first giving five (5) days’ notice to the holder of such
license by certified mail, return receipt requested. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff.
November 1, 1980, as amended by § 8, Ord. 953, eff. July 1, 1983)
Sec. 5-17.406.   Denial or cancellation: Appeals.
   All decisions of the Sheriff-Coroner as to the denial or cancellation of
taxicab licenses may be appealed by the taxicab owner to the Board. (§ 1, Ord.
893, eff. November 1, 1980, as amended by § 9, Ord. 953, eff. July 1, 1983)
Sec. 5-17.407.   Denial or cancellation: Decisions: Finality.
   The decision of the Sheriff-Coroner as to the denial or cancellation of
licenses rendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be final,
unless appealed to the Board within thirty (30) days after such decision is
rendered in writing to the taxicab owner. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff. November 1,
1980, as amended by § 10, Ord. 953, eff. July 1, 1983)
Sec. 5-17.408.   Denial or cancellation: Appeals: Procedure.
   Appeals from the decisions of the Sheriff-Coroner shall be made in writing,
and shall specify and set forth the grounds for the appeal, and shall be filed
by the appellant with the Clerk of the Board. The Board shall set the matter
for a hearing no later than thirty (30) days after such filing and shall give
the appellant and the Sheriff-Coroner no less than fifteen (15) days’ written
notice of such date of hearing. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980, as
amended by § 11, Ord. 953, eff. July 1, 1983)
Sec. 5-17.409.   Denial or cancellation: Appeals: Hearings: Determinations.
   (a)   After hearing the appeal, the Board shall render its decision and may:
   (1)   Reinstate or order the issuance of the license or the renewal thereof;
or
   (2)   Uphold the decision of the Sheriff-Coroner.
   (b)   The order of the Board shall be final. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff. November
1, 1980, as amended by § 12, Ord. 953, eff. July 1, 1983)
Sec. 5-17.410. Nontransferability.
   No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable. (§ 1, Ord.
893, eff. November 1, 1980)
Article 5.
Standards
Sec. 5-17.501. Scope.
   Applications for the issuance of taxicab licenses shall be determined in
accordance with the standards prescribed by this article. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff.
November 1, 1980)
Sec. 5-17.502. Licenses: Requirements.
   No license shall be issued pursuant to this chapter until a policy for
public liability insurance as required by this chapter has been secured, and
the policy, or a copy of the policy or certificate evidencing the policy, has
been deposited with the Tax Collector, along with the required license fee. The
policy, or an endorsement thereto, shall provide that the issuing company will
not allow the policy to be cancelled for any reason without first serving a ten
(10) day notice of cancellation upon the County. Such service shall be made by
registered mail to the Tax Collector. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980)
Sec. 5-17.503.   Licenses: Public liability insurance: Requirements.
   (a)   Each policy required by this chapter shall cover each taxicab operated
by an owner for not less than the following sums:
   (1)   For the injury to any one person, or the death of any one person in
any one accident, One Hundred Thousand and no/100ths ($100,000.00) Dollars;
   (2)   For the injury to or the death of two (2) or more persons in any one
accident, Three Hundred Thousand and no/100ths ($300,000.00) Dollars; and
   (3)   For the injury to or destruction of property in any one accident,
Fifty Thousand and no/100ths ($50,000.00) Dollars.
   (b)   The public liability insurance specified in this section shall be
executed by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State by the
Insurance Commissioner of the State.
   (c)   Up to Twenty-Five Thousand and no/100ths ($25,000.00) Dollars of the
insurance requirements set forth in subsection (a)of this section may be
satisfied by depositing with the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State
sufficient cash or a bond pursuant to Sections 16020 et seq. of the Vehicle
Code of the State. If a portion of the insurance requirements are satisfied by
such deposits, no permit shall be granted until a certified copy of the
acknowledgement of the deposit issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of
the State specifying the amounts of such deposits has been filed with the Tax
Collector. (§ 1, Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 912,
eff. July 9, 1981)
Article 6.
Violations: Penalties
Sec. 5-17.601. Violations: Penalties.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and
shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. (§ 1,
Ord. 893, eff. November 1, 1980)
Chapter 18
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA*
*   Adopted as Chapter 14; renumbered to Chapter 18 by codifier to conform with
numbering system of the Code.
Sections:
   
5-18.01   Purpose.
   
5-18.02   Definitions.
   
5-18.03   Displays of drug paraphernalia.
   
5-18.04   Distributions of drug paraphernalia.
   
5-18.05   Exceptions.
   
5-18.06   Severability.
   
5-18.07   Violations: Infractions.
Sec. 5-18.01. Purpose.
   The illegal use of controlled substances within the unincorporated area of
the County creates serious social, medical, and law enforcement problems. The
illegal use of such substances by persons under eighteen (18) years of age has
reached crisis dimensions. It is causing serious physical and psychological
damage to he youth of this community, an impairment of educational achievement
and of the efficiency of the educational system, increases in a non-drug
related crimes and a threat to the ability of the community to ensure future
generations of responsible and productive adults, all to the detriment of the
healthy, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the County.
   The proliferation of the display of drug paraphernalia in retail stores
within the unincorporated area, and the distribution of such paraphernalia,
intensifies, and otherwise compounds the problem of illegal use of controlled
substances in this community. That proliferation is encouraged by the enactment
of regulatory laws in neighboring jurisdictions, and the enactment of
regulatory laws is necessary to prevent the migration of such displays and
distribution in the County.
   A ban only upon the display and distribution of drug paraphernalia to
persons under eighteen (18) years of age would not be practical. The person who
displays or distributes would have difficulty determining who could lawfully
view or receive drug paraphernalia. The already thinly-staffed law enforcement
agencies would be subject to intolerable added enforcement burden by adding the
age of a person who views or receives paraphernalia as an element of a
prohibition upon displays and distribution. A significant number of high school
students are eighteen (18) years of age or older. It would be unlawful to
distribute paraphernalia to some students attending the same school in which
the distribution to other students would be prohibited. Permitted displays and
distribution to adults within the community would symbolize a public tolerance
of illegal drug use, making it difficult to explain the rationale of program
directed against similar abuse by youth. The problem of the illegal consumption
of controlled substances by adults within this community is significant and
substantial, necessitating a cessation of the encouragement to drug abuse which
the display and distribution of drug paraphernalia create.
   This chapter is a measure which is necessary in order to discourage the
illegal use of controlled substances within the unincorporated area of the
County. (§ 1, Ord. 908, eff. April 30, 1981)
Sec. 5-18.02. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   Business. “Business” shall mean a fixed location, whether indoors or
outdoors, at which merchandise is offered for sale at retail.
   (b)   Display. “Display” shall mean to show to a patron or place in a manner
so as to be available for viewing or inspection by a patron.
   (c)   Patron. “Patron” shall mean a person who enters a business for the
purpose of purchasing or viewing as a shopper merchandise offered for sale at
the business.
   (d)   Distribute. “Distribute” shall mean to transfer ownership or a
possessory interest to another, whether for consideration or as a gratuity.
“Distribute” shall include both sales and gifts.
   (e)   Controlled substance. “Controlled substance” shall mean those
controlled substances set forth in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, and
11058 of the Health and Safety Code of the State, identified as Schedules I
through V, inclusive, as said sections now exist or may hereafter be amended.
   (f)   Drug paraphernalia.  “Drug paraphernalia” shall mean all equipment,
products, and materials of any kind which are intended by a person charged with
a violation of this chapter for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repacking, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of any law
of the State. “Drug paraphernalia” shall include, but not be limited to, all of
the following:
   (1)   Kits intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from
which a controlled substance can be derived;
   (2)   Kits intended for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances;
   (3)   Isomerization devices intended for use in increasing the potency of
any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
   (4)   Testing equipment intended for use in identifying or in analyzing the
strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances;
   (5)   Scales and balances intended for use in weighing or measuring
controlled substances;
   (6)   Dilutants and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, and lactose, intended for use in cutting controlled
substances;
   (7)   Separation gins and sifters intended for use in removing twigs and
seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana;
   (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices intended for
use in compounding controlled substances;
   (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers intended for use
in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;
   (10)   Containers and other objects intended for use in storing or
concealing controlled substances; and
   (11)   Objects intended for use in injecting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body,
such as:
   (i)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with
or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
   (ii)   Water pipes;
   (iii)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
   (iv)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
   (v)   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a
marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand;
   (vi)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
   (vii)   Chamber pipes;
   (viii)   Carburetor pipes;
   (ix)   Air-driven pipes; and
   (x)   Bongs.
   In determining whether an object is “drug paraphernalia”, a court or other
authority may consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors,
the following:
   1.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning
its use;
   2.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
   3.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
   4.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver to persons whom he knows intend to
use the object to facilitate violations of the laws of the State relating to
controlled substances;
   5.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use;
   6.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use;
   7.   National and local advertising concerning its use;
   8.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
   9.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;
   10.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
   11.   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   (g)   Person. “Person” shall mean a natural person or any firm, partnership,
association, corporation, or cooperative association. (§ 1, Ord. 908, eff.
April 30, 1981)
Sec. 5-18.03.   Displays of drug paraphernalia.
   (a)   Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully maintain or operate any business knowing, or under circumstances
where one reasonably should know, that drug paraphernalia is displayed at such
business.
   (b)   Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person who
is the owner of a business, an employee thereof, or one who works at such
business as an agent of the owner to willfully display drug paraphernalia at
such a business. (§ 1, Ord. 908, eff. April 30, 1981)
Sec. 5-18.04.   Distribution of drug paraphernalia.
   Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully distribute to another person drug paraphernalia knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of any law of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 908, eff. April 30,
1981)
Sec. 5-18.05. Exceptions.
   No provision of this chapter shall be deemed, whether directly or
indirectly, to authorize any act which is otherwise prohibited by any law of
the State or require any act which is otherwise prohibited by any law of the
State. Nor shall any provision of this chapter be deemed,.whether directly or
indirectly, to prohibit any act or acts which are prohibited as a criminal
offense by any law of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 908, eff. April 30, 1981)
Sec. 5-18.06. Severability.
   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
chapter are severable. (§ 1, Ord. 908, eff. April 30, 1981)
Sec. 5-18.07. Violations: Infractions.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by (1) a fine not
exceeding Fifty and no/100ths ($50.00) Dollars for a first violation; (2) a
fine not exceeding One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars for a second
violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a fine not exceeding Two
Hundred Fifty and no/100ths ($250.00) Dollars for each additional violation of
this chapter within one year. A person who violates the provisions of Section
5-18.03 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
day, or portion thereof, during which the violation continues. A person who
violates the provisions of Section
5-18.04 of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each item of
drug paraphernalia which is distributed. (§ 1, Ord. 908, eff. April 30, 1981)
Chapter 19
ADULT PICTURE ARCADES
Sections:
   
5-19.01   Definitions.
   
5-19.02   Adult picture arcades: Booths.
   
5-19.03   Violations: Penalties.
Sec. 5-19.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   Adult picture arcade. “Adult picture arcade” shall mean any place to
which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated, or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled, still or motion
picture machines, projectors, television sets, or other image-producing devices
are used to display images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and which images have as a dominant or predominant character and theme
the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as
defined in this section.
   (b)   Specified sexual activity. “Specified sexual activity” shall mean and
include, and shall be limited to, the following:
   (1)   Actual or simulated genital or anal sexual intercourse;
   (2)   Oral copulation;
   (3)   Bestiality;
   (4)   Direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals;
   (5)   Masochism;
   (6)   Erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of
pain; or
   (7)   The use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship.
   (c)   Specified anatomical areas. “Specified anatomical areas” shall mean
and include, and shall be limited to, the following:
   (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, mons pubis,
buttocks, and female breasts below the top of the areola; and/or
   (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
or opaquely covered. (§ 1, Ord. 1004, eff. April 11, 1985, as amended by § 3,
Ord. 1045, eff. November 27, 1986)
Sec. 5-19.02.   Adult picture arcades: Booths.
   No adult picture arcade shall be maintained or operated unless the complete
interior of the place where the pictures are viewed is visible upon entrance to
such place. No partially or fully enclosed booth or partially or fully
concealed booth shall be maintained. (§ 1, Ord. 1004, eff. April 11, 1985, as
amended by § 3, Ord. 1045, eff. November 27, 1986)
Sec. 5-19.03. Violations: Penalties.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. (§ 1, Ord. 1004,
eff. April 11, 1985, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1045, eff. November 27, 1986)
Title 6
SANITATION AND HEALTH
Chapters:
1.   Animals
2.   Barbers and Cosmetologists
3.   Food Handling
4.   Milk Inspection and Distribution
5.   Public Sewage Disposal
6.   Housing Code
7.   Litter and Contaminants
8.   Water Quality
9.   Public Health Permits
10.   General Provisions
11.   Underground Storage of Hazardous Substances (Repealed)
12.   Regulation of Biosolids
13.   Camping Within the Unincorporated Area of Yolo County
14.   Limitations to Access to Tobacco Products
15.   Tobacco Retailer Permit
16.   Recycling And Diversion of Debris From Construction and Demolition
17.   Waste, Recyclables and Organics
18.   Smoking in Workplaces and Enclosed Public Places
19.   Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems
20.   Promotion of Safe and Open Public Spaces
21.   COVID-19 Penalty
22.   LNU Complex Fire Debris Removal
Chapter 1
ANIMALS*
* Article 1 entitled “Animals at Large”, consisting of Section
6-1.101, codified from Ordinance No. 63, Article 2 entitled “Dogs”, consisting
of Sections
6-1.201 through 6-1.226, codified from Ordinance No. 468, as amended by
Ordinance Nos. 494 and 536 and Ordinance No. 620, effective January 1, 1970,
and 701, effective January 28, 1974, and Article 3 entitled “Poundmaster”,
consisting of Sections
6-1.301 through
6-1.304, codified from Ordinance No. 468, and Section
6-1.305, added by Ordinance No. 637, effective October 14, 1970, repealed by
Section 1, Ordinance No. 703, effective May 22, 1974.
Sections:
Article 1. Title, Purpose, Authority, and Territory
   
6-1.101   Title.
   
6-1.102   Purpose.
   
6-1.103   Authority.
   
6-1.104   Territory.
Article 2. Administration
   
6-1.201   Sheriff.
   
6-1.202   Chief of the Animal Control Division.
   
6-1.203   Authority to carry firearms.
   
6-1.204   Pursuit on private property.
   
6-1.205   Animal Control Registrars.
   
6-1.206   Health Officer.
   
6-1.207   Fees and Penalties.
Article 3. Definitions
   
6-1.301   Scope.
   
6-1.302   Agricultural Commissioner.
   
6-1.303   Animal Control Center .
   
6-1.304   At large.
   
6-1.305   Chief of the Animal Control Division.
   
6-1.306   Dog.
   
6-1.307   Health Officer.
   
6-1.308   Kennel.
   
6-1.309   Owner.
   
6-1.310   Person.
   
6-1.311   Vaccination.
   
6-1.312   Veterinarian.
   
6-1.313   Vicious animal.
   
6-1.314   Wolf hybrid.
Article 4. Prohibitions
   
6-1.401   Animals running at large.
   
6-1.401.1   Dogs on leashes.
   
6-1.401.2   Animals running at large: Fees.
   
6-1.401.3   Wolf hybrids.
   
6-1.402   Trespassing.
   
6-1.403   Noise.
   
6-1.404   Female dogs in heat.
   
6-1.405   Proper care.
   
6-1.406   Unlicensed dogs.
   
6-1.407   Tags and collars.
   
6-1.408   Replacement of tags.
   
6-1.409   Improper tags.
   
6-1.410   Removal of tags.
   
6-1.411   Unlicensed kennels.
   
6-1.412   Kennel standards.
   
6-1.413   Kennels after license revocation.
   
6-1.414   Taking dogs from kennels.
   
6-1.415   Vaccinations.
   
6-1.416   Reports.
   
6-1.417   Isolation or quarantine.
   
6-1.418   Epidemic regulations.
   
6-1.419   Interference with enforcement.
   
6-1.420   Cats: Damages or injuries.
   
6-1.421   Fecal matter.
   
6-1.422   Violations: Misdemeanors: Infractions.
   
6-1.423   Separate offenses.
   
6-1.424   Promises to appear.
Article 5. Licenses: General
   
6-1.501   Effect of licenses.
   
6-1.502   Exemptions from licensing.
Article 6. Licenses: Dogs
   
6-1.601   Dog licenses.
   
6-1.602   Dogs required to be licensed.
   
6-1.603   Time of applications: Duration of licenses: Renewal notices.
   
6-1.604   Preparation of forms and tags.
   
6-1.605   License applications.
   
6-1.606   Fees.
   
6-1.607   Penalties.
   
6-1.608   Exceptions from penalties.
   
6-1.609   Seeing Eye dogs.
   
6-1.610   Law enforcement dogs.
   
6-1.611   Issuance: Filing.
   
6-1.612   Endorsement and filing of application forms.
   
6-1.613   License tags.
   
6-1.614   Notices.
   
6-1.615   Lost tags.
Article 7. License: Kennels
   
6-1.701   Kennel licenses.
   
6-1.702   Preparation of forms and certificates.
   
6-1.703   Contents of application forms.
   
6-1.704   Fees.
   
6-1.705   Penalties.
   
6-1.706   Exceptions from penalties.
   
6-1.707   Law enforcement dogs.
   
6-1.708   Investigations.
   
6-1.709   Action on applications.
   
6-1.710   Endorsement and filing.
   
6-1.711   License certificates.
   
6-1.712   Notices.
   
6-1.713   Suspension of kennel licenses.
   
6-1.714   Suspension of kennel licenses: Notices.
   
6-1.715   Appeals.
   
6-1.716   Automatic revocation.
Article 8. Impoundment
   
6-1.801   Taking up and impounding.
   
6-1.802   Redemption period.
   
6-1.803   Animals voluntarily surrendered.
   
6-1.803.1   Surrendered or abandoned animals: Adoption: Immunization.
   
6-1.803.2   Spay or neuter deposit.
   
6-1.804   Redemption.
   
6-1.804.1   Euthanasia.
   
6-1.805   Disposition.
   
6-1.805.1   Animal traps.
   
6-1.806   Liability.
Article 9. Rabies
   
6-1.901   Vaccinations.
   
6-1.902   Vaccinations: Imported dogs.
   
6-1.903   Vaccinations: Exceptions.
   
6-1.904   Vaccinations: Procedure.
   
6-1.905   Reports.
   
6-1.906   Reports to the Health Officer.
   
6-1.907   Isolation or quarantine.
   
6-1.908   Carcasses of rabid animals.
   
6-1.909   Destruction.
   
6-1.910   Epidemic regulations.
   
6-1.911   Fees.
Article 10. Regulation of Vicious Animals
   
6-1.1001   Purpose.
   
6-1.1002   Filing of charges.
   
6-1.1003   Investigations: Impoundment: Rabies control.
   
6-1.1003.1   Factors to consider.
   
6-1.1004   Disposition: Notices.
   
6-1.1005   Requests for hearings: Waivers.
   
6-1.1006   Hearings: Procedure: Judicial reviews.
   
6-1.1007   Disposition of vicious animals.
   
6-1.1008   Fees.
   
6-1.1009   Territory.
   
6-1.1010   Prohibitions.
Article 1.
Title, Purpose, Authority, and Territory
Sec. 6-1.101.   Title.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be cited and referred to as the
“Animal Control Law of the County of Yolo”. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.102.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the preservation of the health
and safety of persons and domestic livestock in the County, to fix the limits
within which animals shall not run at large, and to provide for the regulation
and licensing of dogs and kennels. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.103.   Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by the following
enactments:
   (a)   Article 11, Section 7 of the California Constitution;
   (b)   Title 3, Division 2, Chapter 8 of the Government Code (commencing with
Section 25800) of the State;
   (c)   Division 1, Part 2, Chapter 1, Article 1 of the Health and Safety Code
(commencing with Section 450) of the State; and
   (d)   Division 14 of the Food and Agricultural Code (commencing with Section
30501) of the State. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.104.   Territory.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the entire unincorporated
territory of the County, and the provisions governing dogs shall apply to
territory within any city which is located within the County which requests, by
ordinance, the application of the provisions of this chapter within the
confines of such city. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Article 2.
Administration
Sec. 6-1.201.   Sheriff.
   The sheriff shall:
   (a)   Supervise and direct the Chief of the Animal Control Division, and his
or her deputies or assistants and the Animal Control Registrars in the
performance of their duties;
   (b)   Administer the dog licensing and kennel licensing provisions of this
chapter;
   (c)   Collect at least monthly all dog license fees and kennel license fees
received by the Chief of the Animal Control Division, and Animal Control
Registrars; and
   (d)   Deposit at least monthly all fees collected by him or her in the
County Treasury for deposit in the general fund of the County, and render with
the money so deposited an itemized statement of collections, and file a copy
thereof with the County Auditor. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended
by § 1, Ord. 1061, eff. November 26, 1987)
Sec. 6-1.202.   Chief of the Animal Control Division.
   The duties of the Chief of the Animal Control Division, shall be as follows:
   (a)   To administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter;
   (b)   To take up and impound all animals found to be in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or of Chapter 7 of Division 9 of the Food and
Agricultural Code of the State;
   (c)   To receive applications for dog licenses, to issue dog licenses, to
collect dog license fees in advance, and to enforce the dog licensing
provisions of this chapter;
   (d)   To receive applications for kennel licenses, to issue kennel licenses,
to collect kennel license fees in advance, and to enforce the kennel licensing
provisions of this chapter;
   (e)   To operate and maintain the Animal Control Center and to administer
and enforce the Animal Control Center provisions of this chapter;
   (f)   To cooperate with the Health Officer in the administration and
enforcement of the rabid and dangerous animal provisions of this chapter in the
manner therein set forth;
   (g)   To remove and dispose of the carcass of any dog found in or on any
street, alley, or other public place, except State highways;
   (h)   To keep such records as may be required by the Board, the Agricultural
Commissioner, or other authorities; and
   (i)   To pay all fees collected by him or her in the discharge of his or her
duties under this chapter to the Sheriff. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1061, eff. November 26, 1987)
Sec. 6-1.203.   Authority to carry firearms.
   The Chief of the Animal Control Division, and such animal control officers
as he may specifically designate in writing, are hereby authorized to carry
firearms when acting in the course and scope of their employment pursuant to
the provisions of Section 12031 of the Penal Code of the State. (§ 2, Ord. 703,
eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.204.   Pursuit on private property.
   Animal control officers, when in pursuit of an animal at large, shall have
the authority to enter private property to apprehend such animal. (§ 2, Ord.
703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.205.   Animal Control Registrars.
   (a)   Establishment. There is hereby created and established the position of
Animal Control Registrar.
   (b)   Appointment. The Sheriff shall appoint, with confirmation by the
Board, Animal Control Registrars in such number as he or she shall determine,
and such Animal Control Registrars shall serve at the pleasure of the Sheriff.
   (c)   Compensation. Animal Control Registrars shall serve without
compensation.
   (d)   Duties. The duties of the Animal Control Registrars shall be as
follows:
   (1)   To receive applications for dog licenses, to issue dog licenses, and
to collect dog license fees in advance;
   (2)   To keep such records as may be required by the Board, the Sheriff, or
other authorities; and
   (3)   To pay all fees collected in the discharge of their duties pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter to the Sheriff. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22,
1974, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1061, eff. November 26, 1987)
Sec. 6-1.206.   Health Officer.
   The Health Officer shall:
   (a)   Administer and enforce the vaccination provisions of this chapter; and
   (b)   Cooperate with the animal control officers in the administration and
enforcement of the rabid and dangerous animal provisions of this chapter in the
manner set forth in this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.207.   Fees and penalties.
   The Animal Control Division shall charge, receive and collect fees and
penalties for the performance of services in the amounts, at the times, and in
the manner specified herein or by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. (§ 1,
Ord. 1097, eff. August 24, 1989)
Article 3.
Definitions
Sec. 6-1.301.   Scope.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless the provisions or the context
indicates otherwise, the terms and words defined in this article shall have the
meaning set forth in this article. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.302.   Agricultural Commissioner.
   “Agricultural Commissioner” shall mean the Agricultural Commissioner of the
County. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.303. Animal Control Center .
   “Animal Control Center” shall mean the facilities provided by the County for
the impounding of animals. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.304.   At large.
   “At large” shall mean an animal that, with or without the consent of its
owner, is off the premises of its owner and not under restraint by leash, or
that is not under the control and in the immediate presence of its owner or his
or her agent.(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1365,
eff. December 6, 2007)
Sec. 6-1.305.   Chief of the Animal Control Division.
   “Chief of the Animal Control Division” shall mean the person designated by
the Sheriff as the Chief of the Animal Control Division for the County and his
or her duly authorized deputies. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended
by § 4, Ord. 1061, eff. November 26, 1987)
Sec. 6-1.306.   Dog.
   “Dog” shall mean any domesticated animal of the canine family, excluding
domesticated coyotes, foxes, dingoes, wolves, or other wild species of the
same, as well as all hybrids thereof, which are defined separately in this
Title as “wolf hybrids.” (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1365, eff. December 6, 2007)
Sec. 6-1.307.   Health Officer.
   “Health Officer” shall mean the Health Officer of the County and any Health
Department employee or other person duly authorized by the Health Officer to
act on his behalf. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.308.   Kennel.
   “Kennel” shall mean any enclosure, premises, building, structure, lot or
area, except where reasonably necessary to support an agricultural use (i.e.,
to contain herding dogs), where five (5) or more dogs or other small domestic
animals, as defined in Title 8, which are not sick or injured and are ten (10)
weeks in age or older are boarded for compensation, cared for, trained for
compensation, kept for sale, or bred for sale, or ten (10) or more dogs or
other small domestic animals that are ten (10) weeks of age or older which are
kept and maintained as pets, “rescue” animals, or for any other non-commercial
purpose. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1365, eff.
December 6, 2007)
Sec. 6-1.309.   Owner.
   “Owner” shall mean a person who possesses, has title to, or an interest in,
harbors, or has control, custody, or possession of an animal, and the verb
forms of “to own” shall include all these shades of meaning. (§ 2, Ord. 703,
eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.310.   Person.
   “Person” shall mean any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership, or
association. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.311.   Vaccination.
   “Vaccination” shall mean the inoculation of a dog with canine anti-rabies
vaccine approved by and in the manner prescribed by the Department of Public
Health of the State. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.312.   Veterinarian.
   “Veterinarian” shall mean a person licensed by the State to practice
veterinary medicine. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.313.   Vicious animal.
   “Vicious animal” shall mean any dog or other animal, except a dog assisting
a peace officer in law enforcement duties, which has attacked any person or
other animal, without provocation by such person or other animal, at a place
other than on private property where the attacking animal is maintained by its
owner. (§ 1, Ord. 950, eff. June 2, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1365, eff.
December 6, 2007)
Sec. 6-1.314.   Wolf Hybrid.
   “Wolf hybrid” shall mean a mammal that, based on substantial evidence, is
determined to be the offspring of any species of wild canid or wild canid
hybrid and a domestic dog or a wild canid hybrid, or any mammal that is
represented by its owner to be a wolf hybrid. “Wolf hybrid” includes hybrids of
wolves, coyotes, dingoes, foxes, or any other kind of wild canid. Substantial
evidence used to identify wolf hybrids may include the opinion of an expert in
wolf hybrid identification. (§ 2, Ord. 1365, eff. December 6, 2007)
Article 4.
Prohibitions
Sec. 6-1.401.   Animals running at large.
   The territory to which the provisions of this chapter shall apply is hereby
fixed as the limits within which animals shall not run at large, and no owner
shall permit his animal, wild or domestic, except a domestic cat, to run at
large within the territory to which the provisions of this chapter apply. (§ 2,
Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.401.1.   Dogs on leashes.
   No owner shall permit his dog to be in any area, other than on private
property where the dog is maintained by or on behalf of its owner, unless the
dog is restrained by a leash not exceeding eight (8’) feet in length; provided,
however, this section shall not apply if the dog is (1) assisting a peace
officer in law enforcement duties, (2) under the control of a person engaged in
hunting pursuant to a license issued under Sections 3031 et seq. Of the Fish
and Game Code of the State, (3) enrolled and actually participating in a dog
training or obedience class, exhibition, or competition conducted by an
organization with the permission of the owner or operator of the grounds or
facility, or (4) actively herding on an agriculturally zoned parcel. (§ 1, Ord.
949, eff. May 26, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1365, eff. December 6, 2007)
Sec. 6-1.401.2.   Animals running at large: Fees.
   Whenever the Chief of the Animal Control Division or authorized personnel
thereof take up, assume control over, herd, or otherwise respond to a situation
involving any animal which is at large, and which is not impounded pursuant to
the provisions of Article 8 of this chapter, the owner or other person
responsible for the care or restraint of such animal shall pay, and be charged
and liable for a fee not to exceed the actual costs incurred by the County in
taking up, assuming control over, herding, or otherwise responding to the at
large animal. (§ 4, Ord. 1013, eff. August 15, 1985)
Sec. 6-1.401.3   Wolf Hybrids.
   (a)   After November 1, 2007, no person shall possess, purchase, acquire, or
breed a wolf hybrid, except for:
   (1)   Wolf hybrids possessed in the County prior to November 1, 2007; or
   (2)   Any wolf hybrid born to a wild canid or wolf hybrid that was both
pregnant with such hybrid and possessed in the county prior to that date.
   (b)   Any wolf hybrid falling within either of the above exceptions shall be
spayed or neutered, and shall at all times be vaccinated against rabies.
Notwithstanding such vaccination, however, any wolf hybrid that bites or
scratches a human being or other animal must be quarantined as required by the
current California Rabies Compendium. Wolf hybrids may not be bred. The owner
of a wolf hybrid may be required, upon reasonable request by the Chief of
Animal Services, to provide satisfactory evidence that the hybrid falls within
either of the above exceptions.
   (c)   Except as otherwise set forth in this section, any wolf hybrid falling
within either of the exceptions set forth in subsection (a), above, shall be
subject to all of the same requirements of the Yolo County Code that apply to
dogs.
   (d)   Any wolf hybrid that is determined to be possessed illegally may, in
addition to other penalties provided in this Title, be seized and disposed of
as determined to be appropriate by the Chief of Animal Services. The Chief of
Animal Services may, in his or her sole discretion, provide the person in
possession of such wolf hybrid not more than 30 days to transfer such animal
out the county prior to seizure.
   Any person determined to have violated the provisions of this Code with
respect to wolf hybrids may file an appeal regarding the identification of the
animal. Such appeal must be initiated within fifteen (15) days of the
determination that the animal is possessed illegally, and shall be commenced by
filing an application for an appeal with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors shall hear the appeal in accordance with the
provisions of Title 1 of this Code. If the appeal is filed with regard to an
animal that is in the custody of Animal Services, the animal shall be
maintained at the cost of the Owner until there is a final decision on the
appeal. (§ 2, Ord. 1365, eff. December 6, 2007).
Sec. 6-1.402.   Trespassing.
   No owner shall permit his animal, except a domestic cat, to trespass on any
property, public or private, without the consent of the owner of the property.
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.403.   Noise.
   No owner shall permit his animal, except a domestic cat, habitually to make
a loud noise or act in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. (§ 2,
Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.404.   Female dogs in heat.
   No owner of any unspayed female dog shall permit such dog to stray or run at
large in the territory to which this chapter applies while such female dog is
in the copulating season. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.405.   Proper care.
   No owner or person in charge of an animal shall permit such animal to go
without proper food, water, care, shelter, or attention. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff.
May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.406.   Unlicensed dogs.
   No owner shall have a dog required to be licensed within the territory to
which this chapter applies unless such dog has been licensed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.407.   Tags and collars.
   No owner shall fail, neglect, or refuse to attach, by means of a collar,
harness, or other device, any tag issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter to the licensed dog, or pot-bellied pig; nor shall any owner fail,
neglect, or refuse to keep such tag attached to such dog or pot-bellied-pig at
all times while the license is in force. In addition, pot-bellied pigs must be
micro-chipped and chip numbers recorded with Yolo County Animal Services. (§ 2,
Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974 and amended by § 2, Ord. 1365, eff. December 6,
2007).
Sec. 6-1.408. Replacement of tags.
   No owner shall fail to apply for a new license within ten (10) days after
the date of the loss of the license tag. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.409.   Improper tags.
   No owner shall permit to be attached or kept upon any dog any license tag
provided for by this chapter except a tag issued for that dog pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, nor shall any owner permit to be attached to or
kept upon any dog, or to be made or to be kept in his possession, any
counterfeit or imitation of any tag provided for by this chapter. (§ 2, Ord.
703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.410.   Removal of tags.
   No person without authorization from the owner shall remove from any dog any
collar, harness, or other device to which a current license tag is attached;
nor shall any such person remove a current license tag from any such collar,
harness, or other device. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.411.   Unlicensed kennels.
   No owner shall maintain, conduct, or operate, or cause to be maintained or
operated; any unlicensed dog kennel. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.412.   Kennel standards.
   No person shall fail, neglect, or refuse to maintain a kennel:
   (a)   So as to prevent dogs contained therein from running at large;
   (b)   So the location does not violate planning and zoning laws;
   (c)   So the kennel building does not violate the building codes or sanitary
laws;
   (d)   So the kennel premises are maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition;
   (e)   So the dogs therein are not subject to suffering, cruelty, or abuse;
   (f)   So the kennel does not constitute a public nuisance;
   (g)   So the keeping and maintenance of the kennel. will not be detrimental
to the peace, health, or safety of persons in the immediate vicinity or in the
County as a whole; or
   (h)   Without possessing evidence that each dog in the kennel has been
vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 703,
eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.413.   Kennels after license revocation.
   No person shall operate or maintain a kennel within one year after the
revocation of a kennel license. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.414.   Taking dogs from kennels.
   No person shall take a dog off the premises of a kennel except under leash
or the control of the owner; nor shall any owner of a kennel or his agent or
employee run or take dogs off the premises of a kennel or permit dogs to be run
or be taken therefrom except as provided in this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff.
May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.415.   Vaccinations.
   No owner shall have a dog within the unincorporated area of the County
unless such dog has been vaccinated against rabies pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.416.   Reports.
   No person having knowledge of an animal of the categories set forth in
Section
6-1.905 of Article 9 of this chapter shall fail to report the animal to the
Health Officer, the Chief, Division of Animal Control, or the Sheriff-Coroner.
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.417.   Isolation or quarantine.
   No person shall violate any of the conditions of isolation or quarantine
prescribed by the Health Officer. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.418.   Epidemic regulations.
   No person shall violate any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter based upon a determination or declaration of a
rabies epidemic or other unusually dangerous health situation. (§ 2, Ord. 703,
eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.419.   Interference with enforcement.
   No person shall interfere with, oppose, or resist the animal control
officers or other persons authorized under the provisions of this chapter to
take up and impound animals while any such person is engaged in the performance
of any act authorized by the provisions of this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff.
May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.420.   Cats: Damages or injuries.
   No owner of a domestic cat shall permit or suffer such cat to damage
property, public or private or real or personal, or to bite, scratch, or claw
any human being or other animal which is the property of another. (§ 2, Ord.
703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.421.   Fecal matter.
   No owner shall permit his dog to deposit fecal matter on the lands of
another, unless such owner shall cause the fecal matter to be removed
immediately thereafter. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended by § 1,
Ord. 903, eff. February 12, 1981)
Sec. 6-1.422.   Violations: Misdemeanors: Infractions.
   (a)   Any person who violates the provisions of Sections
6-1.401, through
6-1.401.3,
6-1.410 through
6-1.413,
6-1.415,
6-1.418, or
6-1.419 of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (b)   Any other provision of this Code notwithstanding, any person who
violates any provision of this article other than the provisions set forth in
subsection (a)of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable as
set forth in Section 25132 of the Government Code of the State. (§ 2, Ord. 703,
eff. May 22, 1974, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1027, eff. April 3, 1986, as amended
by § 2, Ord. 1365, eff. December 6, 2007).
Sec. 6-1.423.   Separate offenses.
   Every person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which such
violation continues and shall be punishable therefor as provided in this
article. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.424.   Promises to appear.
   (a)   Notices to appear. If any person is arrested for any such violation,
and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate, the arresting
officer, pursuant to the provisions of Section 853.6 of the Penal Code of the
State, shall prepare, in duplicate, a written notice to appear in court. Such
written notice shall contain the name and address of such person and the
offense charged and shall set forth the time when and the place where such
person shall appear in court. The time set forth in the notice to appear shall
be at least fourteen (14) days after such arrest. The place set forth in the
notice to appear shall be the court of the magistrate before whom the person
would be taken if the requirement of taking an arrested person before a
magistrate were complied with, or shall be an officer authorized by such court
to receive a deposit of bail.
   (b)   Bail. The arresting officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to
appear to the arrested person, and the arrested person, in order to secure
release, shall give his written promise to appear in court by signing the
duplicate notice which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the
arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. The
officer, as soon as practicable, shall file the duplicate notice with the
magistrate specified therein. Thereupon, the magistrate shall fix the amount of
bail which, in his judgment, in accordance with the applicable provisions of
the Penal Code of the State, will be reasonable and sufficient for the
appearance of the defendant and shall endorse upon the notice a statement
signed by the magistrate in the form set forth in the applicable section of
said Penal Code. The defendant, prior to the date upon which he promised to
appear in court, may deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail thus set.
Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before a
magistrate, if the defendant shall not appear, either in person or by counsel,
the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and, in his discretion, may order
that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. Upon the making of such
order that no further proceedings shall be had, all sums deposited as bail
shall forthwith be paid into the County Treasury for disposition pursuant to
the applicable provisions of said Penal Code. No warrant shall issue on such
charge for the arrest of a person who has given such written promise to appear
in court unless and until he has violated such promise or has failed to deposit
bail, or to appear for arraignment, trial, or judgment, or to comply with the
terms and provisions of the judgment as required by law.
   (c)   Violations: Warrants for arrest. Any person wilfully violating his
written promise to appear in court shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally
arrested. Whenever a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and
place set forth therein and has not posted bail as provided in the Penal Code
of the State, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a
warrant for his arrest within twenty (20) days after the delivery of such
written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction
over the offense. When such person violates his promise to appear before the
officer authorized to receive bail, other than a magistrate, the officer shall
immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense
charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the
arresting officer. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended by § 2, Ord.
1027, eff. April 3, 1986)
Article 5.
Licenses: General
Sec. 6-1.501.   Effect of licenses.
   The issuance of any license or permit to keep an animal as provided for in
this chapter shall be prima facie evidence that the owner has satisfied the
basic licensing requirements pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, but
such issuance shall be given no evidentiary weight to indicate that the owner
has conformed to the zoning regulations, building regulations, health and
safety regulations, or to any other applicable rule, regulation, or statute
unless, pursuant to the issuance, official written approval has been given by
the office or agency responsible for the administration of the rule,
regulation, or statute in question. If such approval has been given, it shall
be deemed prima facie evidence that the matter approved is in conformance with
the rule, regulation, or statute in question. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22,
1974)
Sec. 6-1.502.   Exemptions from licensing.
   The licensing regulations of this chapter shall not be applicable to the
following owners who use animals for diagnostic purposes or research, the use
having been approved by the Board of Public Health of the State pursuant to the
provisions of Section 1666 of the Health and Safety Code of the State; owners
who use animals for teaching purposes in recognized educational institutions;
owners of establishments which treat or board animals and which are owned or
operated by veterinarians licensed by the State; and owners of pet shops,
circuses, animal exhibits, and other enterprises maintaining animals which have
been granted business licenses by the County. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22,
1974)
Article 6.
Licenses: Dogs
Sec. 6-1.601.   Dog Licenses.
   Every owner of a dog required to be licensed shall procure an annual license
for such dog in accordance with the procedure set forth in this chapter. (§ 2,
Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.602.   Dogs required to be licensed.
   A dog required to be licensed shall be a dog that::
   (a)   Is over the age of four (4) months; and
   (b)   Is not in a licensed kennel; and
   (c)   Has not been in a licensed kennel within forty-eight (48) hours; and
   (d)   Has been in the County for ten (10) days. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22,
1974)
Sec. 6-1.603.   Time of applications: Duration of licenses: Renewal notices.
   (a)   Applications for dog licenses shall be made on or before the first day
the dog is required to be licensed pursuant to Section
6-1.602 of this article; provided, however, in the case of a dog for which a
license has previously been issued pursuant to this article, an application
shall be made within thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of such
previously issued license. Before any dog is released to a new owner, a
completed application form, together with the license fee, shall be submitted
by such person.
   (b)   A license which is initially issued in accordance with this article
shall be valid for twelve (12) months following such application therefor. A
license which is a renewal of a previously issued license shall be valid for
the twelve (12) months following the expiration of the previously issued
license.
   (c)   The Animal Control Division shall endeavor to notify the owners of
currently licensed dogs of the impending expiration of such licenses
approximately thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date; provided, however,
the failure of the Animal Control Division to provide such notice shall not
relieve a dog owner from the requirements of this article. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff.
May 22, 1974, as amended by § 1, Ord. 963, eff. December 1, 1983)
Sec. 6-1.604.   Preparation of forms and tags.
   The Sheriff is hereby authorized and directed to have prepared suitable
application forms for dog licenses as provided in this article and license tags
to be issued to the owners of dogs. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as
amended by § 5, Ord. 1061, eff. November 26, 1987)
Sec. 6-1.605.   License applications.
   The license application shall bear the name (if any), age, sex, color,
breed, previous rabies vaccination date, and subsequent revaccination date of
the dog for which the license is applied. (§ 2 Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as
amended by § 2, Ord. 963, eff. December 1, 1983, and § 1, Ord. 1047, eff.
January 8, 1987)
Sec. 6-1.606.   Fees.
   The amount of the annual dog license fee shall be set by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors; provided, however, if a certificate is presented from a
licensed veterinarian that the dog has been either spayed or neutered, or if
the veterinarian has on file an affidavit stating that the animal has been
spayed or neutered and that examination by the veterinarian discloses no
evidence to the contrary, the fee shall be one-half (1/2) the regular fee. (§
2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended by § 1, Ord. 797, eff. June 8, 1978,
§ 1, Ord. 940, eff. December 1, 1982, and § 2, Ord. 1097, eff. August 24, 1989)
Sec. 6-1.607.   Penalties.
   (a)   The owner of any dog required to be licensed who fails to procure and
pay for such license as required by Section
6-1.602 of this article shall pay, in addition to the license fee, a penalty
set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   The owner of any dog required to be licensed by this article for the
year immediately preceding the year in which an application for a dog license
is filed who failed to obtain a license for such dog for such year shall pay,
in addition to any other license fee or penalty, a penalty set by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended by § 3,
Ord. 963, eff. December 1, 1983, and § 3, Ord. 1097, eff. August 24, 1989)
Sec. 6-1.608.   Exceptions from penalties.
   (a)   The penalty provided for in subsection (a)of Section
6-1.607 of this article shall not apply to the owner of a dog required to be
licensed which has not been subject to the licensing requirement for more than
thirty (30) days.
   (b)   The penalty provided for in subsection (b)of Section
6-1.607 of this article shall not apply to the owner of a dog required to be
licensed which dog had not been subject to the licensing requirement for more
than thirty (30) days during the immediately preceding year. (§ 2, Ord. 703,
eff. May 22, 1974, as amended by § 4, Ord. 963, eff. December I, 1983, and § 2,
Ord. 1047, eff. January 8, 1987)
Sec. 6-1.609.   Seeing Eye dogs.
   (a)   No fee or penalty shall be collected or received for any dog license
issued for a Seeing Eye dog owned by a blind or partially blind person.
   (b)   If a person presents written verification from Guide Dogs for the
Blind, Inc., that his child is raising a Seeing Eye puppy and will deliver it
to Guide Dogs for the Blind, Inc., when it is approximately one year old, no
fee or penalty shall be collected or received for any dog license issued for a
Seeing Eye puppy. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.610.   Law enforcement dogs.
   If a dog is owned and used exclusively for law enforcement purposes by a
public agency, no fee or penalty shall be collected or received for such dog.
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.611.   Issuance: Filing.
   A license shall be issued after the submission of a completed application
form, a license fee, and a rabies vaccination certificate issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter establishing that the dog in question has been
vaccinated in accordance with the requirements of the State Department of
Health. The license shall be sent to the applicant within ninety (90) days
thereafter. A copy of all licenses shall be filed in the office of the Chief of
the Animal Control Division and shall at all times be open for public
inspection. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended by § 5, Ord. 963,
eff. December 1, 1983, and § 3, Ord. 1047, eff. January 8, 1987)
Sec. 6-1.612.   Endorsement and filing of application forms.
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974; repealed by § 6, Ord. 963, eff. December 1,
1983)
Sec. 6-1.613.   License tags.
   The initial issuance of a dog license shall be accompanied by a license tag
which shall be valid for so long as the dog is owned by the person to whom the
tag is originally issued. License tags shall be metallic, shall be numbered
serially, and shall have a stamp thereon bearing the name of the County. (§ 2,
Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended by § 7, Ord. 963, eff. December 1,
1983)
Sec. 6-1.614.   Notices.
   The Sheriff may notify all dog owners of record that a current license is
due and a fee is payable. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended by § 6,
Ord. 1061, eff. November 26, 1987)
Sec. 6-1.615.   Lost tags.
   As often as any license tag is lost, the owner, within ten (10) days
thereafter, shall procure another tag for which such owner shall pay a fee set
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974,
as amended by § 8, Ord. 963, eff. December 1, 1983, and § 4, Ord. 1097, eff.
August 24, 1989)
Article 7.
Licenses: Kennels
Sec. 6-1.701.   Kennel licenses.
   Every person owning or controlling a kennel shall procure an annual kennel
license on or before February 15 of each year in accordance with the procedure
set forth in this chapter, which kennel license shall be a license for all dogs
kept therein. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.702.   Preparation of forms and certificates.
   The Chief of the Animal Control Division is hereby authorized and directed
to have prepared suitable application forms for kennel licenses and kennel
license certificates as provided in this article. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22,
1974)
Sec. 6-1.703.   Contents of application forms.
   The application forms for kennel licenses shall set forth the name and
address of the applicant, the location, including the address, of the kennel, a
description of the facility for housing the dogs, and the number and
description of the dogs to be kept in the kennel. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22,
1974)
Sec. 6-1.704.   Fees.
   The kennel license fee shall be set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1097,
eff. August 24, 1989)
Sec. 6-1.705.   Penalties.
   (a)   The owner of any kennel who fails to procure and pay for such license
until after February 15th of any year shall nevertheless procure a kennel
license until January 1st next ensuing and, except as otherwise provided in
Section
6-1.706 of this article, shall pay in addition to the license fee a penalty set
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   The owner of any kennel required to be licensed by this chapter for
the year immediately preceding the year in which an application for a kennel
license is filed who failed to obtain a license for that kennel for that year
shall pay in addition to any other license fee or penalty a penalty set by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as
amended by § 6, Ord. 1097, eff. August 24, 1989)
Sec. 6-1.706   Exceptions from Penalties.
   (a)   The penalty provided for in Section
6-1.705 of this article for the nonpayment of a license fee on or prior to
February 15 in any year shall not apply to the owner of a kennel required to be
licensed that has not been subject to the licensing requirement for more than
ten (10) days.
   (b)   The penalty provided for in Section
6-1.705 of this article for nonpayment of a license fee for the immediately
preceding year shall not apply to the owner of a kennel required to be licensed
that had not been subject to the licensing requirement for more than ten (10)
days during the immediately preceding year. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.707.   Law enforcement dogs.
   If a kennel is used exclusively for housing dogs used exclusively for law
enforcement purposes by a public agency, no fee or penalty shall be collected
or received for such a kennel. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.708.   Investigations.
   Upon the receipt of an application and license fee and penalties, if any,
the Chief, Division of Animal Control, shall send copies of the application to
the Health Officer and to the building official and planning official having
jurisdiction over the territory where the kennel is located for an
investigation and report as to conformity with the sanitation laws, building
codes, and planning and zoning laws, respectively. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22,
1974)
Sec. 6-1.709   Action on applications.
   After the receipt of the sanitation, building code, and planning and zoning
reports and making such investigations as he may deem proper, the Chief,
Division of Animal Control shall act on the application as follows:
   (a)   He shall approve the application if he finds that the kennel is
maintained in accordance with each of the conditions of Sections
6-1.401,
6-1.405, and
6-1.412 through
6-1.419 of Article 4 of this chapter.
   (b)   He may impose such conditions upon granting an application as are
reasonably necessary to bring a kennel into compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (c)   He shall deny the application if he does not make the findings set
forth in this section, or he may grant the application subject to conditions.
(§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.710.   Endorsement and filing.
   The issuance of the license shall be endorsed upon the application form by
the person issuing the license. All license application forms so endorsed shall
be filed in the office of the Chief, Division of Animal Control, and shall be
at all times open for public inspection. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.711.   License certificates.
   The issuance of a kennel license shall be evidenced by the issuance of a
kennel license certificate in a form determined by the Chief, Division of
Animal Control; however, kennel license certificates shall bear the name of the
County and the year of issuance and shall be numbered serially. (§ 2, Ord. 703,
eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.712.   Notices.
   The Chief, Division of Animal Control, may notify all kennel owners of
record that a current kennel license is due and a fee is payable. (§ 2, Ord.
703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.713.   Suspension of kennel licenses.
   The Chief, Division of Animal Control, may make an order suspending any
kennel license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter upon a finding
that there exists any fact which would have been a ground for refusal to issue
a kennel license, or if there has been a violation of the provisions of
Sections
6-1.401 through 6- 1.405 or
6-1.412 through
6-1.419 of Article 4 of this chapter, or if there has been a violation of the
conditions imposed in any kennel license, or if the owner of the kennel, or any
agent or employee employed therein, has been convicted of a violation of the
provisions of Section 597 of the Penal Code of the State. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff.
May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.714.   Suspension of kennel licenses: Notices.
   No order of suspension shall become effective until the Chief, Division of
Animal Control, shall cause a copy thereof to be mailed to the applicant by
United States certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, at the
address set forth in his application. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.715.   Appeals.
   The applicant or permittee may appeal an order of the Chief, Division of
Animal Control, denying a license, issuing a license subject to conditions, or
suspending a license to the Board by filing such appeal within fifteen (15)
days after the denial or granting of an application with conditions or after
the mailing of a notice of revocation. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.716.   Automatic revocation.
   If no appeal shall be taken within the time specified for an appeal
following an order of suspension of a license, the license shall be deemed
revoked. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Article 8.
Impoundment
Sec. 6-1.801.   Taking up and impounding.
   The Chief of the Animal Control Division shall take up and impound in the
Animal Control Center, in a manner consistent with recognized standards of
humane treatment, all animals found to be in violation of the provisions of
this chapter or of Chapter 7 of Division 9 of the Food Agricultural Code of the
State. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.802.   Redemption period.
   Except as otherwise provided in this article, all animals impounded at the
Animal Control Center shall be kept and maintained at least for the following
redemption periods:
   (a)   Five (5) days for any dog found wearing a current annual license tag;
   (b)   Seventy-two (72) hours for any dog found not wearing a current annual
license tag;
   (c)   Five (5) days for any animal governed by the provisions of Section
17003 of the Food and Agricultural Code of the State; and
   (d)   Seventy-two (72) hours for any other animal. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May
22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.803.   Animals voluntarily surrendered.
   Any animal which is voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the Animal
Control Center, or authorized personnel thereof, shall not be deemed to be
impounded and need not be kept or retained for any minimum period of time. (§
2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.803.1.   Surrendered or abandoned animals: Adoption: Immunization.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided by law the Chief of the Animal Control
Division may authorize the adoption of any animal in the care, custody, and
control of the Animal Control Center which animal has been abandoned or
voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the Animal Control Center or
authorized personnel thereof. The Chief of the Animal Control Division may
issue regulations to implement the provisions of this section. A fee, set by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors, shall be charged to defray the costs
associated with the adoption of the animal, which fee shall be in addition to
all other fees provided for or authorized by law.
   (b)   The Chief of the Animal Control Division may authorize the
immunization of any dog, six (6) months of age or less, which is voluntarily
surrendered to or deposited with the Animal Control Center or authorized
personnel thereof by its legal owner against certain viral diseases, including,
but not necessarily limited to, immunization against canine distemper. A fee,
set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, shall be assessed to all persons
adopting an immunized dog, which fee shall be in addition to all other fees
provided for or authorized by law. (§ 1, Ord. 994, eff. January 10, 1985, as
amended by § 1, Ord. 1013, eff. August 15, 1985, and § 7, Ord. 1097, eff.
August 24, 1989)
Sec. 6-1.803.2.   Spay or neuter deposit.
   (a)   A spay or neuter deposit, as set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, shall be collected at the time of adoption of any dog or cat, and
will be held by the County for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, except
that for dogs and cats six (6) months of age or younger at the time of
adoption, the period shall not exceed six (6) months. If a female dog and her
puppies or a female cat and her kittens are adopted together, one deposit shall
be charged.
   (b)   At any time within the period specified above, the owner may present a
spay or neuter certificate for the adopted animal from a licensed veterinarian
or veterinary clinic, in which event the deposit shall be returned. Deposits
not so claimed within the time period specified above shall be deemed unclaimed
and shall automatically be forfeited to the County for use in accordance with
Food and Agricultural Code Sections 30503 and 31751. (§ 8, Ord. 1097, eff.
August 24, 1989)
Sec. 6-1.804.   Redemption.
   (a)   The owners of impounded animals, during the redemption period and at
any time before the disposition of such animals, may redeem them by paying the
impoundment fees and licensing dogs in the manner provided in this section.
   (b)   The Chief of the Animal Control Division shall charge and collect
fees, as set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, for every impounded
animal when claimed and before its release. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974,
as amended by §§ 2 and 3, Ord. 797, eff. June 8, 1978, § 2, Ord. 1013, eff.
August 15, 1985, and § 9, Ord. 1097, eff. August 24, 1989)
Sec. 6-1.804.1.   Euthanasia.
   (a)   The Chief of the Animal Control Division may provide euthanasia
services on animals whose owners request it. The Chief of the Animal Control
Division may issue regulations to implement the provisions of this section.
   (b)   A fee, set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, shall be charged
and collected by the Animal Control Division for every animal which is
euthanized at its owner’s request. (§ 3, Ord. 1013, eff. August 15, 1985, as
amended by § 10, Ord. 1097, eff. August 24, 1989)
Sec. 6-1.805.   Disposition.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an impounded animal
which is not redeemed within the redemption period specified in this chapter,
in the discretion of the Chief of the Animal Control Division, may be sold for
not less than the amount of the redemption fees specified by this chapter, be
destroyed, or be otherwise disposed of; provided, however, no animal shall be
sold, destroyed, or otherwise disposed of until seventy-two (72) hours after a
notice of the impoundment thereof has been given to the owner, if he shall be
known.
   (b)   If an animal is sold, the receipt signed by the Chief of the Animal
Control Division shall be valid title to the animal.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary,
an impounded animal which is determined by the Chief of the Animal Control
Division to constitute a health hazard may be destroyed or otherwise disposed
of as ordered by the Chief of the Animal Control Division upon the concurrence
of a veterinarian.
   (d)   The possession of any animal governed by the provisions of Section
17003 of the Food and Agricultural Code of the State shall be delivered to the
Director of the Department of Agriculture of the State or his designee. (§ 2,
Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.805.1.   Animal traps.
   (a)   The Chief of the Animal Control Division may loan animal traps and
provide related pick up services for persons who request it. The Chief of the
Animal Control Division may adopt regulations to implement provisions of this
section.
   (b)   Such fees and deposits as are set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors shall be charged for the use of an animal trap and for pick up
services provided by the Animal Control Division. (§ 11, Ord. 1097, eff. August
24, 1989)
Sec. 6-1.806.   Liability.
   No person shall be liable for the disposition of any animal in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Article 9.
Rabies
Sec. 6-1.901.   Vaccinations.
   Every owner of a dog over four (4) months in age shall have such dog
vaccinated with such canine anti-rabies vaccine and at such intervals as
prescribed by the State Department of Health. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22,
1974, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1047, eff. January 8, 1987)
Sec. 6-1.902.   Vaccinations: Imported dogs.
   Every owner who brings into the County a dog which has not been vaccinated
within twelve (12) months prior to the importation thereof shall have the dog
vaccinated within five (5) days from and after its arrival in the County. The
certificate of vaccination issued by a duly licensed veterinarian from any
other jurisdiction for the specific dog, establishing the vaccination with an
approved vaccine, may be accepted by the Chief of the Animal Control Division
as evidence of vaccination upon the date of the vaccination indicated in the
certificate. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.903.   Vaccinations: Exceptions.
   A dog shall be exempt from the vaccination requirements of this chapter if
within one year:
   (a)   A veterinarian has examined the dog and certified that a vaccination
will endanger the dog’s health for physiological reasons; and
   (b)   Such certificate is presented to the Health Officer within five (5)
days after the examination; and
   (c)   The Health Officer concurs in the opinion of the veterinarian and
endorses his approval on the veterinarian’s certificate. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff.
May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.904.   Vaccinations: Procedure.
   (a)   Dogs shall be vaccinated by a veterinarian or at vaccination clinics
approved by the Health Officer.
   (b)   Every person who vaccinates a dog for rabies shall issue to the owner
of the dog a certificate containing the following:
   (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the dog;
   (2)   The type of rabies vaccine administered (including the name of the
manufacturer and the lot number of the vaccine used);
   (3)   The date of the vaccination, the interval for the next vaccination,
and the date the next vaccination is due;
   (4)   A description of the dog, including the breed, age, sex, color, and
markings of the dog;
   (5)   The stamped, printed, or typewritten name, address, and telephone
number of the person who administered the vaccine; and
   (6)   The signature, with date, of the person administering the vaccine.
   (c)   Every person who vaccinates a dog for rabies shall submit to the
Animal Control Division a copy of the rabies vaccination certificate required
by subsection (b)of this section no later than thirty (30) days after the date
the vaccination was administered. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended
by § 1, Ord. 962, eff. October 27, 1983, and § 5, Ord. 1047, eff. January 8,
1987)
Sec. 6-1.905.   Reports.
   It shall be the duty of any person having knowledge of any animal falling
into the following categories to immediately report the animal to the Health
Officer, Chief of the Animal Control Division, or Sheriff-Coroner and to
furnish complete information regarding the incident:
   (a)   Known rabid animals;
   (b)   Suspected rabid animals;
   (c)   Animals which have bitten a human or otherwise exposed a human to
rabies; and
   (d)   Animals of a species subject to rabies which have been bitten by a
known rabid or suspected rabid animal or have been in intimate contact with a
rabid or suspected rabid animal. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.906.   Reports to the Health Officer.
   Upon the receipt of a report pursuant to the provisions of Section
6-1.905 of this article, upon acquiring knowledge of an animal listed in said
Section
6-1.905, or upon the receipt of information of the existence of any case of
rabies or any other animal disease dangerous to human beings in the County, the
Chief of the Animal Control Division or the Sheriff-Coroner hall report the
same to the Health Officer. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.907.   Isolation or quarantine.
   (a)   The Health Officer shall order the isolation or quarantine of all
animals of the categories set forth in Section
6-1.905 of this article, shall order the place and conditions thereof in a
manner not inconsistent with State and local laws and regulations, and, with
the cooperation of the Chief of the Animal Control Division, shall insure the
isolation or quarantine of such animals.
   (b)   Upon a determination by the Sheriff or his or her designee, or the
Chief of the Animal Control Division, that the Health Officer is not reasonably
available for such purposes, the Chief of the Animal Control Division may
discharge the powers and duties of the Health Officer set forth in subsection
(a)of this section, in accordance with procedures established by the Health
Officer, until such time as the Health Officer is determined to be available to
do so. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974, as amended by § 1, Ord. 977, eff.
June 7, 1984, and § 7, Ord. 1061, effective November 26, 1987)
Sec. 6-1.908.   Carcasses of rabid animals.
   Upon the death of any rabid animal, clinically suspected rabid animal, or
animal which has bitten or otherwise exposed a human to rabies, the Chief of
the Animal Control Division shall obtain and turn over to the Health Officer
the carcass of such animal or an adequate specimen thereof. (§ 2, Ord. 703,
eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.909.   Destruction.
   Upon an order of the Health Officer, the Chief of the Animal Control
Division shall destroy any animal or its carcass if an examination shows such
animal or carcass to be rabid. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.910.   Epidemic regulations.
   The Health Officer may determine and declare that a rabies epidemic or other
unusually dangerous health situation exists among dogs or other animals in the
County, or in any part thereof. Upon making such a declaration, the Health
Officer shall prepare and promulgate, with the approval of the Board, such
rules and regulations as are necessary for the conduct of all persons within
the area where the dangerous condition exists and such rules and regulations as
are necessary for the control of dogs and other animals within such area. Such
rules and regulations of the Health Officer may include, but not be limited to,
the quarantine, vaccination, and destruction of diseased or suspected or stray
animals by humane methods. It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Animal
Control Division to comply with all the directives of the Health Officer in the
enforcement of such rules and regulations. (§ 2, Ord. 703, eff. May 22, 1974)
Sec. 6-1.911.   Fees.
   Upon a determination by the Health Officer that an animal which has been
isolated or quarantined in accordance with the provisions of this article may
be released or discharged from such isolation or quarantine, the animal may be
released to the owner or other person responsible for its care and control upon
the payment of the fees provided in Section
6-1.804 of Article 8 of this chapter. If the owner or other person responsible
for the care and control of the animal does not obtain the release of the
animal, such owner or other responsible person shall pay, and be charged and
liable for, the fees set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of subsection (b)of
said Section
6-1.804. (§ 5, Ord. 1013, eff. August 15, 1985)
Article 10.
Regulation of Vicious Animals
Sec. 6-1.1001.   Purpose.
   The uncontrolled maintenance of vicious animals constitutes a dangerous
situation which presents a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of persons
and animals within the County. This situation presents a serious hazard within
the County which is compounded by the increasing tendency to maintain animals
which, by virtue of breeding and training, have a propensity to attack others.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare by regulating vicious animals. (§ 2, Ord. 950, eff. June 2, 1983)
Sec. 6-1.1002.   Filing of charges.
   Any person possessing knowledge of facts indicating that there is a vicious
animal within the County may file with the Chief of the Division of Animal
Control a written affidavit containing the following facts:
   (a)   A description of the animal, including, to the extent known, the
color, size, sex, breed, and name of the animal and the name and address of the
owner of the animal;
   (b)   An assertion that the animal described is a vicious animal, together
with a statement of facts upon which the assertion is based, including the name
and address of any person or animal which has been victimized by the allegedly
vicious animal, the date and location of any incidents related to the
assertion, the name and address of any witnesses thereto, and an explanation of
how the knowledge of the incident was acquired; and
   (c)   The name, residential and occupational addresses, and telephone
numbers of the affiant. (§ 2, Ord. 950, eff. June 2, 1983)
Sec. 6-1.1003.   Investigations: Impoundment: Rabies control.
   (a)   Upon the receipt of an affidavit filed in compliance with Section
6-1.1002 of this article, the Chief of the Animal Control Division may
investigate the incident or incidents described in the affidavit for the
purpose of verifying the facts stated or for obtaining other information. In
conducting such investigation, the Chief of the Animal Control Division shall
attempt to obtain pertinent information from the attacking animal’s owner. If,
based upon such affidavit and investigation, the Chief of the Animal Control
Division identifies facts which, in his discretion, show the existence of a
vicious animal, the Chief of the Animal Control Division may immediately locate
and impound the animal as necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare. The Chief of the Animal Control Division may use any lawful means
which are reasonably necessary to so locate and impound the animal.
   (b)   If, based upon an affidavit or investigation pursuant to this article,
the Chief of the Animal Control Division determines that an animal capable of
carrying or transmitting rabies has bitten a person or other animal, the Chief
of the Animal Control Division shall report the matter to the Chief of the
Environmental Health Division, who shall take such action as is appropriate
under Article 9 of this chapter. In the event of a conflict between this
article and Article 9 of this chapter, the provisions of Article 9 shall
supersede the conflicting provisions of this article. (§ 2, Ord. 950, eff. June
2, 1983)
Sec. 6-1.1003.1   Factors to consider.
   (a)   The following factors shall be considered in determining whether an
attack has been provoked for the purposes of this article:
   (1)   Whether the person or animal which was attacked acted in a manner
which would reasonably be expected to excite the attacking animal;
   (2)   In the case of a person being attacked, whether the exciting conduct,
if any, was intentionally and knowingly engaged in;
   (3)   The nature and extent of the attack as compared to the nature and
extent of the exciting conduct, if any; and
   (4)   Whether the attack occurred in an enclosed space and, if so, whether
the enclosure was prominently and clearly posted in a manner which would notify
a reasonable person of the dangers of entering the enclosure.
   The list set forth in this subsection is intended to be illustrative and is
not exhaustive. Furthermore, conduct which may be provocation for a minor
attack is not necessarily provocation for an attack of a more serious nature.
   (b)   The following factors shall be considered in determining the
appropriate disposition of a vicious animal under this article:
   (1)   The factors specified in subsection (a)of this section;
   (2)   The location of the attack;
   (3)   Efforts by the owner to control the attacking animal; and
   (4)   Prior incidents of a similar nature involving the attacking animal
and/or its owner.
   The list set forth in this subsection is intended to be illustrative and is
not exhaustive. (§ 2, Ord. 950, eff. June 2, 1983)
Sec. 6-1.1004.   Disposition: Notices.
   (a)   The Chief of the Animal Control Division may do any of the following
with regard to an animal which has been determined to be vicious in accordance
with Section
6-1.1003 of this article:
   (1)   Retain the animal for observation for a period not to exceed fourteen
(14) days;
   (2)   Release the animal to the owner upon such conditions as are reasonably
determined to be necessary to insure the public health, safety, and welfare and
which may include, but need not be limited to, requiring (a)that the animal be
securely muzzled, leashed, and under the control of a person eighteen (18)
years of age or older who is physically capable of restraining the animal
whenever the animal is off the premises, (b)that the animal be confined on the
owner’s premises in an enclosure approved by the Chief of the Animal Control
Division, and (c)that the owner demonstrate financial responsibility by posting
a bond or certificate of insurance for not less than Ten Thousand and no/100ths
($10,000.00) Dollars. The owner shall agree that a violation of any of the
conditions imposed upon the release of the animal may result in the animal
being impounded and destroyed; or
   (3)   Cause the animal to be destroyed if, in the opinion of the Chief of
the Animal Control Division and the Chief of the Environmental Health Division,
the release of such animal would create a significant threat to the public
health, safety, and welfare.
   (b)   The Chief of the Animal Control Division shall notify the owner of the
animal of the intended disposition of the animal pursuant to subsection (a)of
this section within three (3) days of such decision. In the event the Chief of
the Animal Control Division determines pursuant to said subsection (a)that the
animal is to be destroyed, the notice shall be given at least five (5) days in
advance of the intended action and at least ten (10) days in advance of such
action if notice is given by mail. Such notice may be served personally or by
mail. Service shall be deemed to be complete and effective upon deposit with
the United States Postal Service.
   The notice shall contain the following:
   (1)   A summary of the facts upon which the Chief of the Animal Control
Division has based the determination that the animal is a vicious animal;
   (2)   The intended disposition of the animal and the reasons therefor;
   (3)   A copy of the provisions of this article, if not already provided to
the owner; and
   (4)   Notice of the owner’s right to a hearing pursuant to Section
6-1.1005 of this article.
   If additional information is subsequently obtained, the Chief of the Animal
Control Division shall not be limited to the facts, incidents, and reasons set
forth in the notice in any administrative or judicial proceeding reviewing the
determinations and decisions made pursuant to this article. (§ 2, Ord. 950,
eff. June 2, 1983)
Sec. 6-1.1005.   Requests for hearings: Waivers.
   The owners of the animal may appeal the decision of the Chief of the Animal
Control Division pursuant to Section
6-1.1004 of this article by filing a written request for a hearing, including
the grounds and reasons therefor, with the Clerk of the Board within five (5)
days after the date of the notice given by the Chief of the Animal Control
Division pursuant to said Section
6-1.1004 if such notice is personally served, or within ten (10) days if such
notice is given by mail only. The Clerk of the Board shall thereupon transmit
copies of the hearing request to the Sheriff, the Director of Public Health,
and the presiding judge of the Municipal Court or, in the event such judge has
designated a hearing officer, the person so designated.
   Any person who fails to request a hearing within the time specified in this
section shall be deemed to have waived any right in or claim upon such animal
or to claim any damages or other relief by reason of any action by the Chief of
the Animal Control Division pursuant to this article. (§ 2, Ord. 950, eff. June
2, 1983, as amended by § 1, Ord. 991, eff. November 22, 1984, and § 8, Ord.
1061, eff. November 26, 1987)
Sec. 6-1.1006.   Hearings: Procedure: Judicial reviews.
   In the event a request for a hearing is properly filed, a hearing shall be
held pursuant to the provisions of this section.
   (a)   The hearing shall be conducted by an individual who is designated by
the presiding judge of the Municipal Court. The person may be an employee of
the County who is not assigned to the Animal Control Division or the
Environmental Health Division or who is not otherwise subordinate to the Chief
of the Animal Control Division or the Chief of the Environmental Health
Division. Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the hearing shall be held
within thirty (30) days after the date the request for the hearing was properly
filed.
   (b)   The burden shall be upon the Chief of the
   Animal Control Division to prove that the animal is a vicious animal. If it
is found or established that the animal is a vicious animal, the burden shall
be upon the appellant to prove that the disposition ordered by the Chief of the
Animal Control Division is unreasonable.
   At the hearing the appellant and the Animal Control Division may be
represented by counsel, may present oral and written evidence, and may cross-
examine witnesses. Strict rules of evidence shall not apply. Any relevant
evidence may be admitted if it is the sort of evidence which responsible
persons are accustomed to rely upon in the conduct of serious affairs. For good
cause, the hearing may be continued. The hearing shall be tape recorded, and
all documents presented as evidence shall be maintained as part of the record
of the hearing.
   In the event the appellant fails to appear at the time, date, and place
appointed for the hearing, the hearing shall be conducted in the absence of the
appellant, and the hearing officer shall render a decision based upon evidence
presented during the hearing.
   (c)   The hearing officer shall render a decision within ten (10) days after
the close of the hearing. The decision shall be supported by the weight of
evidence. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, Chapter 4 of
Title 1 of this Code notwithstanding.
   The decision shall be in writing and shall include findings of fact and
conclusions respecting the following:
   (1)   Whether, based upon the evidence presented during the hearing, the
animal is a vicious animal; and
   (2)   If the animal is determined to be a vicious animal, what disposition
should be made. The hearing officer shall formulate a disposition based upon
all of the facts and circumstances revealed by the evidence and may:
   (i)   Uphold the decision of the Animal Control
   Division and order the decision carried out;
   (ii)   Order the return of the animal to its owner upon such conditions as
may be reasonably necessary to insure the public health, safety, and welfare,
including, but not limited to, those set forth in Section
6-1.1004 of this article, and subject to the further condition that the animal
may be destroyed if any of such conditions is breached; and
   (iii)   Such other action as is found reasonably necessary to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare, including a continuance of the impoundment
of such animal for the purposes of observation for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days after the date of the order.
   The hearing officer shall promptly file the decision with the Clerk of the
Board who shall thereupon transmit copies to the parties.
   (d)   Any action seeking a judicial review of a decision of the hearing
officer shall be brought pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil
Procedure of the State and shall be instituted within ninety (90) days after
the date the decision is filed with the Clerk of the Board. (§ 2, Ord. 950,
eff. June 2, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 991, eff. November 22, 1984)
Sec. 6-1.1007.   Disposition of vicious animals.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, in the event the hearing
officer orders the destruction of an animal determined to be vicious, the Chief
of the Animal Control Division shall continue to impound the animal and shall
destroy the animal on the seventh (7th) day following the date of personal
service upon the owner or deposit with the United States Postal Service of
notice of the hearing officer’s decision. In the event the Chief of the Animal
Control Division is personally served with a summons or other legal process in
connection with a lawsuit which seeks a review of the hearing officer’s
decision, the animal shall not be destroyed and shall continue to be impounded
while the lawsuit is pending. (§ 2, Ord. 950, eff. June 2, 1983)
Sec. 6-1.1008.   Fees.
   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Code or a decision and order
of the hearing officer to the contrary, the Chief of the Animal Control
Division shall not release an animal which has been determined to be vicious
pursuant to this article back to the owner until the owner has paid all fees
and charges for impoundment. (§ 2, Ord. 950, eff. June 2, 1983)
Sec. 6-1.1009.   Territory.
   The provisions of this article shall apply to the entire unincorporated
territory of the County and, any contrary provision of Section
6-1.1004 of this article notwithstanding, within any city located within such
city. (§ 2, Ord. 950, eff. June 2, 1983)
Sec. 6-1.1010.   Prohibitions.
   (a)   No person shall resist, delay, obstruct, or impede any person in the
enforcement of this article.
   (b)   No person shall keep, harbor, or maintain an animal determined to be
vicious pursuit to Section
6-1.1003 or
6-1.1006 of this article, except as specifically authorized by law or by lawful
order issued pursuant to this article. (§ 2, Ord. 950, eff. June 2, 1983)
Chapter 2
BARBERS AND COSMETOLOGISTS
Sections:
   
6-2.01   Definitions.
   
6-2.02   Examinations for communicable diseases as required by the Public
Health Director.
   
6-2.03   Respiratory diseases.
   
6-2.04   Violations.
Sec. 6-2.01.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Barbering” shall mean and include any of, or any combination of, the
following practices for hire or reward:
   (1)   Shaving or trimming the beard or cutting the hair;
   (2)   Giving facial and scalp massages or treatments with oils, creams,
lotions, or other preparations, either by hand or mechanical appliances;
   (3)   Singeing, shampooing, arranging, dressing, curling, waving, or dyeing
the hair or applying hair tonics; provided, however, waving shall not include
permanent waving; and
   (4)   Applying cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, powders, oils, clays, or
lotions to the scalp, face, or neck.
   (b)   “Barber shop” shall mean any establishment or place of business where
the practice of barbering is engaged in or carried on.
   (c)   “Beauty parlor” or “beauty shop” shall mean any establishment or place
of business where the art of cosmetology is engaged in or carried on.
   (d)   “Cosmetology” shall mean and include any and all and any combination
of the following practices:
   (1)   Arranging, dressing, curling, waving, machineless permanent waving,
permanent waving, cleansing, cutting, singeing, bleaching, tinting, coloring,
straightening, dyeing, brushing, beautifying, or otherwise treating by any
means the hair of any person;
   (2)   Massaging, cleaning, or stimulating the scalp, face, neck, arms, bust,
or upper part of the human body by means of the hands, devices, apparatus, or
appliances with or without the use of cosmetic preparations, antiseptics,
tonics, lotions, or creams;
   (3)   Beautifying the face, neck, arms, bust, or upper part of the human
body by use of cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, tonics, lotions, or creams;
   (4)   Removing superfluous hair from the body of any person by the use of
electrolysis, depilatories, tweezers, chemicals, or preparations or by the use
of devices or appliances of any kind or description, except by the use of light
waves, commonly known as rays;
   (5)   Cutting, trimming, polishing, tinting, coloring, cleansing, or
manicuring the nails of any person; and
   (6)   Massaging, cleansing, treating, or beautifying the hands of any
person. (§ 1, Ord. 567)
Sec. 6-2.02.   Examinations for communicable diseases as required by the Public
Health Director.
   Should the Public Health Director deem it necessary, he may require an
examination or laboratory tests for any respiratory disease considered
hazardous to the public health in any person serving as a barber or
cosmetologist. (§ 2, Ord. 567, as amended by § 1, Ord. 823, eff. March 1, 1979)
Sec. 6-2.03.   Respiratory diseases.
   (a)   Notices by employees. It shall be the duty of every employee of a
barber or cosmetology shop to notify the operator if such employee contracts an
unusually persistent cough.
   (b)   Notices by operators. It shall be the duty of the operator to
immediately notify the Public Health Director that such condition exists.
   (c)   Action by the Public Health Director. Upon the receipt of such notice
from the operator, it shall be the duty of the Public Health Director to
investigate the condition set forth in such report and to institute such
measures as may be necessary for the public health. (§ 2, Ord. 567, as amended
by § 2, Ord. 823, eff. March 1, 1979)
Sec. 6-2.04.   Violations.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding Three Hundred and no/100ths ($300.00) Dollars, or by
imprisonment in the County Jail for not to exceed six (6) months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. (§ 3, Ord. 567)
Chapter 3
FOOD HANDLING
Sections:
   
6-3.01   Definitions.
   
6-3.02   Permits.
   
6-3.03   Permits: Applications: Form.
   
6-3.04   Permits: Granting: Conditions.
   
6-3.05   Permits: Suspension and revocation: Notices.
   
6-3.06   Permits: Suspension and revocation: Closing of food facilities.
   
6-3.07   Inspections of establishments: Frequency.
   
6-3.08   Posting of placards.
   
6-3.09   Mandatory food safety education.
   
6-3.10   Bacterial examinations of utensils.
   
6-3.11   Examinations and rejection of utensils and fixtures.
   
6-3.12   Examinations and condemnation of food and drink.
   
6-3.13   Employee lists.
   
6-3.14   Communicable diseases.
   
6-3.15   Employee lists. (Repealed).
   
6-3.16   Communicable diseases. (Repealed).
Sec. 6-3.01.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Director of Environmental Health" shall mean the Director of the Yolo
County Environmental Health Division or his/her designated employee.
   (b)   "Employee" shall mean any person who is engaged in the handling,
preparation, packaging, or serving of food or drink, or in the handling of
utensils used in the preparation, packaging, or serving of food or drink, or
who is employed, with or without pay, at any time in any room in which food or
drink is prepared, packaged, or served.
   (c)   “Food Facility” shall mean an operation that stores, prepares,
packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption at
the retail level as more fully defined in the California Health and Safety
Code, Section 113789.
   (d)   “Operator” shall mean every person, owner, or agent conducting the
business of a Food Facility.
   (e)   “Placard” shall mean a color-coded placard that describes the
compliance status of the food facility at the most recent Routine Inspection or
Re-Inspection. The color green shall be the primary color used for a “PASS”
placard. The color yellow shall be the primary color used to a “CONDITIONAL
PASS” placard. The color red shall be the primary color for the “CLOSED”
placard.
   (f)   “Re-Inspection” shall mean an inspection of any food facility by the
Director of Environmental Health to determine compliance with an inspection
report following a Routine Inspection, or any interim inspection conducted to
determine compliance with specific regulations or legal requirements.
   (g)   “Routine Inspection” shall mean an inspection of any food facility by
the Director of Environmental Health to determine compliance with all
applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations pertaining to the
protection of public health.
(§§ 1 through 5, Chapter I, Ord. 260; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1480, eff.
January 12, 2017)
Sec. 6-3.02.   Permits.
   On and after February 12, 1953, it shall be unlawful for any person to open,
operate, or maintain a food facility without first obtaining a permit from the
Director of Environmental Health.
(§ 1, Chapter II, Ord. 260; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1480, eff. January 12,
2017)
Sec. 6-3.03.   Permits: Applications: Form.
   Applications for permits shall be filed with the Director of Environmental
Health and include the following information:
   (a)   The name and address of the applicant and, if a partnership,
corporation, or association, the names and addresses of all partners, and the
names and addresses of the president, vice-president, secretary, and managing
officer of the corporation or association; and
   (b)   The location of the premises for which the permit is sought.
(§ 2, Chapter II, Ord. 260; as amended by § 4, Ord. 1480, eff. January 12,
2017)
Sec. 6-3.04.   Permits: Granting: Conditions.
   No permit shall be granted to any person to operate a food facility if the
condition of the building, premises, equipment, or apparatus, or the reasonable
facilities for the establishment, maintenance, conducting, or operating of the
business, is insufficient, unfit, or incapable of being used for the proper
maintenance of such business in a manner which will comply with:
   (a)   The building and equipment requirements made mandatory by the
provisions of this chapter;
   (b)   All other laws of the County in any manner pertaining thereto;
   (c)   California Retail Food Code and all laws and statutes of the State of
California in any manner pertaining to the operation of a Food Facility; and
   (d)   All rules and regulations regarding food facilities promulgated by the
Director of Public Health of the State or by the Public Health Director of
Environmental Health of the County.
(§ 4, Chapter III, Ord. 260; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1480, eff. January 12,
2017)
Sec. 6-3.05.   Permits: Suspension and revocation: Notices.
   The Director of Environmental Health shall suspend or revoke permits for
violations of the provisions of this chapter and, whenever such action is
warranted for the protection of the health and safety of the public, by notice
in writing delivered personally or by mail to the operator.
(§ 1, Chapter III, Ord. 260; as amended by § 6, Ord. 1480, eff. January 12,
2017)
Sec. 6-3.06.   Permits: Suspension and revocation: Closing of food facilities.
   Upon receipt of a notice of suspension or revocation of a permit, the
operator shall close the food facility until such time as the order of
suspension is rescinded by the Director of Environmental Health. The notice of
suspension or revocation shall include a provision for an appeal hearing as
described in the California Retail Food Code, Chapter 13, Article 3.
(§ 2, Chapter III, Ord. 260; as amended by § 7, Ord. 1480, eff. January 12,
2017)
Sec. 6-3.07.   Inspections of establishments: Frequency.
   At least once every year or once every six (6) months the Director of
Environmental Health shall cause every food facility located within the County
to be inspected. The frequency of the inspections will be based on the risk
level of the food facility. The Director of Environmental Health may
temporarily require more frequent inspections when a food facility has shown
poor compliance history and more frequent inspections are necessary to
demonstrate consistent compliance and public health protection.
(§ 3, Chapter III, Ord. 260; as amended by § 8, Ord. 1480, eff. January 12,
2017)
Sec. 6-3.08.   Posting of Placards.
   (a)   Upon completion of a routine inspection or re-inspection, the Director
of Environmental Health shall post the appropriate placard at the food
facility, as determined by the Director of Environmental Health. The placard
shall be posted so as to be clearly visible to the general public and to
patrons entering the food facility. "Clearly visible to the general public and
to patrons" shall mean:
   (1)   Posted in the front window of the food facility; or
   (2)   Posted in a display case mounted on the outside front wall of the food
facility; or
   (3)   Posted in a location approved by the Director of Environmental Health
to ensure proper notice to the general public and to patrons.
   (b)   If a food facility is operated in the same building as a separately
permitted or licensed business, or if a facility shares a common patron
entrance with a separately permitted facility or licensed business, or in the
event of both, the Director of Environmental Health shall post the placard in
the initial patron contact area, or in a location approved by the Director of
Environmental Health.
   (c)   The placard shall not be altered, defaced, marred, camouflaged,
hidden, or removed. It shall be unlawful to operate a food facility unless the
placard is posted in accordance with this chapter. Failure to comply with this
section may result in the suspension or revocation of the food facility permit
and will be subject to a daily re-inspection and the associated fees.
   (d)   The Director of Environmental Health shall re-inspect every food
facility at which a yellow "conditional pass" placard is posted within three
(3) department business days of the posting of the yellow placard. Upon re-
inspection, the appropriate placard shall be posted.
   (e)   A placard shall remain valid from the time of issuance until a new
placard is issued at time of routine inspection, re-inspection or change of
ownership.
   (f)   Food facility categories eligible for the placard program shall be
determined by the department.
(§ 8, Chapter IV, Ord. 260, as amended by § 1, Ord. 563,§ 3, Ord. 823, eff.
March 1, 1979, and § 9, Ord. 1480, eff. January 12, 2017)
Sec. 6-3.09.   Mandatory food safety education.
   (a)   When the Director of Environmental Health, during a food facility
inspection, determines either of the following:
   (1)   Repeated violation of critical factors affecting food safety; or
   (2)   The owner or employee with Food Safety Certification has failed to
ensure that all employees who handle unpackaged food have sufficient knowledge
and understanding of how to safely prepare and serve food.
   The Director of Environmental Health may require the owner to send all staff
who engage in food preparation to a food safety education class provided or
approved by the Yolo County’s Division of Environmental Health.
   (b)   The food safety education class shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
   (1)   Causes and contributing factors of food-borne illness, the
relationship between time and temperature with respect to food-borne illness,
and the relationship between personal hygiene and food safety.
(§ 8, Chapter IV, Ord. 260, as amended by § 1, Ord. 563,§ 4, Ord. 823, eff.
March 1, 1979, and § 10, Ord. 1480, eff. January 12, 2017)
Sec. 6-3.10.   Bacterial examinations of utensils.
   The Public Health Director, from time to time may cause a bacterial
examination to be made of such eating and drinking utensils as he may elect to
test at any restaurant. In any such test, the resulting bacterial count
exceeding 100 per utensil surface area examined shall be considered
unsatisfactory. Any three (3) such unsatisfactory results from such tests taken
in any restaurant in any sixty (60) day period shall warrant the closing of the
restaurant concerned until such time as it has been demonstrated that the
conditions causing such unsatisfactory utensil sanitization have been
corrected. (§ 8, Chapter IV, Ord. 260, as amended by § 1, Ord. 536, and § 5,
Ord. 823, eff. March 1, 1979)
Sec. 6-3.11.   Examinations and rejection of utensils and fixtures.
   Whenever the Public Health Director, upon examination or inspection, shall
ascertain that any fixture or utensil used in the operation of any restaurant
is unfit or unsuitable for its intended or actual use by reason of previous use
for any unclean purpose, or by lack of compliance with any law or regulation
pertaining thereto, or by reason of its being damaged or broken, or if for any
reason its use is likely to prove a menace to the public health, it shall be
the duty of the Public Health Director, and he is hereby empowered, to reject
any such fixture or utensil and prohibit its use within the establishment. (§
1, Chapter IV, Ord. 260, as amended by § 6, Ord. 823, eff. March 1, 1979)
Sec. 6-3.12.   Examinations and condemnation of food and drink.
   Samples of food or drink may be taken and examined by the Public Health
Director as often as may be necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness,
adulteration, or misbranding. The Public Health Director may condemn, denature,
remove, and destroy any food or drink which is unwholesome, adulterated, or
misbranded, or he may forbid the sale for human consumption of any food or
drink which is adulterated or misbranded. (§ 2, Chapter IV, Ord. 260, as
amended by § 7, Ord. 823, eff. March 1, 1979)
Sec. 6-3.13.   Employee lists.
   It shall be the duty of every operator of a restaurant to keep an accurate,
up-to-date list of all persons employed therein and to furnish a true copy of
such list to the Public Health Director upon request. (§ 4, Chapter IV, Ord.
260, as amended by § 8, Ord. 823, eff. March 1, 1979)
Sec. 6-3.14.   Communicable diseases.
   (a)   Notices by employees. It shall be the duty of every employee of a food
handling establishment to notify the operator if such employee contracts any
communicable disease.
   (b)   Notices by operators. It shall be the duty of the operator to
immediately notify the Public Health Director that such condition exists.
   (c)   Action by the Public Health Director. Upon the receipt of such notice
from the operator, it shall be the duty of the Public Health Director to
investigate the condition set forth in such report and to institute such
measures as may be necessary for the public health. (§ 3, Chapter IV, Ord. 260,
as amended by § 9, Ord. 823, eff. March 1, 1979)
Sec. 6-3.15.   Employee lists.
   Repealed* (§ 5, Chapter IV, Ord. 260; * § 10, Ord. 823, eff. March 1, 1979)
Sec. 6-3.16.   Communicable diseases.
   Repealed* (§§ 6 and 7, Chapter IV, Ord. 260; * § 11, Ord. 823, eff. March 1,
1979)
Chapter 4
MILK INSPECTION AND DISTRIBUTION
Sections:
   
6-4.01   Permits to distribute: Required.
   
6-4.02   Permits to distribute: Granting: Expiration: Fees.
   
6-4.03   Permits to distribute: Renewal.
   
6-4.04   Conformance of products to State standards.
   
6-4.05   Inspection service.
Sec. 6-4.01.   Permits to distribute: Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, or the agent or employee of any person,
to sell, offer for sale, distribute, or have in his possession for sale or
distribution for ultimate consumption within the County any milk or cream for
consumption as milk or cream until a permit has been granted by the Health
Department permitting such person so to do. (§ III, Ord. 152)
Sec. 6-4.02.   Permits to distribute: Granting: Expiration: Fees.
   The permits required by the provisions of Section
6-4.01 of this chapter may be granted at any time during the calendar year and
shall remain in force until the expiration of the calendar year in which the
permits are granted, unless sooner suspended or revoked for cause, and no
permit shall be granted unless the applicant pays such fees as the Board may
establish by resolution. (§ III, Ord. 152, as amended by § 2, Ord. 858, eff.
October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-4.03.   Permits to distribute: Renewal.
   Applications for the renewal of the permits required by the provisions of
Section
6-4.01 of this chapter shall be made and acted upon at the beginning of each
successive calendar year in the same manner as original applications. (§ III,
Ord. 152)
Sec. 6-4.04.   Conformance of products to State standards.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, or the agent or employee of any person,
to sell, offer for sale, distribute, or have in his possession for sale or
distribution for ultimate consumption within the County any milk or cream for
consumption as milk or cream unless it conforms to the standards of grading and
to the requirements for the production of milk or cream established by the
provisions of Division 15 of the Agricultural Code of the State and the rules
and regulations of such standards. (§ I, Ord. 152)
Sec. 6-4.05.   Inspection service.
   The Health Department shall create a milk inspection service and carry out
the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, such milk inspection service
shall be so conducted as to meet the approval and requirements of the
Department of Agriculture of the State. (§ II, Ord. 152)
Chapter 5
PUBLIC SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Sections:
Article 1. Definitions.
   
6-5.101   Scope.
   
6-5.102   B.O.D.
   
6-5.103   Cesspool. (Repealed)
   
6-5.104   Control manhole.
   
6-5.105   District.
   
6-5.106   Engineer.
   
6-5.107   Engineering Division.
   
6-5.108   Garbage.
   
6-5.109   Garbage, properly shredded.
   
6-5.110   Health Officer. (Repealed)
   
6-5.111   Industrial wastes.
   
6-5.112   Lot.
   
6-5.113   Natural outlet.
   
6-5.114   Outside user.
   
6-5.115   Paved surface.
   
6-5.116   Permit.
   
6-5.117   Person.
   
6-5.118   pH.
   
6-5.119   Septic tank system. (Repealed)
   
6-5.120   Sewage.
   
6-5.121   Sewage, sanitary.
   
6-5.122   Sewage treatment plant.
   
6-5.123   Sewage works.
   
6-5.124   Sewer.
   
6-5.125   Sewer, building.
   
6-5.126   Sewer, house connection.
   
6-5.127   Sewer, private.
   
6-5.128   Sewer, public.
   
6-5.129   Storm drain.
   
6-5.130   Street.
   
6-5.131   Suspended solids.
   
6-5.132   Watercourse.
Article 2. Public Sewers: Construction
   
6-5.201   Permits: Required: Exception.
   
6-5.202   Permits: Applications: Plans, profiles, and specifications.
   
6-5.203   Compliance with laws and regulations.
   
6-5.204   Performance of work by licensed contractors.
   
6-5.205   Subdivision requirements.
   
6-5.206   Easements and rights-of-way.
   
6-5.207   Grade and line stakes.
   
6-5.208   Barriers, lights, and signs.
   
6-5.209   Restoration of streets, sidewalks, and other property.
   
6-5.210   Design and construction standards.
   
6-5.211   Completion of work.
Article 3. Public Sewers: Use.
   
6-5.301   Required.
   
6-5.302   Treatment facilities for certain waters and wastes.
   
6-5.303   Connection of toilet facilities.
   
6-5.304   Connection of septic tanks and cesspools. (Repealed)
   
6-5.305   Discharging certain waters and wastes.
   
6-5.306   Interceptors.
   
6-5.307   Manholes.
   
6-5.308   Flow recording devices.
   
6-5.309   Measurements, tests, and analyses of waters and wastes.
   
6-5.310   Agreements to discharge certain industrial wastes.
   
6-5.311   Outside users.
   
6-5.312   Charges.
Article 4. Building and House Connection Sewers
   
6-5.401   Permits required.
   
6-5.402   Inspection of works.
   
6-5.403   Costs of work.
   
6-5.404   Responsibility for work.
   
6-5.405   Maintenance.
   
6-5.406   Artificial lifting of sanitary sewage.
   
6-5.407   Structural openings: Fees.
   
6-5.408   Separate sewers.
Article 5. Permits, Fees, Deposits, and Insurance
   
6-5.501   Permits: Required: Exception.
   
6-5.502   Permits: Applications: Form.
   
6-5.503   Permits: Applications: Significance of signatures.
   
6-5.504   Permits: Issuance.
   
6-5.505   Permits: Compliance.
   
6-5.506   Permits: Posting: Exhibition.
   
6-5.507   Performance of work by permittees only.
   
6-5.508   Fees and charges.
   
6-5.509   Fees and charges: Deposit.
   
6-5.510   Cash deposits: Bonds.
   
6-5.511   Liability insurance.
Article 6. Private Sewage Disposal (Repealed)
Article 7. Inspections: Enforcement: Violations
   
6-5.701   Inspections: Right of entry.
   
6-5.702   Enforcement.
   
6-5.703   Violations.
Article 1.
Definitions
Sec. 6-5.101.   Scope.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined in this
article.
(Article I, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.102.   B.O.D.
   "B.O.D." (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade,
expressed in parts per million by weight.
(§ 128, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.103.   Cesspool.
   Repealed (§ 2, Ord. 1470)
Sec. 6-5.104.   Control manhole.
   "Control manhole" shall mean a manhole in the building sewer line for the
observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes.
(§ 122, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.105.   District.
   “District” shall mean:
   (a)   A sewer maintenance district under the control of the Board; or
   (b)   A County service area within the County which area provides extended
sewer service.
(§ 101, Ord. 497, as amended by § 1, Ord. 604; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.106. Engineer.
   "Engineer" shall mean the Director of Public Works of the County or his duly
authorized representative acting as Engineer for the District.
(§ 104, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.107.   Engineering Division.
   "Engineering Division" shall mean the Department of Public Works of the
County.
(§ 105, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.108.   Garbage.
   "Garbage" shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. (§ 126,
Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.109.   Garbage, properly shredded.
   "Properly shredded garbage" shall mean the wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, which wastes have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half
(1/2") inch in any dimension. (§ 127, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.110.   Health Officer.
   Repealed (§ 2, Ord. 1470)
Sec. 6-5.111.   Industrial wastes.
   "Industrial wastes" shall mean liquid wastes from industrial processes, as
distinct from sanitary sewage. (§ 125, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.112. Lot.
   "Lot" shall mean any piece or parcel of land bounded, defined, or shown upon
the latest map, plat, or deed recorded in the office of the County Recorder;
provided, however, where any building, or improvements appurtenant to such
building, cover more area than a lot, as defined in this section, "lot" shall
mean and include all such pieces or parcels of land on which such buildings or
improvements are wholly or partly located. (§ 103, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.113.   Natural outlet.
   "Natural outlet" shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body of surface water or ground water. (§ 131, Ord. 497; as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.114.   Outside user.
   "Outside user" shall mean any person responsible for the payment of sewer
service fees for premises served outside the boundaries of a District. (§ 108,
Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.115.   Paved surface.
   "Paved surface" shall mean any form of pavement used on any street in the
County, whether such pavement is composed of concrete, asphalt, oil, gravel,
crushed rock, or any combination of such materials. (§ 111, Ord. 497; as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.116.   Permit.
   "Permit" shall mean any written authorization required pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter or any regulation of a District for the installation
of any sewage works. (§ 109, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July
14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.117.   Person.
   "Person" shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
organization, partnership, corporation, or group. (§ 107, Ord. 497; as amended
by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.118.   pH.
   "pH" shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration in grams per liter of solution. (§ 129, Ord. 497; as amended by §
2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.119.   Septic tank system.
   Repealed (§ 2, Ord. 1470)
Sec. 6-5.120.   Sewage.
   "Sewage" shall mean the liquid wastes from residences, business buildings,
institutions, and industrial establishments, which wastes contain animal or
vegetable matter in suspension. (§ 115, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.121.   Sewage, sanitary.
   "Sanitary sewage" shall mean any waste discharging in a District sewage
system, which waste contains human or animal excreta. (§ 116, Ord. 497; as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.122.   Sewage treatment plant.
   "Sewage treatment plant" shall mean any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage. (§ 124, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.123.   Sewage works.
   "Sewage works" shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating,
and disposing of sewage effluent. (§ 114, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.124.   Sewer.
   "Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. (§ 117, Ord. 497;
as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.125.   Sewer, building.
   “Building sewer” shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes from the building and conveys such discharge to the junction
with the house connection sewer at the lot property line or sewer easement
line. (§ 120, Ord. 497)
Sec. 6-5.126.   Sewer, house connection.
   "House connection sewer" shall mean the portion of a sewer located within a
public street or public easement connecting a building sewer to the public
sewer. (§ 119, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.127.   Sewer, private.
   "Private sewer" shall mean a sewer serving an independent sewage disposal
system not connected with a public sewer and which accommodates one or more
buildings or industries. (§ 121, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff.
July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.128.   Sewer, public.
   "Public sewer" shall mean any sewer, other than a house connection sewer,
which has been constructed in a street and is part of the public sewer system
of the District. (§ 118, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14,
2016)
Sec. 6-5.129.   Storm drain.
   "Storm dram" shall mean a conduit which carries storm and surface waters and
drainage but excludes sanitary sewage and polluted industrial wastes. (§ 123,
Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.130.   Street.
   "Street" shall mean any public highway, road, street, avenue, alley, way,
walk, easement, or right-of-way. (§ 110, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.131.   Suspended solids.
   "Suspended solids" shall mean solids which either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtration expressed in parts per million by weight. (§
130, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.132.   Watercourse.
   "Watercourse" shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently. (§ 132, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 2.
Public Sewers: Construction
Sec. 6-5.201.   Permits: Required: Exception.
   (a)   Required. In accordance with the provisions of Article 5 of this
chapter, no person shall construct, extend, or connect to any public sewer or
house connection sewer under the jurisdiction of the District without first
obtaining a written permit from the Engineer, paying all fees and connection
charges, and furnishing bonds as required in this chapter.
   (b)   Exception. The provisions of this section requiring permits shall not
be construed to apply to contractors constructing sewers and appurtenances
under contracts awarded and entered into by the County through the Department
of Public Works. (§ 401, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14,
2016)
Sec. 6-5.202.   Permits: Applications: Plans, profiles, and specifications.
   Any sewer line which connects to a public sewer, other than a building sewer
and house connection sewer, shall be classified as a public sewer line and
shall be subject to the submittal of plans, profiles, and specifications as
required. The application for a permit for public sewer construction shall be
accompanied by complete plans, profiles, and specifications complying with all
applicable laws, rules, and regulations of the District and the County. Such
plans, profiles, and specifications shall be prepared by a registered civil
engineer and show all details of the proposed work based on an accurate survey
of ground. The application, together with the plans, profiles, and
specifications, shall be examined by the Engineering Division which shall,
within thirty (30) days, approve them as filed or require them to be modified
as is deemed necessary for proper installation. After examination by the
Engineering Division, the application, plans, profiles, and specifications
shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works for his review and comments.
When the Director of Public Works is satisfied that the proposed work is proper
and the plans, profiles, and specifications are sufficient and correct, he
shall sign each original tracing and shall order the issuance of a permit
predicated upon the payment of all connection charges and fees and furnishing
bonds as required by the Engineer. The permit shall prescribe such terms and
conditions as the Director of Public Works finds necessary in the public
interest. (§ 402, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.203.   Compliance with laws and regulations.
   Any person constructing a sewer within a street shall comply with all State,
County, and City laws, rules, and regulations pertaining to the cutting of
pavement, the opening, barricading, lighting, and protecting of trenches, and
the backfilling and repaving thereof and shall obtain all permits and pay all
fees required by the department having jurisdiction prior to the issuance of a
permit by the Director of Public Works. (§ 407, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.204.   Performance of work by licensed contractors.
   Only properly licensed contractors shall be authorized to perform the work
of public sewer construction within the District. All terms and conditions of
the permit issued by the District to the applicant shall be binding on the
contractor. (§ 405, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.205.   Subdivision requirements.
   The provisions of Sections
6-5.201 and
6-5.202 of this article shall be fully complied with before any final
subdivision map which includes property within any District shall be approved
by the County. The final subdivision map shall provide for the dedication for
public use of streets, easements, or rights-of-way in which public sewer lines
are to be constructed. If a final subdivision map of a tract is recorded and
the work of constructing sewers to serve the tract is not completed within the
time limit allowed on the permit, the Director of Public Works may extend the
time limit or may complete the work and take appropriate steps to enforce the
provisions of the bond furnished by the subdivider. (§ 403, Ord. 497; as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.206.   Easements and rights-of-way.
   In the event an easement is required for the extension of the public sewer
or the making of connections, the applicant shall procure and have accepted by
the Engineering Division and the County the proper easement or grant of right-
of-way sufficient in length to allow the laying and maintenance of such
extension or connection. (§ 404, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff.
July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.207.   Grade and line stakes.
   Grade and line stakes shall be set by a registered civil engineer or land
surveyor prior to the start of work on any public sewer construction. The
contractor shall be responsible for accurately transferring grades to grade
bars and sewer invert. (§ 406, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff.
July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.208.   Barriers, lights, and signs.
   The applicant shall maintain such barriers, lights, and signs as are
necessary to give warning to the public at all times that a sewer is under
construction and of each dangerous condition to be encountered as a result
thereof. He shall likewise protect the public in the use of the sidewalk
against any such conditions in connection with the construction of the sewer.
(§ 408, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.209.   Restoration of streets, sidewalks, and other property.
   Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other property disturbed in the course of
the sewer construction work shall be reinstalled in a manner satisfactory to
the District and the County or any other person having jurisdiction thereover.
(§ 408, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.210.   Design and construction standards.
   The minimum standards for the design and construction of sewers within the
District shall be in accordance with the Improvement Standards and
Specifications of the County adopted by the Board, copies of which are on file
in the office of the Department of Public Works. The Engineer may permit
modifications or may require higher standards where unusual conditions are
encountered.
   "As-built" tracings, showing the actual location of all mains, structures,
Y's, and laterals, shall be filed as a permanent record with the Engineer
before final acceptance of the work. (§ 409, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.211.   Completion of work.
   Before the acceptance of any sewer line by the Engineer, and prior to the
admission of any sewage into the system, the sewer line shall be tested and
completed in full compliance with all the requirements of the Improvement
Standards and Specifications of the County and to the satisfaction of the
Director of Public Works. (§ 410, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff.
July 14, 2016)
Article 3.
Public Sewers: Use
Sec. 6-5.301.   Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited, in an insanitary manner upon public or private property within the
District or in any area under the jurisdiction of the District, any human or
animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable wastes. (§ 201, Ord. 497; as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.302.   Treatment facilities for certain waters and wastes.
   (a)   Required. It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet
within the District or in any area under the jurisdiction of the District any
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this
article. The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes with the
following qualities shall be subject to review and approval by the Engineer:
   (1)   Having a five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts
per million by weight;
   (2)   Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended
solids;
   (3)   Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics set
forth in Section
6-5.305 of this article; or
   (4)   Having an average daily flow greater than two (2%) percent of the
average daily sewage flow of the system.
   (b)   Construction. Where necessary in the opinion of the Engineer, the
owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to:
   (1)   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million and the
suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight;
   (2)   Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the
maximum limits provided for in Section
6-5.305 of this article; or
   (3)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
   Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval
of the Engineer, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced
until such approval is obtained in writing.
   (c)   Maintenance. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, such facilities shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. (§§ 202, 505,
and 507, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.303.   Connection of toilet facilities.
   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the District and
abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is located a
public sanitary or combined sewer of the District, is hereby required at his
expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter within ninety (90) days after the date of official
notice to do so by the Division of Environmental Health provided such public
sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. (§ 203, Ord. 497; as amended by
§ 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.304.   Connection of septic tanks and cesspools.
   Repealed (§ 2, Ord. 1470)
Sec. 6-5.305.   Discharging certain waters and wastes.
   Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall discharge, or
cause to be discharged, any of the following waters or wastes to any public
sewer:
   (a)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 100 degrees
Fahrenheit;
   (b)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 200 parts per million,
by weight, of fat, oil, or grease;
   (c)   Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas;
   (d)   Any garbage which has not been properly shredded and contains any
particle greater than one-half (1/2”) inch in any dimension;
   (e)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous
substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works;
   (f)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths (5.5)
or higher than nine and five-tenths (9.5), or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or
personnel of the sewage works;
   (g)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of the sewage treatment plant;
   (h)   Any waters containing radioactive wastes of sufficient quantity to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant;
   (i)   Any waters containing synthetic detergents in sufficient quantity to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or create problems in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
   (j)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials
at the sewage treatment plant;
   (k)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance; and
   (l)   Industrial wastes, waters, or liquids which are odorless, stable, and
free from deleterious chemicals shall, where practicable, be discharged into
storm drains or storm water channels. For the purposes of this subsection, any
industrial wastes, waters, or liquids containing sufficient oxygen to prevent
putreficaction when incubated for a period of five (5) days at a temperature of
twenty-five (25) degrees centigrade shall be deemed stable. (§ 502, Ord. 497;
as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.306.   Interceptors.
   (a)   Required. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when,
in the opinion of the Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes,
sand, or other harmful ingredients; provided, however, such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
   (b)   Type, capacity, and location. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Engineer and shall be located so as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (c)   Construction. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and
equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be
gastight and watertight.
   (d)   Maintenance. Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors
shall be maintained by the owner at his expense in continuously efficient
operation at all times. (§§ 503 and 504, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.307.   Manholes.
   When required by the Engineer, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole cover, when required, shall be
accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the Engineer. The manhole shall be installed and maintained by the
owner at his expense. (§ 508, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July
14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.308.   Flow recording devices.
   When required by the Engineer, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes with a volume greater than two (2%)
percent of the system flow shall install and maintain an approved flow
recording device for continuous measurement of the volume of waste discharged
to the public sewer. The flow measuring station and the records obtained
therefrom shall be accessible at all times to the Engineer. Copies of the flow
measurements shall be furnished the Engineer. (§ 509, Ord. 497; as amended by §
2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.309.   Measurements, tests, and analyses of waters and wastes.
   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage",
published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at
the control manhole provided for in Section
6-5.307 of this article or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole.
In the event no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the house connection sewer is connected. (§ 510, Ord. 497; as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.310.   Agreements to discharge certain industrial wastes.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between a District and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the district for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial
concern. (§ 511, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.311.   Outside users.
   Outside users may be permitted to connect to a District's sewer only when
the Engineer finds that such connection will not be adverse to the District's
interests and that sufficient capacity is available in the sewage works. Rules
and regulations of the district shall be applicable to outside users, and
service charges, as established by the District for outside users, shall be
applicable. In the event it shall develop, by reason of increased flow, changes
in the character of discharge, or changes of any cause whatsoever, that the
flow becomes adverse to the District's interests or that capacity in the sewage
works is no longer available for outside users, such users may be disconnected
ninety (90) days after notice is given in writing that service is to be
terminated. (§ 512, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.312.   Charges.
   A sewer service charge, if adopted by a District, shall be applicable to
wastes permitted to be discharged to the public sewer system. (§ 506, Ord. 497;
as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 4.
Building and House Connection Sewers
Sec. 6-5.401.   Permits required.
   (a)   Connection and use. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer, house
connection sewer, or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the Engineer.
   (b)   Construction and excavations. No public sewer or house connection
sewer shall be constructed or any excavation made within the right-of-way of
any street within the District until after a permit has been issued therefor by
the Engineer as provided in this chapter. (§§ 301 and 302, Ord. 497; as amended
by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.402.   Inspection of works.
   The Engineer shall act as Sewer Inspector. The duties of the Sewer Inspector
shall include, but not be limited to:
   (a)   Supervising any and all connections to District sewer lines lying
within street limits;
   (b)   Inspecting all trenches for alignment and grade and approving such
trenches for pipe laying;
   (c)   Inspecting pipe laying and jointing;
   (d)   Inspecting backfill, pavement replacement, and completion of work; and
   (e)   Issuing an acceptance of work completed satisfactorily. (§ 303, Ord.
497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.403.   Costs of work.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of a
house connection sewer and building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The
owner shall indemnify the District from any loss or damage which may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. (§ 304,
Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.404.   Responsibility for work.
   All persons performing work pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be responsible for any and all acts of their agents or employees in connection
with such work. Upon being notified in writing by the Engineer of any defect
arising therefrom in any sewer or the violation of the provisions of this
chapter, the person responsible for such work shall immediately correct such
defect or violation. (§ 305, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July
14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.405.   Maintenance.
   House connection sewers and building sewers shall be maintained by the owner
of the property served thereby. (§ 307, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.406.   Artificial lifting of sanitary sewage.
   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted
by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. Where
installed, such installations shall be maintained by the owner at his expense
and installed on his property. (§ 308, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.407.   Structural openings: Fees.
   Whenever the Engineer finds that it is necessary for any person to construct
a connection to any sewer of eighteen (18") inches in diameter, or smaller,
where no Y or T spur branch or other structural opening exists, the contractor
or person doing the work shall excavate to the sewer at the point where the
connection is being made, and the sewer maintenance forces of the District
shall then cut the required hole in the sewer top and install a saddle
furnished by the District for the connection. The additional fee for tapping
the sewer and furnishing and installing the saddle shall be Twenty-Five and no/
100ths ($25.00) Dollars. Sewers over eighteen (18") inches in diameter, where a
saddle is required to be installed, shall be handled on an individual basis in
the same manner at the actual cost of making the connection. (§ 309, Ord. 497;
as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.408.   Separate sewers.
   A separate and independent house connection sewer shall be provided for
every building unless one building stands at the rear of another on the same
lot and is under the same ownership and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or
driveway. In such event, the matter shall be reviewed on an individual basis,
whereby a building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer. (§ 306, Ord. 497; as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 5.
Permits, Fees, Deposits, and Insurance
Sec. 6-5.501.   Permits: Required: Exception.
   (a)   Required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection
with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
or perform any work on any house connection without first obtaining a written
permit from the Engineer.
   (b)   Exception. No permit shall be required for routine clean-out work on
house connection sewers where no opening is required. (§ 601, Ord. 497; as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.502.   Permits: Applications: Form.
   Any person lawfully entitled to apply for and receive a permit shall make
such application on forms provided by the Engineer for such purpose.
   The applicant shall give a description of the character of the work proposed
to be done and the location, ownership, occupancy, and use of the premises in
connection therewith. The Engineer may require plans, specifications, or
drawings and such other information as he may deem necessary. (§ 602, Ord. 497;
as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.503.   Permits: Applications: Significance of signatures.
   The applicant's signature on an application for any permit shall constitute
an agreement to comply with all of the provisions, terms, and requirements of
this chapter and other applicable laws, with the rules and regulations of the
District, and with the plans and specifications he has filed with his
application, if any, together with such corrections or modifications as may be
made or permitted by the District, if any. Such agreement shall be binding upon
the applicant and may be altered only by the District upon written request for
the alteration from the applicant. (§ 604, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.504.   Permits: Issuance.
   If the Engineer determines that the plans, specifications, drawings,
descriptions, and information furnished by the applicant is in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the District,
the Engineer shall issue the permit applied for upon the payment of the fees
set forth in this article. (§ 602, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff.
July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.505.   Permits: Compliance.
   After the approval of the application, evidenced by the issuance of a
permit, no change shall be made in the location of the sewer or the grade,
materials, or other details from those described in the permit or as shown on
the plans and specifications for which the permit was issued except with the
written permission of the District, the Engineer, or other authorized
representative. (§ 603, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14,
2016)
Sec. 6-5.506.   Permits: Posting: Exhibition.
   At all times while the work under any permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter is in progress, the original of such permit shall be
kept at the place of work and shall, on demand, be exhibited to the Engineer.
(§ 601, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.507.   Performance of work by permittees only.
   No person, other than the permittee, shall perform any work under a permit
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (§ 602, Ord. 497; as amended
by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.508.   Fees and charges.
   (a)   House connection permits and inspections. A fee in the amount of Ten
and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars shall be paid to the District for issuing a
permit and inspecting each house connection sewer installation.
   (b)   Alteration of existing sewer installations. A fee in the amount of Ten
and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars shall be paid to the District for issuing a
permit for any work adding to, altering, or extending an existing public sewer
installation. In addition, a plan-checking and construction inspection fee in
the amount of two (2¢) cents per lineal foot per inch of pipe diameter shall be
paid.
   (c)   Hookup charges for partially assessed and unassessed areas. The owners
of lands within the boundaries of a District, which lands have been partially
assessed or not assessed at all, shall comply with the provisions of
subsections (a) and (b) of this section and, in addition, shall pay to the
District a hookup charge which shall be determined on the basis of area and
upon fees established by resolution for each District within the County.
   (d)   Outside users. Outside users shall comply with the provisions of this
section and of this chapter but shall be considered on an individual basis by
the Department of Public Works. (§§ 605, 606, and 608, Ord. 497; as amended by
§ 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.509.   Fees and charges: Deposit.
   All fees and charges collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be deposited with the Treasurer-Tax Collector to the credit of the
District within which the work is done. (§ 607, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.510.   Cash deposits: Bonds.
   (a)   Cash deposits. Before any permit is issued pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, a cash deposit or surety bond shall be on file with the
County. The cash deposit shall be in a sum of not less than Five Hundred and
no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or 100 percent of the estimated cost of the work,
whichever is greater. Such deposit shall remain with the County for not less
than six (6) months from the date of the last permit issued to the depositor
thereof. Such deposit shall be held to insure the faithful performance of the
work, and the County is hereby empowered to deduct from such cash deposit all
sums due for any and all damages occurring to the County by reason of faulty or
defective work of the permittee.
   (b)   Bonds. At the option of the permittee, a good and sufficient bond in
any amount equal to the amount of such cash deposit may be executed by the
applicant to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, payable to the
County by a reliable surety company. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the
faithful and proper performance of the work upon the same terms as the terms
required by such cash deposit in lieu of which such bond is executed. The
County is hereby empowered to enforce collections under the bond for all sums
due for charges pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and for any and all
damages occurring to the County by reason of faulty or defective work by the
permittee.
   (c)   Exception. The requirements of this section may be waived by the
Engineer for house connection sewer permits where the lateral exists and no
opening in the street surface is necessary. (§§ 609, and 611, Ord. 497; as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.511.   Liability insurance.
   (a)   Required. A permit, as provided for in this chapter, shall not be
issued until the applicant has filed with the Engineer, in duplicate, a policy
or certificate of protective liability insurance in which the County has been
named or co-insured with the permittee. The policy of insurance shall insure
the County and its departments, officers, and employees, while acting within
the scope of their duties, against all claims arising out of, or in connection
with, the operations of the permittee or any contractor or subcontractor of the
permittee pursuant to the permit.
   (b)   Amounts. The policy of insurance shall provide coverage in the
following amounts:
   (1)   For bodily injury, One Hundred Thousand and no/100ths ($100,000.00)
Dollars for each person;
   (2)   For each accident, Three Hundred Thousand and no/100ths ($300,000.00)
Dollars; and
   (3)   For property damage, Fifty Thousand and no/100ths ($50,000.00) Dollars
for each accident.
   (c)   Coverage. Such policy of insurance shall provide coverage at least as
broad as that provided in the Standard Form approved by the National Bureau of
Casualty Underwriters, together with such endorsements as are required to cover
the risks involved.
   (d)   Exception. The requirements of this section may be waived by the
Engineer for house connection sewer permits where the lateral exists and no
opening in the street surface is necessary. (§§ 610 and 611, Ord. 497; as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 6.
Private Sewage Disposal*
   Repealed* (§ 2, Ord. 1470)
Article 7.
Inspections: Enforcement: Violations
Sec. 6-5.701.   Inspections: Right of entry.
   The Engineer may make such inspections or investigations as he deems
necessary at any reasonable time in any building or on any premises or lot for
any of the following purposes:
   (a)   To determine the size, depth, and location of any sewer connection;
   (b)   To determine the outlet of any sewer connection by depositing testing
materials in any plumbing fixture attached thereto and flushing the same, if
necessary;
   (c)   To determine by measurements and samples the quantity and nature of
sewage or waste water being discharged into any sewer, storm drain, or
watercourse;
   (d)   To inspect, test, or sample the discharge of any device used to
prevent the discharge into any sewer, storm drain, or watercourse of unlawful
wastes or unlawful quantities of waste, such as floor drains, sand boxes,
grease traps, or other clarifiers, and of devices used to grind, shred,
pulverize, or otherwise treat garbage or industrial waste before discharging
the same into a sewer or storm drain;
   (e)   To determine the location of roof, swimming pool, and surface drains
and whether they are connected to a street gutter, storm drain, or sewer; and
   (f)   To determine the nature and quantity of flow in any open watercourse
or storm drain.
   No person shall interfere with, prevent, or refuse to permit the entry of
the Engineer into any building or upon any premises or lot for any of the
purposes set forth in this section. (§ 804, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.702.   Enforcement.
   Except as otherwise provided in Article 6 of this chapter, the Engineer is
hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and with
the coordination of all District and County officials and departments in order
to achieve the purposes of such provisions. (§ 803, Ord. 497; as amended by §
2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-5.703.   Violations.
   (a)   Willful damage.  No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully,
or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any
person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to
immediate arrest under a charge of disorderly conduct.
   (b)   Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding Two Hundred Fifty and no/100ths ($250.00)
Dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not to exceed ninety (90)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (c)   Notices: Abatement of hazards. Any person found to be violating any of
the provisions of this chapter, except subsection ((a) of this section, shall
be served with a written notice by the Engineer stating the nature of the
violation and requiring a time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
Any person who shall continue any such violation in excess of sixty (60) days
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in subsection(b) of this section;
provided, however, if the Engineer determines that the violation results in a
public hazard or menace to the public health or safety, he may enter upon the
premises without notice and do everything necessary to abate such hazard or
menace to the public health or safety. The actual cost incurred by the Engineer
in taking such abatement action shall be a legal charge against the violator.
(§§ 701, 801, and 802, Ord. 497; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14,
2016)
Chapter 6
HOUSING CODE*
*   Chapter 6 entitled “Tent Camps and House Courts”, consisting of Sections 6-
6.01 through 6-6.24, codified from Ordinance No. 163, repealed by Ordinance No.
718, effective April 23, 1975.
Sections:
   
6-6.01   Adoption of the 1985 Edition of the Uniform Housing Code.
   
6-6.02   Purpose.
   
6-6.03   Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board: Created.
   
6-6.04   Housing Code: Advisory and Appeals Board: Membership.
   
6-6.05   Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board: Membership: Terms:
Composition.
   
6-6.06   Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board: Compensation.
   
6-6.07   Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board: Rules.
   
6-6.08   Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board: Organization.
   
6-6.09   Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board: Duties.
   
6-6.10   Amendments: Section 301: Building Permits.
   
6-6.11   Amendments: Section 304: Voluntary Inspections.
   
6-6.12   Amendments: Section 402: Further Definitions.
   
6-6.13   Amendments: Section 1101: Notices and Orders.
   
6-6.14   Amendments: Section 1306: Appeals from Board to Board of Supervisors.
   
6-6.15   Amendments: Section 1307: Limitations on time for Action.
   
6-6.16   Amendments: Section 204: Violations and Penalties.
   
6-6.17   Deletions: Section 203.
Sec. 6-6.01.   Adoption of the 1985 Edition of the Uniform Housing Code.
   (a)   There is hereby adopted the 1985 Edition of the Uniform Housing Code
by reference thereto. Said Code is published by the International Conference of
Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California. Said
Code shall be known as the Housing Code for the County.
   (b)   Said Uniform Housing Code is hereby adopted in its entirety, except
for such portions as are deleted, modified, amended, and added by the
provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   Three (3) copies of said Uniform Housing Code are on file in the
office of the Clerk of the Board, and additional copies are available to the
public through the office of the Building Official, at cost. (§ 2, Ord. 718,
eff. April 23, 1975, as amended by § 1, Ord. 819, eff. February 8, 1979, § 1,
Ord. 1003, eff. March 28, 1985, and § 1, Ord. 1050, eff. March 26, 1987)
Sec. 6-6.02.   Purpose.
   The purpose of adopting said Uniform Housing Code by reference is to provide
minimum requirements for the protection of the life, limb, health, property,
safety, and welfare of the general public and the owners and occupants of
residential dwellings in the unincorporated portions of the County. The further
purpose is to designate the officers of the County charged with the
responsibilities for the enforcement of said Code and to establish a local
Housing Code Advisory, and Appeals Board to hear appeals and perform other
duties more particularly set forth in this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 718, eff. April
23, 1975, as amended by § 2, Ord. 819, eff. February
8, 1979)
Sec. 6-6.03.   Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board: Created.
   There is hereby created the Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board,
referred to in this chapter as the “Board”. (§ 2, Ord. 718, eff. April 23,
1975)
Sec. 6-6.04.   Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board: Membership.
   The Board shall be composed of nine (9) members who are not employees of the
County. The Building Official shall serve as the secretary to the Board. (§ 2,
Ord. 718, eff. April 23, 1975)
Sec. 6-6.05.   Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board: Membership: Terms:
Composition.
   The composition of the Board shall be one person skilled in the building
trades, one person skilled in fire prevention and control, one person who is a
registered architect or engineer whose professional work is connected with the
building and construction trades, one person who is an active licensed real
estate salesman or broker, and five (5) members of the general public, one
appointed from each supervisorial district of the County.
   The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors. The
terms of office shall be three (3) years, except for the initial appointees.
The terms of office of the initial appointees shall be as follows:
   (a)   The person skilled in the building trades and two (2) of the public
members selected by lot shall serve for one year.
   (b)   The real estate salesman or broker and two (2) of the public members
selected by lot shall serve for two (2) years.
   (c)   The architect or engineer, the person skilled in fire prevention and
control, and one of the public members selected by lot shall serve for three
(3) years.
   After the initial appointments, in the event of a vacancy in office by
reason of the expiration of a term or the termination of the term of office of
a member with the technical skills of a real estate broker, architect or
engineer, or person skilled in fire prevention or control, such office shall be
filled by the appointment of a person of like technical skills.
   In the event of a vacancy in office caused by the expiration of a term or
the termination of the term of office of a public member, such office shall be
filled by the appointment of a member of the public from the same supervisorial
district of the County.
   Appointments to the Board to fill vacancies which occur prior to the
expiration of the term of office shall be for the unexpired term only.
   At the first meeting of the Board after March 24, 1975, lots shall be cast;
two (2) lots with the number “1” which shall signify the first term of office
as one year; two (2) lots with the number “2” which shall signify the first
term of office as two (2) years; and one lot with the number “3” which shall
signify the first term of office as being three (3) years. All subsequent terms
of office shall be for three (3) years. (§ 2, Ord. 718, eff. April 23, 1975)
Sec. 6-6.06   Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board: Compensation.
   Each member of the Board shall receive transportation compensation at
regular County rates for travel within the scope of his duties.
   Each member of the Board shall receive compensation at the rate of Twenty-
Five and no/100ths ($25.00) Dollars for each meeting of the Board actually
attended provided, however, after July 1, 1975, no member of the Board shall
receive compensation for more than two (2) meetings per calendar month actually
attended. (§ 2, Ord. 718, eff. April 23, 1975)
Sec. 6-6.07.   Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board: Rules.
   The Board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting business
and shall render all decisions and findings in writing. Appeals to the Board
shall be processed in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapters 12
and 13 of said Uniform Housing Code. Copies of all rules or regulations adopted
by the Board shall be delivered to the Building Official who shall make them
accessible to the public for a nominal charge. (§ 2, Ord. 718, eff. April 23,
1975)
Sec. 6-6.08.   Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board: Organization.
   The members of the Board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman to serve
terms of one year from January 1 to December 31 of each year. The chairman
shall be authorized to appoint subcommittees as necessary for the efficient
administration of the duties of the board. (§ 2, Ord. 718, eff. April 23, 1975)
Sec. 6-6.09.   Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board: Duties.
   The duties of the Board shall be as follows:
   (a)   To hear appeals as provided for in this chapter;
   (b)   To propose new ordinances or amendments to said Uniform Housing Code
to the Board of Supervisors;
   (c)   With the advice of the Building Official, to promulgate written rules
and regulations pertaining to the enforcement and implementation of said
Uniform Housing Code. Such rules and regulations shall become effective when
ratified, approved, and adopted by the Board of Supervisors; and
   (d)   To advise the Board of Supervisors in the interpretation of the
provisions of said Uniform Housing Code. (§ 2, Ord. 718, eff. April 23, 1975)
Sec. 6-6.10.   Amendments: Section 301: Building Permits.
   Section 301 of said Uniform Housing Code is amended to read as follows:
   Sec. 301. Building Permits. Whenever a building is substandard, no person,
firm, or corporation shall commence or undertake any work upon such building,
such as erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal,
improvement, conversion, or demolition, without first obtaining a separate
building permit for such work from the Building Official in the manner and
according to the applicable conditions prescribed in Chapter 3 of the Uniform
Building Code and upon the payment of fees as set forth therein. (§ 2, Ord.
718, eff. April 23, 1975)
Sec. 6-6.11.   Amendments: Section 304: Voluntary Inspections.
   Section 304 is added to said Uniform Housing Code to read as follows:
   Sec. 304. Voluntary Inspections. The Building Official shall inspect
buildings and structures used as places of human habitation to determine the
conditions thereof upon the request of the owner of such premises, or the
mortgagee or beneficiary of a deed of trust upon such premises, and shall
charge for the same at the rate of Twenty and no/100ths ($20.00) Dollars per
hour of time spent, or fraction thereof.
(§ 2, Ord. 718, eff. April 23, 1975)
Sec. 6-6.12.   Amendments: Section 402: Further Definitions.
   Section 402 is added to said Uniform Housing Code to read as follows:
   Sec. 402. Further Definitions.
   (a)   “Place of human habitation” shall mean any structure, shelter, or
building used or designed for human habitation and shall include all fences and
appurtenances attached thereto and all buildings on the same property that are
supplemental of such habitation.
   (b)   “Building Official”. Wherever the term “Building Official” is used in
this Code, it shall mean the Director of Public Health or his or her designee.
   (c)   “Apartment complex” shall mean any series of buildings, or portions
thereof, designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied as
the homes or residences of three (3) or more families living independently of
each other and doing their own cooking in such building or buildings, and shall
include flats and apartments.
   (d)   “Board”. Wherever the term “Board” is used in this Code, it shall mean
and refer to the Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board of the County of Yolo.
   (e)   “City Council”. Wherever the term or expression “City Council” is used
in this Code, it shall mean the Board of Supervisors of the County of Yolo.
   (f)   “City”. Wherever the term “City” is used in this Code, it shall be
deemed to mean “County”.
   (g)   “City Attorney “. Wherever the term or expression “City Attorney” is
used in this Code, it shall mean the County Counsel of the County of Yolo.
   (h)   “Enforcement Agency”. The term “enforcement agency”, as used in this
Code, shall be defined to refer to the Department of Public Health of the
County of Yolo. (§ 2, Ord. 718, eff. April 23, 1975, as amended by § 2, Ord.
1003, eff. March 28, 1985)
Sec. 6-6.13.   Amendments: Section 1101: Notices and Orders.
   Section 1101 of said Uniform Housing Code is amended to read as follows:
   Sec. 1101. Notices and Orders.
   (a)   Commencement of Proceedings. Whenever the Building Official has
inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined
that such building is a substandard building, he shall commence proceedings to
cause the repair, rehabilitation, vacation, or demolition of the building.
   (b)   Notice and Order. The Building Official shall issue a notice and order
directed to the record owner of the building. The notice and order shall
contain:
   1.   The street address and a legal description sufficient for the
identification of the premises upon which the building is located;
   2.   A statement that the Building Official has found the building to be
substandard with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to
render the building dangerous under the provisions of Section 202 of this Code;
   3.   A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the
Building Official.
   (i)   If the Building Official has determined that
the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all
required permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within
such time (not to exceed sixty (60) days from the date of the order) and
completed within such time as the Building Official shall determine is
reasonable under all of the circumstances.
   (ii)   If the Building Official has determined that the building or
structure must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or
structure shall be vacated within a certain time from the date of the order as
determined by the Building Official to be reasonable.
   (iii)   If the Building Official has determined that the building or
structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the building be
vacated within such time as the Building Official shall determine reasonable
(not to exceed sixty (60) days from the date of the order); that all required
permits be secured therefor within sixty (60) days from the date of the order;
and that the demolition be completed within such time as the Building Official
shall determine is reasonable;
   4.   Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work
(without vacation also being required) is not commenced within the time
specified, the Building Official (i)will order the building vacated and posted
to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed, and (ii)may proceed
to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property
or its owner; and
   5.   Statements advising (i)that any person having any record title or legal
interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action of
the Building Official to the Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board, provided
the appeal is made in writing as provided in this Code, and filed with the
Building Official within thirty (30) days from the date of service of such
notice and order; and (ii)that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of
all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
   (c)   Service of Notice and Order. Service of the first notice and order
shall be made upon the record owners and posted on the property.
   (d)   Compliance by Mortgagee or Beneficiary. If such building shall not
have complied with the order of the Building Official on or before the
expiration of the time set for the completion of work or demolition ordered by
the Building Official, the mortgagee or beneficiary under such deed of trust
may, within fifteen (15) days after the expiration of such period, comply with
the requirements of the order of the enforcement agency.
   (e)   Noncompliance. If the order of the Building Official shall not have
been complied with on or before the time specified therein, the Building
Official may institute such appropriate actions or proceedings to correct or
abate the condition as would be taken to correct or abate any nuisance or any
violation of any other provision of this Code, or, as an alternative procedure,
he may institute proceedings for the abatement of such nuisance before the
Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board.
   (f)   Method of Service. All of the notices required herein shall be given
in the following manner: the Building Official shall post conspicuously at
least one copy of the notice on the building alleged to be unfit and shall send
another copy by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested, to the person owning the land on which the building is located, as
such person’s name and address appear on the last equalized assessment roll or
as known to the Clerk of the governing board of such enforcement agency, and to
any deed of trust of record, at the last known address of such mortgagee or
beneficiary; and, if such address is unknown to the enforcement agency, then
such fact shall be so stated in the copy mailed, and it shall be addressed to
him at the county seat of the county wherein such property is situated.
   (g)   Proof of Service. The Building Official, upon giving the notice
referred to in subsection (b)of this section, shall file proof of service
thereof with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors certifying to the time and
manner in which such notice was given. He shall also file therewith any receipt
card which may have been returned to him in acknowledgment of the receipt of
such notice by registered mail. The failure of any owner or other person to
receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any
proceedings taken hereunder.
   (h)   Second Notice. If the Building Official determines to proceed with the
abatement of such nuisance through proceedings instituted before the Housing
Code Advisory and Appeals Board, he shall give a second notice, in the same
manner as set forth in this section, directing the owner of such building to
appear before said Board at a stated time and place and show cause why such
building should not be condemned as a nuisance and such nuisance be abated as
provided in this section, and a copy of such notice shall be mailed to each
mortgagee or beneficiary under any deed of trust of record in the manner
prescribed in this section. Such notice shall be headed “Notice to Abate
Nuisance” in letters not less than three-fourths (3/4”) inch in height and
shall be substantially in the following form:
   NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE
   The owner of the building situated at _____
is hereby notified to appear before the Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board
of the County of Yolo at its meeting to be held _____, 19_, at (place of
meeting), at the hour of ____ o’clock., _m., or as soon thereafter as he may be
heard, and show cause, if any he has, why said building should not be condemned
as a public nuisance and said nuisance be abated by reconstructing or properly
repairing said building or by razing or removing same in accordance with the
provisions of Ordinance No. _________.
   Dated __________ .
___________________________
(Name of Enforcement Agency)
   BY ___________________________
(Name of Officer)
   (i)   Affldavit of Posting. The officer or employee of the enforcement
agency giving such notice shall file an affidavit of posting and mailing in the
manner required by Section 1015 of Title 25 of the California Administrative
Code, but the failure of any owner or other person to receive such notice shall
not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings taken pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
   (j)   Notice to Prospective Purchasers. The owner of any property for which
a notice has been issued pursuant to this section shall deliver a copy of such
notice to prospective purchasers of the property before making (or accepting)
an offer to sell (or purchase) the property. (§ 2, Ord. 718, eff. April 23,
1975, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1003, eff. March 28, 1985)
Sec. 6-6.14.   Amendments: Section 1306: Appeals from Board to Board of
Supervisors.
   Section 1306 is added to said Uniform Housing Code to read as follows:
   Sec. 1306. Appeals from Board to Board of Supervisors. The decision of the
Board shall be final, subject to appeal to the Board of Supervisors.
   Any person entitled to notice under the provisions of this Code may appeal
the decision of the Board by filing with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
within fifteen (15) days after the date of the decision a request that the
matter be set for an appeal hearing by the Board of Supervisors.
   The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall notify the appellant of the date
of the hearing and give the appellant no less than fifteen (15) days’ notice of
the hearing date. The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall serve the notice
by certified mail to the address given by the appellant in his notice of
appeal.
   The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall notify the Building Official of
the filing of such request, and the Building Official shall transmit to the
Board of Supervisors the records of the Board pertaining to the order being
appealed. The filing of such an appeal shall automatically defer the effective
date of any order until the Board of Supervisors has ruled on the appeal.
   The decision of the Board shall be presumed to be correct, and the appellant
shall have the burden of proof in the appeal hearing before the Board of
Supervisors. In the event the Board of Supervisors sustains the order of the
Board, the period for the commencement and completion of the abatement as
specified in the Board resolution shall start from the date of such action by
the Board of Supervisors.
   The Board of Supervisors may continue its hearings on such appeals from time
to time. It may hear evidence from competent persons as may be desired. It may
return the matter to the Board for further information or for further hearings.
The Board of Supervisors may modify as it determines proper any order of the
Board. Any order so modified shall be returned to the Board, and thereafter, in
that case, the Board and the Building Official shall act upon that modified
order in the same manner as orders which the Board itself might issue. (§ 2,
Ord. 718, eff. April 23, 1975, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1003, eff. March 28,
1985)
Sec. 6-6.15.   Amendments: Section 1307: Limitations on Time for Action.
   Section 1307 is added to said Uniform Housing Code to read as follows:
   Sec. 1307. Limitations on Time for Action. Any action or decision to attack,
review, set aside, void, or annul any decision of the Board of Supervisors
hereunder, or to determine the reasonableness, legality, or validity of any
such act of the Board of Supervisors, shall not be maintained by any person
unless such action or proceeding is commenced within sixty (60) days after the
date of such decision. Thereafter all persons shall be barred from any such
action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of such
decision or of such proceedings, act, or determinations. (§ 2, Ord. 718, eff.
April 23, 1975)
Sec. 6-6.16.   Amendments: Section 204: Violations and Penalties.
   Section 204 of said Uniform Housing Code is amended to read as follows:
   Sec. 204. Violations and Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation
violating any of the provisions of said Uniform Housing Code shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of
Title 1 of the Yolo County Code. (§ 4, Ord. 819, eff. February 8, 1979, as
amended by § 5, Ord. 1003, eff. March 28, 1985)
Sec. 6-6.17.   Deletions: Section 203.
   Section 203 is hereby deleted from said Uniform Housing Code. (§ 3, Ord.
819, eff. February 8, 1979)
Chapter 7
LITTER AND CONTAMINANTS
Sections:
   
6-7.01   Definitions.
   
6-7.02   Disposal of litter.
   
6-7.03   Disposal of contaminants.
   
6-7.04   Enforcement.
Sec. 6-7.01.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Contaminant” shall mean sewage, sludge, cesspool or septic tank
effluent, an accumulation of human excreta, or liquid industrial waste.
   (b)   “Fill” shall mean deposits of soil, rock, or other irreducible
materials placed by man.
   (c)   “Garbage” shall mean all solid putrescible wastes and all solid animal
or vegetable refuse or residue which shall result from the preparation or care
for, or treatment of, foodstuffs intended to be used as food, or shall have
resulted from the preparation or handling of food for human consumption, or any
decayed or unsound meat, fish, fruit, or vegetables, or the excreta from
domestic animals.
   (d)   “Industrial waste” shall mean any and all liquid or solid waste
substances, not sewage, from any producing, manufacturing, or processing
operation of whatever nature.
   (e)   “Litter” shall mean and include garbage, rubbish, and refuse as
defined in this section, except that litter shall not include fill.
   (f)   “Person” shall mean any person, firm, association, organization,
partnership, joint venture, corporation, business trust, or company and any
officer or agent thereof.
   (g)   “Refuse” shall mean and include all types of, but not be restricted
to, putrescible or non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, garbage, grass clippings,
tree or shrub trimmings, wood, bedding, crockery, rubber tires, construction
and demolition waste, and similar waste materials, except sewage and liquid
industrial wastes.
   (h)   “Rubbish” shall mean solid non-putrescible wastes, such as unusable,
unwanted, or discarded material and debris resulting from normal community or
business activities, or materials which by their presence may injuriously
affect the health, safety, and comfort of persons and/or depreciate property
values in the vicinity thereof. (§ 1, Ord. 619, as amended by § 3, Ord. 903,
eff. February 12, 1981)
Sec. 6-7.02.   Disposal of litter.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or dump any
litter or allow any accumulation of litter to remain on any public or private
property within the unincorporated area of the County except as set forth in
this section.
   (b)   An occupant of property which is devoted entirely to commercial
agricultural purposes, including the feeding and raising of livestock for
dairying or poultry raising, may dispose on such property of his own refuse
from operations conducted on such property by burying the refuse at least 800
feet from the nearest building used for human habitation, but such occupant may
not permit any other person or agency to use his property for the disposal of
refuse unless the property is declared a disposal area by the Board.
   (c)   Litter may be placed, deposited, or dumped and may remain in the areas
designated as disposal areas by the Board, and the dumps maintained by the
Cities of Woodland, Davis, and Winters and by the County on November 5, 1969,
are hereby designated as such disposal areas. (§ 2, Ord. 619)
Sec. 6-7.03.   Disposal of contaminants.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, dump, or dispose of
any contaminant in the unincorporated area in the County except by means of a
private sewage disposal system or other acceptable means approved by the Health
Officer in the manner provided by law or in a public sanitary sewer or disposal
area designated by the Board. (§ 3, Ord. 619)
Sec. 6-7.04.   Enforcement.
   The Health Officer shall be the primary enforcement officer for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. To aid in such enforcement, the
Sheriff’s office shall periodically report to the Health Officer citations or
arrests made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in the course of normal
patrol activities. Employees of the County, members of agencies of the County,
and the personnel of other governmental agencies who discover violations of the
provisions of this chapter shall report to, and cooperate with, the Health
Officer in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (§ 5, Ord. 619)
Chapter 8
WATER QUALITY
Sections:
Article 1. Authority and Title
   
6-8.101   Authority.
   
6-8.102   Title.
Article 2. Purposes.
   
6-8.201   Purposes.
Article 3. Policies
   
6-8.301   Policies.
   
6-8.302   State regulations.
Article 4. Definitions
   
6-8.401   Scope.
   
6-8.401.5   Abandoned well.
   
6-8.402   Board.
   
6-8.403   Connection or service connection.
   
6-8.404   Contamination.
   
6-8.405   Domestic water supply.
   
6-8.406   Effluent.
   
6-8.407   Hazardous substance operation.
   
6-8.408   Inactive well.
   
6-8.409   Industrial liquid waste treatment system. (Repealed)
   
6-8.410   Liquid waste or wastewater.
   
6-8.411   Liquid waste discharge. (Repealed)
   
6-8.412   Person.
   
6-8.413   Pollution.
   
6-8.414   Public nuisance.
   
6-8.415   Recondition and/or reconstruct.
   
6-8.416   Seepage pit. (Repealed)
   
6-8.417   Septic tank. (Repealed)
   
6-8.418   Subdivision.
   
6-8.419   Test hole.
   
6-8.420   Wastewater system. (Repealed)
   
6-8.421   Water quality.
   
6-8.422   Well.
   
6-8.423   Public water supply system.
Article 5. Administration
   
6-8.501   Water Quality Control Board.
   
6-8.502   Duties and functions.
   
6-8.503   County Water Resources Board: Duties
   
6-8.504   Technical Advisory Committee.
   
6-8.505   Technical Advisory Committee: Duties.
   
6-8.506   Enforcement Officer.
   
6-8.507   Enforcement Officer: Duties.
   
6-8.508   Chief Building Inspector: Duties. (Repealed)
Article 6. Prohibitions
   
6-8.601   Domestic water supplies.
   
6-8.602   Wells.
   
6-8.603   Septic tanks. (Repealed)
   
6-8.604   Waste discharges.
   
6-8.605   Waste discharge standards: Violations of conditions and requirements.
   
6-8.606   Exceptions.
Article 7. Waste Discharge Standards
   
6-8.701   Applications for establishments.
   
6-8.702   Applications: Contents.
   
6-8.703   Applications: Procedure.
   
6-8.704   Applications: Processing Fees.
   
6-8.705   Public hearings: Establishment of standards.
   
6-8.706   Standards: Term.
Article 8. Permits
   
6-8.801   Permits: Applications.
   
6-8.802   Permits: Issuance.
   
6-8.802.1   Permits: Inspections.
   
6-8.802.2   Permits; Reports.
   
6-8.803   Permits: Form.
   
6-8.804   Application and Permits: Term; Expiration.
   
6-8.805   Permits: Fees.
   
6-8.806   Permits: Decision by Enforcement officer: Appeals.
   
6-8.807   Decisions of Enforcement Officer: Finality and validity.
   
6-8.808   Appeals: Procedure.
   
6-8.809   Appeals: Hearings and determinations.
   
6-8.810   Decisions of Board: Finality and validity.
   
6-8.811   Permits: Nontransferable.
   
6-8.812   Permits: Revocation.
   
6-8.813   Permits: Revocation: Petitions.
   
6-8.814   Permits: Revocation: Hearings and determinations.
   
6-8.815   Permits: Revocation: Cease and desist orders.
Article 9. Standards, Criteria, and Regulations for Public Water Supplies
   
6-8.901   Public water supply quality.
   
6-8.902   Water quality monitoring and records.
Article 10. Standards, Criteria, and Regulations for Wells
   
6-8.1001   Wells: Construction, reconditioning, reconstruction, and abandonment
standards.
   
6-8.1002   Wells: Unattended.
   
6-8.1003   Water supply wells: Construction.
   
6-8.1004   Water supply wells: Locations.
   
6-8.1005   Water supply wells: Spacing.
   
6-8.1006   Water supply wells: Casings.
   
6-8.1007   Water supply wells: Annular seals.
   
6-8.1008   Water supply wells: Depths of surface seals.
   
6-8.1009   Water supply wells: Surface construction.
   
6-8.1010   Water supply wells: Disinfection.
   
6-8.1011   Water supply wells: Abandonment.
   
6-8.1012   Wells: Exceptions from standards.
   
6-8.1013   Wells: Verification by Applicable Groundwater Sustainable Agency.
Article 11. Water Conservation
   
6-8.1101   Application.
   
6-8.1102   Level 1 drought response – Permanent water use restrictions.
   
6-8.1103   Level 2 drought response.
   
6-8.1104   Level 3 drought response.
   
6-8.1105   Level 4 drought response.
   
6-8.1106   Level 5 drought response.
   
6-8.1107   Level 6 drought response.
   
6-8.1108   Declaration of drought response.
   
6-8.1109   Additional conservation measures.
   
6-8.1110   Relief from compliance; Waiver.
   
6-8.1111   Enforcement; Violations.
Article 12. Cache Creek
   
6-8.1201   Findings.
   
6-8.1202   Prohibition against dumping, discharge, and the like: Scope of
application: Nuisances.
Article 13. Violations: Penalties
   
6-8.1301   Violations: Penalties.
Article 1.
Authority and Title
Sec. 6-8.101.   Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of the following laws:
   (a)   The Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Sections 13000 et seq.
of the Water Code of the State);
   (b)   22 California Administrative Code, Part II, Chapter 15 (commencing
with Section 64401); and
   (c)   22 California Administrative Code, Part II, Chapter 15 (commencing
with Section 64551). (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976, as amended by §§ 1
and 2, Ord. 811, eff. July 27, 1978; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July
14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.102.   Title.
   This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Water Quality Law
of the County of Yolo". (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by §
3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 2.
Purposes
Sec. 6-8.201.   Purposes.
   The purposes of this chapter are to adopt and declare objectives, criteria,
and procedures for the regulation of domestic water suppliesand wells in order
to assure high quality water supplies and to protect the quality of the surface
and ground waters of the County. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as
amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 3.
Policies
Sec. 6-8.301.   Policies.
   The Board of Supervisors declares that it is the policy of the County, by
licensing and regulating the activities, work, facilities, and projects
described in this chapter:
   (a)   To seek to maintain a high quality environment within the County; and
   (b)   To take all the action necessary to seek to maintain clean and safe
water. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff.
July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.302.   State regulations.
   It is the policy of the Board of Supervisors to regulate only those
activities, facilities, and projects described in this chapter which are not
appropriately regulated by the State Regional Water Quality Control Board or
other State entities and which are deemed to warrant more stringent regulations
due to particular conditions within the County.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall release any person from compliance
with the provisions of Article 3 of Chapter 10 of Division 7 of the Water Code
of the State or any successor thereto. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as
amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 4.
Definitions
Sec. 6-8.401.   Scope.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined in this
article. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.401.5.   Abandoned well.
   A well is considered “abandoned” when it has not been used for a period of
one year, unless the owner can demonstrate his intention to use the well again
for supplying water or another associated purpose (such as an observation well
or injection well). The well shall then be considered “inactive”. As evidence
of his intentions for continued use, the owner shall properly maintain the well
in such a way that:
   (a)   The well has no defects which will allow the impairment of quality of
water in the well or in the water-bearing formations penetrated;
   (b)   The well is covered such that the cover is watertight and cannot be
removed, except with the aid of equipment or the use of a tool;
   (c)   The well is marked so that it can be clearly seen; and
   (d)   The area surrounding the area is kept clear of brush or debris. If the
pump has been removed for repair or replacement, the well shall not be
considered “abandoned”. During the repair period, the well shall be adequately
covered to prevent injuries to people and to prevent the entrance of
undesirable water or foreign matter.
   Observation or test wells used in the investigation or management of
groundwater basins by governmental agencies or engineering or research
organizations are not considered "abandoned" so long as they are maintained for
such purpose. Such wells, however, shall be covered with an appropriate cap,
bearing the label "Observation Well", and the name of the agency or
organization, and shall be locked when measurements are not being made. When
such wells are no longer used for such purpose or for supplying water, they
shall be considered "abandoned". (§ 1, Ord. 1015, eff. August 15, 1985; as
amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.402.   Board.
   "Board" shall mean the Yolo County Water Quality Control Board. (§ 1, Ord.
765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.403.   Connection or service connection.
   (a)   Connection and service connection. "Connection" or "service
connection" shall mean the pipeline, device, or facility used for water
supplies from or to the public main, lateral, or facility into or from a
facility, building, structure, or place of human habitation, occupancy, or use.
   (b)   Equivalent number of service connections. For the purposes of this
chapter, the equivalent number of service connections shall be computed by
reference to the design capacity of the facility and converting this value to
the number of equivalent dwelling units. For any school or recreational,
industrial, or commercial facility, the equivalent number of service
connections shall be computed by determining the design capacity equivalent
population of the facility and dividing such number by three (3). (§ 1, Ord.
765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.404.   Contamination.
   "Contamination" shall mean an impairment of the quality of the waters of the
County to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health. (§ 1, Ord. 765,
eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.405.   Domestic water supply.
      "Domestic water supply" shall mean a source of water for drinking,
consumption, or domestic use by human beings. (§ 1 Ord. 765, eff. October 7,
1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.406.   Effluent.
   "Effluent" shall mean any liquid or semiliquid flowing out of any water or
wastewater treatment plant or facility. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976;
as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.407.   Hazardous substance operation.
   "Hazardous substance operation" shall mean the manufacture, formulation,
mixing, or transfer from one container to another of any substance or product
set forth in the most current Director's List of Hazardous Substances developed
by the Director of Industrial Relations of the State for which the manufacturer
or producer is required to prepare a Material Safety Data Sheet of the
substance or product pursuant to the Hazardous Substances Information and
Training Act (Chapter 2.5 of Part 1 of Division 5 of the Labor Code of the
State, commencing with Section 6360); provided, however, quantities of less
than 500 pounds, fifty-five (55) gallons, or 200 cubic feet in the gaseous
state during any thirty (30) day period shall not be included unless the Health
Officer has provided notice that he has lowered the weight or volume limits of
this exemption for a specific hazardous substance or product in response to
public health concerns. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976, as amended by §§
2 and 3, Ord. 1015, eff. August 15, 1985; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff.
July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.408.   Inactive well.
   "Inactive well" shall mean a well which satisfies the conditions set forth
in Section
6-8.401.5 of this article. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976, as amended by
§§ 4 and 5, Ord. 1015, eff. August 15, 1985; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff.
July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.409.   Industrial liquid waste treatment system.
(Repealed, Ord. 1470)
Sec. 6-8.410.   Liquid waste or wastewater.
   "Liquid waste" or "wastewater" shall mean any and all waste materials which
exist and are transportable in a liquid or slurry form, either treated or
untreated. "Liquid waste" or "wastewater" shall not include or mean storm
water, ground water, roof or yard drainage, or irrigation tailwater. (§ 1, Ord.
765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.411.   Liquid waste discharge.
(Repealed, Ord. 1470)
Sec. 6-8.412.   Person.
   "Person" shall mean any person, firm, association, organization,
partnership, joint venture, corporation, business trust, company, and any
officer or agent thereof, and any governmental agency, public body, special
district, district, the State, and any city, county, or governmental body,
including the United States of America. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976;
as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.413.   Pollution.
   "Pollution" shall mean an impairment or alteration of the quality, including
the potability and palatability, of waters of the County to a degree which
unreasonably affects the beneficial uses of such waters. "Pollution" may
include contamination. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3,
Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.414.   Public nuisance.
   “Public nuisance” shall mean anything which:
   (a)   Is injurious to health or is indecent or offensive to the senses or
any obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property; and
   (b)   Affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any
considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage
inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.
   “Public nuisance” shall include, but not be limited to, the following;
   (c)   Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children,
whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied
lot. This includes any abandoned wells or shafts; and
   (d)   Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as
determined by the Health Officer. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as
amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.415.   Recondition and/or reconstruct.
   "Recondition" and/or "reconstruct" shall mean the reworking of any well to
repair or modify in any way its physical construction. "Recondition" and/or
"reconstruct" shall not include changes in pumps or other production equipment.
(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July
14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.416.   Seepage pit.
(Repealed, Ord. 1470)
Sec. 6-8.417.   Septic tank.
(Repealed, Ord. 1470)
Sec. 6-8.418.   Subdivision.
   "Subdivision" shall mean a subdivision as defined by the Subdivision Map Act
of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord.
1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.419.   Test hole.
   "Test hole" shall mean an excavation constructed for the determination of
subsurface geologic or hydrologic information by seismic investigation, by
direct physical measurement, or by electric, nuclear, or other test means. (§
1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14,
2016)
Sec. 6-8.420.   Wastewater system.
(Repealed, Ord. 1470)
Sec. 6-8.421.   Water quality.
   "Water quality" shall mean the chemical, physical, biological,
bacteriological, radiological, and other properties and characteristics of the
water which affect its use. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by
§ 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.422.   Well.
   “Well” shall mean any artificial excavation constructed by any method for
the purpose of extracting liquid from, or injecting liquid into, the
underground. “Well” shall include the following:
   (a)   Water supply well. "Water supply well" shall mean a well constructed
for the extraction of ground water and shall include:
   (1)   Individual domestic wells which supply an individual residence or
duplex that produce less than two acre-feet per year for use on the same parcel
as the domestic well and are intended for such domestic, non-commercial uses
associated with a residential dwelling and related yard, garden and barnyard
uses, and small personal crops within the same parcel as the residential
dwelling; and
   (2)   Public wells which serve three (3) or more residences or a school,
employee housing facility, or commercial establishment and public supply system
wells as defined in Health & Safety Code section 116275;
   (3)   Community domestic wells which supply domestic water supply systems;
   (4)   Industrial wells which supply industry on an individual basis; and
   (5)   Irrigation wells which supply water for agricultural and landscape
uses.
   (b)   Observation well. “Observation well” shall mean a well constructed to
monitor or sample ground water conditions, such as water quality and water
level.
   (c)   Recharge or injection well. “Recharge or injection well” shall mean a
well constructed for the introduction of water into an aquifer to replenish the
ground water or otherwise contribute to ground water quantity or quality.
   (d)   Electrolytic protection well. "Electrolytic protection well" shall
mean a well constructed at least twenty-five (25') feet deep for the purposes
of installing facilities to electrically protect metal in contact with the
ground. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1579, eff. December 4, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.423.   Public water supply system.
   "Public water supply system" shall mean the utility serving five (5) or more
connections through an integrated piping system; five (5) or more residences or
dwelling units; a school; employee housing facility; a commercial or industrial
establishment; or any system serving more than five (5) equivalent service
connections. (§ 4, Ord. 811, eff. July 27, 1978, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1099,
eff. October 19, 1989; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 5.
Administration
Sec. 6-8.501.   Water Quality Control Board.
   The Board of Supervisors hereby declares and constitutes itself as the Yolo
County Water Quality Control Board. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as
amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.502.   Duties and functions.
   The duties and functions of the Board shall be:
   (a)   To hear appeals from the decisions and determinations of the
Enforcement Officer;
   (b)   To hear and determine petitions to revoke permits filed by the
Enforcement Officer; and
   (c)   To direct the enforcement of its rulings and determinations, and the
rulings and determinations of the enforcement agency, by appropriate legal
action. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.503.   County Water Resources Board: Duties.
   The County Water Resources Board, created by Article 19 of Chapter 2 of
Title 2 of this Code, shall have the following duties relative to this chapter:
   (a)   To advise the Water Quality Control Board as to all matters governed
by this chapter;
   (b)   To study, analyze, and report on proposed amendments and additions to
this chapter; and
   (c)   To seek, hear, and obtain comments from members of the public and from
public agencies on the formulation of rules, regulations, and standards. (§ 1,
Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14,
2016)
Sec. 6-8.504.   Technical Advisory Committee.
   A Technical Advisory Committee is hereby constituted, composed of the County
Chief of Environmental Health, the Director of Public Works, and the consultant
on water matters retained by the County. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976;
as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.505.   Technical Advisory Committee: Duties.
   The Technical Advisory Committee shall perform the following duties and
functions:
   (a)   Report and advise the Board and the Enforcement Officer, as requested,
as to technical matters related to all matters governed by this chapter; and
   (b)   Seek, hear, and obtain technical input from members of the public,
experts and consultants, and public agencies as to technical matters relative
to this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord.
1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.506.   Enforcement Officer.
   The Enforcement Officer established hereby, and referred to in this chapter,
shall be the Director of Environmental Health. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7,
1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.507.   Enforcement Officer: Duties.
   The duties and functions of the Enforcement Officer are:
   (a)   To receive applications and issue all the permits provided for in this
chapter, including the permits for public water supply systems and wells;
   (b)   To analyze and examine applications for all permits and entitlements
provided for in this chapter;
   (c)   To approve, deny, or approve upon conditions such permits upon written
forms approved by the Board;
   (d)   To file petitions with the Board to revoke permits;
   (e)   To investigate pollution and public nuisances and recommend the
initiation of abatement proceedings;
   (f)   To consult with the County Water Resources Board;
   (g)   To inspect, examine, and monitor the projects and activities regulated
by this chapter, including the inspection of the construction, reconstruction,
repair, abandonment, change in use, or operation of wells , excepting therefrom
the repair, maintenance, and replacement of pumps or pumping equipment; and
   (h)   To maintain all the necessary and appropriate office records
pertaining to the work, projects, and activities regulated by this chapter. (§
1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976, as amended by §§ 5 and 6, Ord. 811, eff.
July 27, 1978; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.508.   Chief Building Inspector: Duties.
(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; repealed by § 7, Ord. 811, eff. July 27,
1978)
Article 6.
Prohibitions
Sec. 6-8.601.   Domestic water supplies.
   (a)   No person shall supply water for domestic uses to two (2) or more
service connections without a valid permit to do so.
   (b)   No person shall so supply water in violation of the conditions of his
permit.
   (c)   No person shall make a material change in the source of domestic water
supply without first notifying the Enforcement Officer of such change.
   (d)   No person shall discontinue or abandon such a domestic water supply
without first notifying the Enforcement Officer of such discontinuance or
abandonment. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord.
1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.602.   Wells.
   (a)   No person shall construct, reconstruct, repair, or abandon any well or
test hole, except oil and gas wells, without a valid permit to do so.
   (b)   No person shall make a material change in the use of any well without
a valid permit to do so.
   (c)   No person shall construct, reconstruct, abandon, or materially change
the use of any well in violation of the conditions of the granted permit. (§ 1,
Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14,
2016)
Sec. 6-8.603.   Septic tanks.
(Repealed, Ord. 1470)
Sec. 6-8.604.   Waste discharges.
(Repealed, Ord. 1470)
Sec. 6-8.605.   Waste discharge standards: Violations of conditions and
requirements.
(Repealed, Ord. 1470)
Sec. 6-8.606.   Exceptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (a)   Persons holding valid and subsisting domestic water supply permits
from the State;
   (b)   Persons supplying water for domestic uses to a single-family or two
(2) dwelling units on the same parcel of real property;
   (c)   Persons supplying water to agriculturally-oriented dwellings, all of
which are located upon the same parcel of land and connected to the same water
supply source provided none of the dwellings or group of dwellings would meet
the criteria established by the Department of Housing and Community
Development, Division of Codes and Standards, as being an Employee Housing
Facility or Labor Camp;
   (d)   All water wells completed and in use on or before October 7, 1976,
unless there exists a public nuisance or a hazard to the public health, safety,
and welfare;
   (e)   The construction or reconstruction of a well may be undertaken by any
person without first applying for and receiving a grant of a permit in the
event of great urgency due to the sudden failure of such well, and provided the
work of the construction or reconstruction thereof is performed in compliance
with the standards and criteria of this chapter, and further provided an
application for any permit required by the provisions of this chapter is made
within three (3) working days after the commencement of such construction or
reconstruction;
   (f)   Wells drilled less than forty (40') feet in depth;
   (g)   Wells drilled into a side slope for slope stability control;
   (h)   Well points less than two (2") inches in diameter; and
   (i)   The location of wells installed for drainage, dewatering, or slope
stability. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976, as amended by § 8, Ord. 811,
eff. July 27, 1978; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 7.
Waste Discharge Standards
(Repealed, Ord. 1470)
Article 8.
Permits
Sec. 6-8.801.   Permits: Applications.
   All persons required to apply for and obtain a permit under the provisions
of this chapter shall prepare and file with the Enforcement Officer an
application on forms provided by the Enforcement Officer. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff.
October 7, 1976, as amended by § 9, Ord. 811, eff. July 27, 1978; as amended by
§ 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.802.   Permits: Issuance.
   (a)   The permits required by the provisions of this chapter shall be
granted, or be granted upon condition, if the applicant meets the standards for
the activity or project contained in or determined as set forth in this
chapter.
   Such permits shall be denied if the applicant does not meet or comply with
the standards contained in or determined as set forth in this chapter.
   (b)   Permits for wells shall require approval by the Enforcement Officer.
The Enforcement Officer shall deny applications for permits which do not meet
or comply with the standards contained in or determined as set forth in this
chapter.
   (c)   Where it is not reasonably possible to meet the standards of this
chapter, the Enforcement Officer may approve a permit based on a special
alternative design provided the special alternative design is not an
unreasonable hazard to health, and does not impair the integrity of the
neighborhood, and is not detrimental to the public health, safety, or general
welfare. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.802.1.   Permits: Inspections.
   All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall have compliance
inspections as follows:
   (a)   Public water supply systems. In addition to the regularly scheduled
water samples, water supply systems shall be inspected at least once each year
for compliance with the standards. Such inspections shall include the source of
water, storage facilities, the distribution system, the cross connection
control, and other aspects as required by this chapter.
   (b)   Sealed wells. In addition to plan-checking site inspections, all wells
required to be sealed shall be inspected immediately prior to and during the
placement of the surface seal and immediately following the placement of the
well in service.
   (c)   Other wells. Other wells shall be inspected as agreed to at the time
of the permit issuance and as specified on the permit.
   (d)   Concealing materials. Any concealing material which prevents an
inspection shall be removed for inspection, and replacement shall be at the
contractor's expense. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to call
for the inspections at the appropriate times.
   (e)   Fees. Fees shall be charged to the extent and as provided in Section
6-8.805 of this article. (§ 10, Ord. 811, eff. July 27, 1978, as amended by §
1, Ord. 814, eff. September 28, 1978, and § 6, Ord. 1015, eff. August 15, 1985;
as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.802.2.   Permits; Reports.
   (a)   Well completion reports; verification of pumping capacity for
irrigation wells. As required by section 13751 of the California Water Code,
which may be amended from time to time, every person who digs, bores, or drills
a well, abandons or destroys such a well, or deepens or reperforates such a
well; shall file a Well Completion Report of that well with the Department of
Water Resources and the Enforcement Officer within 60 days of the date of
completion.
   (b)   Well Pumping Capacity report. A well pumping report verifying the
pumping capacity of the irrigation/agricultural well after the pump is
installed and prior to production must be submitted to the Enforcement Officer.
(§ 2, Ord. 1579, eff. December 4, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.803.   Permits: Form.
   All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in a form prescribed by
the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.804.   Application and Permits: Term; Expiration.
   (a)   Permits to supply water for domestic uses shall be void immediately
upon the occurrence of a material change in the operation of the supply system.
   (b)   Each application submitted for a permit for the construction,
reconstruction, repair, abandonment, or change in use of a well shall expire
and become null and void within one (1) year of the date of submittal unless a
permit is issued as set forth in
6-8.804(c).
   (c)   Prior to the expiration of the application as provided under
6-8.804(b), the applicant holding an unexpired well application may apply for
an extension of time for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days.
No application shall be extended more than once.
   (d)   Permits for the construction, reconstruction, repair, abandonment, or
change in use of a well shall expire and become null and void if the work
authorized by such permit is not completed within two years after the issuance
date of such permit.
   (e)   Permits may be extended for up to two additional years provided that
no changes have been made or will be made to the original approved plans and
specifications. The extension request must be made prior to the permit
expiration date and the permit may only be extended one time.
   (f)   All well permit application and permit extensions authorized in this
Section
6-8.804 are subject to compliance with the well permitting procedures in effect
at the time the new permit is approved.
   (g)   Permits for the construction, reconstruction, repair, abandonment, or
change in use of a well shall be secured prior to the start of any work.
Failure to secure the permit prior to the start of the work shall result in the
permittee being assessed a penalty equal in cost to the permit fee (double fees
for permits). The only exception made shall be for emergency repairs, as set
forth in subsection (f) of Section
6-8.606 of Article 6 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976, as
amended by § 11, Ord. 811, eff. July 27, 1978; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1579, eff. December 4, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.805.   Permits: Fees.
   If the Board of Supervisors shall establish a schedule of fees by
resolution, permits or entitlements issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall only be issued upon the payment to the County of a nonrefundable fee in
the amount set by such resolution. Any such fee shall be due and payable upon
the submission of a request for an entitlement, an initial application, or an
application to renew a permit. No initial application for a permit, an
application to renew a permit, or a request for an entitlement shall be
accepted unless the filing fee, if required, is paid with the submission of the
application or with the request for an entitlement. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff.
October 7, 1976, as amended by § 12, Ord. 811, eff. July 27, 1978, and § 2,
Ord. 814, eff. September 28, 1978; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14,
2016)
Sec. 6-8.806.   Permits: Decision by Enforcement Officer: Appeals.
   All decisions, determinations, and actions of the Enforcement Officer as to
applications for permits may be appealed to the Planning Commission by any
aggrieved person pursuant to Section
8-2.225 of the Yolo County Code of Ordinances. A decision of an appeal to the
Planning Commission may be appealed to the Board of Supervisors in the same
manner. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1579, eff. December 4, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.807.   Decisions of Enforcement Officer: Finality and validity.
   The decision of the Enforcement Officer rendered pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter shall be final, unless appealed to the Planning Commission
within the time period established in Section
8-2.225 of the Yolo County Code of Ordinances. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7,
1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1579, eff. December 4, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.808.   Appeals: Procedure.
   Appeals from all orders, decisions, and determinations of the Enforcement
Officer shall be made in writing, and shall specify and set forth the grounds
for the appeal; and shall be filed by the appellant with the Clerk of the
Board. The Planning Commission shall set the matter for a hearing and give
notice of such hearing as provided in Section
8-2.225 of the Yolo County Code of Ordinances. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7,
1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1579, eff. December 4, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.809.   Appeals: Hearings and determinations.
   Permit appeals shall be heard and determined in accordance with Section 8-
2.225 of the Yolo County Code of Ordinances. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7,
1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1579, eff. December 4, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.810.   Decisions of Board: Finality and validity.
   Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul the
decision of the Planning Commission or the Board of Supervisors, if applicable,
of an appeal filed pursuant to this article, shall not be maintained by any
person, unless such action or proceeding is commenced and the service of the
summons effected within thirty (30) days after the date of the rendition in
writing of such decision. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by §
3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1579, eff. December
4, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.811.   Permits: Nontransferable.
   Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may not be transferred,
assigned, or set over by the permittee to any other person.
   All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall refer to and
be limited to the activity applied for at the site, location, or address
designated in such permit, and such activity may not be undertaken at any other
location. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.812.   Permits: Revocation.
   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the Planning
Commission
consistent with the procedures in Section
8-2.225 of the Yolo County Code of Ordinances upon a petition by the
Enforcement Officer if it finds that:
   (a)   The activity or project has caused or become a public nuisance; or
   (b)   The permittee has violated a condition of the permit; or
   (c)   Due to a change of circumstances and conditions at the site of the
activity or project, the continuance of the project is hazardous to the public
health, welfare, or safety; or
   (d)   The applicant for the permit made a material misrepresentation of fact
in his application. (§ 1, Ord 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3,
Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1579, eff. December 4,
2025)
Sec. 6-8.813.   Permits: Revocation: Petitions.
   A petition to revoke a permit shall be filed with the Clerk of the Board by
the Enforcement Officer, accompanied by a statement of the grounds or reasons
for such action.
   Upon the receipt of such a petition, the Clerk of the Board shall set the
matter for a public hearing and shall serve the permittee with a notice of the
hearing by certified mail, and a copy of such petition, no less than fifteen
(15) days prior to such hearing. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as
amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.814.   Permits: Revocation: Hearings and determinations.
   Upon hearing the petition of the Enforcement Officer and the response of the
permittee at such public hearing, the Board may revoke the permit if it finds
that any of the grounds set forth in Section 6-8.813 of this article exist or
have occurred. The Board shall deny the petition for revocation if it finds
that none of such grounds for revocation exist or have occurred. (§ 1, Ord.
765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.815.   Permits: Revocation: Cease and desist orders.
   An order of revocation may be accompanied by an order to cease and desist
from the continuance of the permitted activity. Such orders shall be in
writing, addressed to the permittee at his address given in the application,
and shall contain a factual statement of the reasons for the action. (§ 1, Ord.
765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 9.
Standards, Criteria, and Regulations for Public Water Supplies*
*   The title of Article 9, formerly entitled "Standards, Criteria, and
Regulations for Domestic Water Supplies", amended by Section 13, Ordinance No.
811, effective July 27, 1978.
Sec. 6-8.901.   Public water supply quality.
   The bacteriological, chemical, physical, and radiological quality of public
water supply systems shall be the same as those standards set by the State for
its regulation as set forth in 22 California Administrative Code, Division 4,
and in Section 6-8.101 of Article 1 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff.
October 7, 1976, as amended by § 14, Ord. 811, eff. July 27, 1978; as amended
by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.902.   Water quality monitoring and records.
   (a)   Bacteriological samples shall be taken at least twice each year for
all domestic water supplies.
   (b)   Chemical, physical, and trace element samples shall be taken once
during each time period in accordance with Table No. 2 set forth in this
section.
   (c)   Samples shall effectively monitor the entire system. When a system is
supplied by more than one source of water, each source of water shall be
sampled at frequencies pursuant to said Table No. 2.
   (d)   Distribution systems shall be sampled at the frequencies set forth in
said Table No. 2 to determine the quality of water delivered to the consumer.
Sampling points shall be chosen to monitor each area supplied by a different
source.
   (e)   The permit may contain conditions which require sampling for problem
constituents or more frequent sampling to evaluate new sources of supply,
treatment plant performance, repairs, complaints, and other considerations in
the supply of domestic water.
   (f)   Analyses of water samples shall be made by approved laboratories for
the constituents included in Section 6-8.901 of this article.
   (g)   Reports of analyses shall be made in writing to the water supplier who
shall retain the records of all such analyses for review by the Enforcement
Officer.
   (h)   Said Table No. 2 is set forth as follows:
TABLE NO. 2
Water Quality Monitoring Frequency
 
              Raw Water Sources       Distribution System
              Chemical Physical Trace Chemical Physical Trace
Ground water  5yrs.    5yrs.    5yrs. 5yrs.    6mos.    ------
Surface water 6mos.    6mos.    5yrs. 6mos.    6mos.    ------
 
(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July
14, 2016)
Article 10.
Standards, Criteria, and Regulations for Wells
Sec. 6-8.1001.   Wells: Construction, reconditioning, reconstruction, and
abandonment standards.
   All wells regulated by this chapter shall be constructed, reconstructed,
repaired, abandoned, or changed in use only in accordance with the standards
and criteria set forth in this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976;
as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.1002.   Wells: Unattended.
   Wells left unattended during or awaiting reconstruction, repair, or
abandonment shall be temporarily sealed to prevent the inflow of surface
materials or access from the surface. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as
amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.1003.   Water supply wells: Construction.
   No person required to be licensed in accordance with the provisions of the
Contractors License Law (Chapter 9 of Division 3 of the Business and
Professions Code of the State) shall be issued a permit unless he has a valid
contractor's license of the proper class issued in accordance with the
Contractors License Law. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976; as amended by §
3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.1004.   Water supply wells: Locations.
   (a)   All water supply wells shall be located a safe distance from potential
sources of contamination and pollution.
   (b)   No water supply well shall be located within the minimum distances
from the features specified in Table No. 3 set forth in Section
6-8.1005  of this article.
   (c)   No irrigation well shall be located within the minimum distances from
other wells specified in Table No. 4 set forth in Section
6-8.1005 of this article unless exempt from Table No. 4 as provided in Section
6-8.1005 of this article. The County requires minimum well separation distances
for ensuring proposed new irrigation wells or irrigation well alterations are
unlikely to interfere with the function and operation of nearby wells. Table
No. 4, below, presents these minimum required distances from nearby active
wells, excluding wells to be abandoned upon completion of the new replacement
well if applicable, according to the proposed well pumping capacity and
proposed well location in relation to Valley Floor or Upland areas. The minimum
well separation distances in Table No. 4 were developed with consideration of
the hydrogeologic and well characteristics within the County.
   (d)   The location of each water supply well for which an application is
made shall be approved by the Enforcement Officer. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October
7, 1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1579, eff. December 4, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.1005.   Water supply wells: Spacing.
   (a)   Table No. 3, referred to in Section
6-8.1004(b) of this article, is set forth as follows:
TABLE NO. 3
Water Supply Well Spacing (Feet)
 
               Individual     Public or
               Domestic Wells Community Domestic Irrigation Wells Other Wells
                              Wells
Septic tank or 50             150                50               100
sewer line
Leach field    100            150                100              100
Public road    ----           100                ----             50
right-of-way
Property lines ----           50                 ----             50
Animal or fowl
intense        100            100                100              100
confinement
Hazardous
substance      100            100                100              100
operations
 
   (b)   Table No. 4, referred to in Section
6-8.1004(c) of this article, is set forth as follows:
   TABLE NO. 4
   Irrigation Well Spacing (Feet) from Other Wells
Pumping Capacity (gallons per minute) Minimum Well Separation Distance (feet)
Irrigation Wells Within the Valley Floor Areas of the County
Pumping Capacity (gallons per minute) Minimum Well Separation Distance (feet)
Irrigation Wells Within the Valley Floor Areas of the County
<500                                  250
500-999                               500
1,000-1,499                           1,000
1,500-1,999                           2,000
<2,000                                Report Required
Irrigation Wells in the Upland Areas of the County
<15                                   500
15-99                                 1,000
<100                                  Report Required
 
   Note: For Delineation of Valley Floor Areas and Upland Areas, refer to Graph
1.
   Graph 1: Map of Groundwater Subbasins Overlapping Yolo County with
Delineation of Valley
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/de66ea921125bb6e72629087eec5bc9b667694bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10947.png]
 
For all irrigation wells, as defined in Section
6-8.422(a)(5) of this chapter, but excluding minor modifications to existing
irrigation wells, the applicant must submit a map and list of known active
wells within a radial distance equal to the minimum separation distance set
forth in
Table No. 4, plus 500 feet. The map should include the proposed well site with
known nearby active domestic, public supply, agricultural/irrigation,
industrial, or other groundwater production wells. Active wells include wells
recently operated (within last five years) as production wells and equipped
with an operational pumping and discharge assembly, or wells in the process of
being prepared to be operated. The table listing known nearby wells must
include the well type, latitude/longitude coordinates, distance from the
proposed well site (in feet), and Assessor’s Parcel Number (APN). Any wells
owned by the applicant should be indicated on the map and list of nearby wells.
The Enforcement Oficer will review the information on nearby wells provided by
the applicant in conjunction with additional review of available well location
information from the Division of Environmental Health’s database to confirm the
minimum well separation is satisfied. However, it is the responsibility of the
permit applicant to investigate and confirm the accuracy and completeness of
the list of nearby wells.
   (c)   Exceptions to Table No. 4 separation distance requirements. For
purposes of
Table No. 4 , an irrigation well does not include:
      (1)   Minor modifications. Minor modifications to existing irrigation
wells that do not increase the discharge rate for the well or significantly
alter the depth interval from which groundwater is extracted with the well.
Minor modifications may include activities such as installing casing liners,
patches, or other work although such work must not modify the well in a manner
that increases the total groundwater pumping capacity.
      (2)   Common ownership exception. Existing wells owned by the applicant
that are located on the same parcel as the proposed well or on a parcel
adjacent to the parcel with the proposed irrigation well are exempt from the
minimum well separation distance requirements set forth in
Table No. 4 .
      (3)   Irrigation wells supported by a hydrogeologist report as set forth
in Section
6-8.1012 of this article.
(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976, as amended by § 7, Ord. 1015, eff. August
15, 1985; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1579, eff. December 4, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.1006.   Water supply wells: Casings.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, all wells shall be cased
using casing materials and installation methods in accordance with Sections 12A
and B of California DWR Bulletin 74, Water Well Standards.
   (b)   The Enforcement Officer may approve, with the recommendation of the
Technical Advisory Committee, new casing materials which may be developed in
the future using new and improved technology.
   (c)   The uppermost perforations in casings shall not be above the depths
specified in Section 6-8.1008 of this article.
   (d)   Wells may be constructed with a permanent conductor or outer casing,
and, if so, there shall be at least two (2") inches of uniform annular space
between the conductor and the hole for wells requiring a suffice seal. The
inner, or production, casing may be of any size adequate for design production
rates. Perforations may be located in the inner casing or in a liner of smaller
diameter and suspended from the casing.
   (e)   Wells may be constructed with a single, or production, casing, and, if
so, there shall be at least two (2") inches of uniform annular space between
the casing and the hole for wells requiring a surface seal. Perforations may be
located in the casing below the surface seal or in a liner of smaller diameter
and hung from the casing. Excepted from this requirement is the cable tool
drilling method when the drive shoe annulus is sealed in accordance with
Section 6-8.1007 of this article. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976, as
amended by § 15, Ord. 811, eff. July 27, 1978; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.1007.   Water supply wells: Annular seals.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/de66ea921125bb6e72629087eec5bc9b667694bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-21.jpg]
 
   The annular space between the drilled hole and the outermost casing shall be
sealed to the depths specified in Section 6-8.1008 of this article as follows:
   (a)   Using neat cement, cement grout, or concrete with an aggregate size
not to exceed three-eighths (3/8") inch; or
   (b)   Using puddled clay mixed with clean materials supplied for preparing
clay-base mixtures; or
   (c)   Using bentonide when drying conditions are not present. When a
drilling method does not provide a two (2") inch annulus, the drive shoe
annulus shall be maintained full of bentonide slurry during the advancement of
the casing through the depth of the required seal. The surface seal shall be
maintained through the completion of the well.
   (d)   Such sealing materials shall be placed in one continuous operation
with the displacement from the bottom to the top of the interval to be sealed.
   (e)   Any well deeper than 1,000 feet and which penetrates two (2) or more
distinct aquifers shall have a minimum fifty (50') foot annular seal placed in
the confining materials between each two (2) aquifers. The installation of such
seals will be based on the interpretation of the well log by the Enforcement
Officer and the well driller or owner. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976, as
amended by § 16, Ord. 811, eff. July 27, 1978; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470,
eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.1008.   Water supply wells: Depths of surface seals.
   All wells regulated by this chapter shall be sealed to the following minimum
depths:
   Type of Well          Depth of Seal (Feet)
   Individual domestic         20
   Public or community domestic   50
   Irrigation            20
   Monitoring            20
   All other            40
   Notwithstanding the table set forth in this section, the Health Officer may
alter the required depth of the annular seal when adverse or special conditions
warrant. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976, as amended by § 8, Ord. 1015,
eff. August 15, 1985; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.1009.   Water supply wells: Surface construction.
   All wells governed and regulated by this chapter shall be constructed only
in accordance with the following standards and criteria:
   (a)   All wells shall be constructed with a concrete base, at least three
(3') feet in diameter or three (3') feet square and six (6") inches in
thickness, poured to a finished grade at least three (3") inches above the
ground surface, with the top of the casing extending at least one-half (1/2")
inch through the concrete base.
   (b)   Domestic water supply wells shall be constructed with no less than an
eighteen (18") inch pump pedestal and a casing vent.
   (c)   The construction of well pits shall be prohibited.
   (d)   All openings, other than required vents, at the top of a well shall be
capped or equipped with watertight seals.
   (e)   All vents shall be open, with the opening facing ground level, and
screened.
   (f)   If a pump motor is to be mounted over the well, a watertight seal
shall be placed between the pump head and base, or between the pump head and
production casing.
   (g)   If an offset surface pump or submersible pump is used, or if any wires
or piping enter the well, watertight seals shall be placed around such
openings.
   (h)   All pumping equipment shall be installed with protective devices to
effectively prevent the entrance of foreign matter for back siphonage into the
well casing. A properly designed air gap may be considered an acceptable
protective device for agricultural wells. No person shall install any equipment
or mechanism, or use any water-treating chemical or substance, if it is found
that such equipment, mechanism, chemical, or substance may cause pollution or
contamination of the groundwater supply. Such equipment or mechanism may be
permitted only equipped with an approved backflow prevention device. (§ 1, Ord.
765, eff. October 7, 1976, as amended by § 9, Ord. 1015, eff. August 15, 1985;
as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.1010.   Water supply wells: Disinfection.
   The following types of wells shall be disinfected using the conventional and
acceptable methods at the time of the construction, reconstruction, or
reconditioning and prior to the well being used or placed in service:
   (a)   Water supply wells, except irrigation wells; and
   (b)   Recharge and injection wells.
   All gravel added to any well shall be adequately disinfected prior to, or
during, placement in the well.
   Water used for the drilling of domestic water supply wells shall be secured
from a potable source or another groundwater well. For irrigation wells, the
water used for drilling shall be clean water, not obviously polluted, and shall
be of a quality which is adequate to support marine life, especially fish. (§
1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7, 1976, as amended by § 17, Ord. 811, eff. July 27,
1978; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.1011.   Water supply wells: Abandonment.
   Abandoned wells shall be destroyed within 120 days after notification by the
Enforcement Officer that it has been established that the well is abandoned and
directing that the well be destroyed. The destruction shall be done by the
owner thereof in the following manner:
   (a)   The well shall be filled with silt, clay, neat cement, cement grout,
or concrete to approximately twenty (20') feet from the surface. For gravel
envelope wells, additional measures for sealing may be directed where the
commingling of water from the various strata may be a problem.
   (b)   Neat cement, cement grout, or concrete shall be placed from
approximately twenty (20') feet to within ten (10') feet, and not higher than
three (3') feet, from the surface.
   (c)   The top three (3') feet to ten (10') feet of the well shall be cut off
and a plate welded or sealed on the stub.
   (d)   The excavation shall be backfilled with native material. (§ 1, Ord.
765, eff. October 7, 1976, as amended by § 10, Ord. 1015, eff. August 15, 1985;
as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.1012.   Wells: Exceptions from standards.
   All wells shall be constructed, reconstructed, repaired, or abandoned in
accordance with the standards and criteria set forth in this article and the
following exceptions:
   (a)   Exploratory wells and test holes. Unless the owner or constructor
completes or changes in use the exploratory well or test hole to another type
of well:
   (1)   The location or site of the exploratory well shall not be limited.
   (2)   Casings shall not be required.
   (3)   Subsurface seals shall not be required.
   (4)   Exploratory wells and test holes shall be abandoned within fourteen
(14) days after the completion of the test work.
   (b)   Recharge or injection wells. Samples of water shall be taken and
compared to the proposed recharge or injection water for compatibility by the
Enforcement Officer.
   (c)   Electrolytic protection wells.
   (1)   A vent pipe may be substituted for casing.
   (2)   Failed electrolytic protection wells shall be abandoned within 120
days after notification by the Enforcement Officer that it has been established
that the well has failed and directing that the well be abandoned.
   (d)   Drainage, dewatering, and slope stability wells. Licensed drillers
shall not be required for the construction of drainage, dewatering, and slope
stability wells.
   (e)   Irrigation wells supported by hydrogeologist report. Irrigation wells
are not required to comply with the well spacing requirements in
Table No. 4  set forth in Section
6-8.1005 of this article if the application is supported by a report prepared
by a licensed professional geologist or hydrogeologist approved by the
Enforcement Officer. Such a report must include a map and list of known wells
within the appropriate separation distance demonstrated in the report, plus an
additional 500 feet. The report must also include technical analyses and
justification for why the proposed separation distance is unlikely to impact
the function and operation of nearby wells. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October 7,
1976; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1579, eff. December 4, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.1013.   Wells: Verification by Applicable Groundwater Sustainability
Agency.
   (a)   The Groundwater Sustainability Agencies (GSA) within each of the three
subbasins in Yolo County are responsible for implementing the groundwater
sustainability plans (GSP) covering their jurisdiction and managing groundwater
in a manner that is consistent with the GSP. The GSPs have defined sustainable
management criteria including minimum thresholds, measurable objectives, and
undesirable results for all applicable sustainability indicators. The GSAs in
the three subbasins have the authority and responsibility to ensure groundwater
management is sustainable in the subbasins and undesirable results are avoided.
Accordingly, the Enforcement Officer will submit all irrigation well permit
applications to the applicable GSA for review and verification in accordance
with the review procedures of the pertinent GSA to determine whether the
proposed well is consistent with the adopted GSP. Applicants must comply with
all applicable verification requirements of the applicable GSA. Most of the
County is within the Yolo Subbasin and well permits in the Yolo Subbasin will
be referred to the YSGA for evaluation. If the applicable GSA includes best
management or other proposed or recommended conditions for the well as part of
its written verification, the Enforcement Office shall include those items as
required conditions of the irrigation well permit. No irrigation well shall be
approved without written verification from the applicable GSA.
   (b)   Exceptions. The GSA verification requirements shall only apply to new
irrigation wells as defined in Section
6-8.422(a)(5) of this chapter and shall exclude other water supply wells and
minor modifications of irrigation wells exempt from the well separation
distances set forth in Table No. 4 of Section
6-8.1005 of this article. (§ 2, Ord. 1579, eff. December 4, 2025)
Article 11.
Water Conservation
Sec. 6-8.1101.   Application.
   The provisions of this Article shall apply to all water customers of the
County Service Areas (CSA) listed below, except to the extent a CSA is subject
to specific water regulations or conservation measures of a retail water
supplier that conflict with this Article, in which case the regulations of the
retail water supplier shall control.
   El Macero CSA No. 1
   North Davis Meadows CSA No. 10
   Willowbank CSA No. 12
   Wild Wings CSA No. 15
(Ord. 1540, eff. September 14, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.1102.   Level 1 drought response – Permanent water use restrictions.
   (a)   Landscape water use restrictions.
   (1)   No potable water shall be applied to outdoor landscapes in a manner
that causes more than incidental runoff, such as minimal overspray from
sprinklers that escapes the area of intended use, so that water flows onto
adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, private or public walkways, roadways,
parking lots, or structures.
   (2)   No landscape watering between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except with a
hand-held container or hose with a shut-off nozzle, or for very short periods
when adjusting a sprinkler system. This restriction does not apply to landscape
irrigation using a low volume irrigation system (such as drip irrigation and
micro-irrigation) designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near
the root zone of plants. This includes, but is not limited to, properly
functioning drip irrigation systems and soaker hoses.
   (3)   No irrigation of turf and/or ornamental landscapes during and within
forty-eight hours after measurable rainfall of at least one-fourth of one inch
of rain in a given area of the CSA.
   (4)   No irrigation with potable water of landscapes outside of homes and
buildings constructed after June 2015 in any manner inconsistent with
regulations or other requirements established by the California Building
Standards Commission, the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (23
California Code of Regulations §§ 490 et seq.), or Yolo County Code, Title 8,
Chapter 3 (Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance), whichever is more
restrictive.
   (5)   No irrigation of turf on public street medians or publicly owned and
maintained landscaped areas between the street and sidewalk, except where:
   (A)   The turf serves a community or neighborhood function, including, but
not limited to, recreational uses and civic or community events; or
   (B)   The turf is irrigated incidentally by an irrigation system, the
primary purpose of which is the irrigation of trees; or
   (C)   The turf is irrigated with recycled or other nonpotable water.
   (b)   Commercial water use restrictions.
   (1)   Eating or drinking establishments, including, but not limited to,
restaurants, cafes, cafeterias, bars, clubhouses or other public places where
food or drink are served and/or purchased shall only serve drinking water upon
patron request.
   (2)   Restaurants are required to use a pre-rinse spray valve when washing
dishes.
   (c)   Other water use restrictions.
   (1)   A hose that dispenses potable water to wash a motor vehicle shall be
fitted with a shut-off nozzle or device attached to it that causes it to cease
dispensing water immediately when not in use.
   (2)   Potable water shall not be applied directly to driveways and sidewalks
unless required for health and safety purposes.
   (3)   Potable water shall not be used in an ornamental fountain or other
decorative water feature, except where the water is part of a recirculating
system.
   (4)   All property owners must fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions in water
fixtures or water-using or distributing devices to which city water is
connected when they find them, or within seventy- two (72) hours of receiving a
notice from the County.
   (d)   HOAs. Homeowners Associations (HOAs) are strongly encouraged to adopt
and enforce water use restrictions in their respective rules and regulations.
(Ord. 1540, eff. September 14, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.1103.   Level 2 drought response.
   The objective of a Level 2 Drought Response is to reduce water usage by 20%
from the normal demand level. During a Level 2 Drought Response condition, all
persons shall comply with Level 1 Drought Response water conservation practices
except when they are replaced by more restrictive conditions imposed by this
section and shall also comply with the following additional mandatory
conservation measures:
   (a)   Limit residential and commercial landscape irrigation to no more than
three assigned days per week on a schedule established by the County.
   (b)   Limit lawn watering and landscape irrigation using sprinklers to no
more than twelve (12) minutes per watering station per day. This provision does
not apply to landscape irrigation systems using water efficient devices,
including but not limited to: weather based controllers, drip/ micro-irrigation
systems and stream rotor sprinklers.
   (c)   For landscaped areas, including trees and shrubs located on
residential and commercial properties, not irrigated by a landscape irrigation
system, water by using a bucket, hand-held hose with positive shut-off nozzle,
or low-volume non-spray irrigation.
   (d)   Stop washing vehicles except at commercial carwashes that re-circulate
water, or by high pressure/low volume wash systems.
(Ord. 1540, eff. September 14, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.1104.   Level 3 drought response.
   The objective of a Level 3 Drought Response is to reduce water usage by 30%
from the normal demand level. During a Level 3 Drought Response condition, all
persons using shall comply with Level 1 and Level 2 Drought Response water
conservation practices except when they are replaced by more restrictive
conditions imposed by this section and shall also comply with the following
additional mandatory conservation measures:
   (a)   Limit landscape irrigation to no more than two assigned days per week
on a schedule established by the Director or designee and posted by the County.
   (b)   New or expanded landscaping is limited to drought tolerant trees,
shrubs, and ground cover. The installation of new turf or hydroseed is
prohibited.
   (c)   Stop filling or re-filling ornamental lakes or ponds, except to the
extent needed to sustain aquatic life, provided that such animals are of
significant value.
   (d)   Repair all leaks within forty-eight (48) hours of notification by the
County unless other arrangements are made with the Director.
(Ord. 1540, eff. September 14, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.1105.   Level 4 drought response.
   The objective of a Level 4 Drought Response is to reduce water usage by 40%
from the normal demand level. During a Level 4 Drought Response condition, all
persons shall comply with Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 Drought Response
conditions, except when they are replaced by more restrictive conditions
imposed by this section, and shall also comply with the following additional
mandatory conservation measures:
   (a)   All landscape irrigation is prohibited except for the irrigation of
trees or drought tolerant plantings.
   (b)   Pools and water storage tanks shall not be emptied or filled using
potable water supplied by the County unless required for public health and
safety purposes.
   (c)   Repair all leaks within twenty-four (24) hours of notification by the
County unless other arrangements are made with the Director.
(Ord. 1540, eff. September 14, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.1106.   Level 5 drought response.
   The objective of a Level 5 Drought Response is to reduce water usage by 50%
from the normal demand level. During a Level 5 Drought Response condition, all
persons shall comply with Level 1, Level 2, Level 3, and Level 4 Drought
Response conditions, except when they are replaced by more restrictive
conditions imposed by this section, and shall also comply with the following
additional mandatory conservation measures:
   (a)   No new permits for pools will be issued.
   (b)   No new landscape installations or renovations will be permitted.
(Ord. 1540, eff. September 14, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.1107.   Level 6 drought response.
   The objective of a Level 6 Drought Response is to reduce water usage by more
than 50% from the normal demand level. During a Level 6 Drought Response
condition, all persons shall comply with Level 1, Level 2, Level 3, Level 4,
and Level 5 Drought Response conditions, except when they are replaced by more
restrictive conditions imposed by this section, and shall also comply with the
following additional mandatory conservation measures:
   (a)   Stop all landscape irrigation.
   (b)   The landscape restriction shall not apply to the following categories
of use unless the County has determined that recycled water is available and
may be lawfully applied to the use.
   (1)   Maintenance of existing landscaping necessary for fire protection as
specified by the Fire Marshal of the local fire protection agency having
jurisdiction over the property to be irrigated;
   (2)   Maintenance of existing landscaping for erosion control;
   (3)   Maintenance of plant materials identified to be rare or essential to
the well being of rare animals;
   (4)   Maintenance of landscaping within active public parks and playing
fields, day care centers, school grounds, cemeteries, and golf course greens,
provided that such irrigation does not exceed two (2) days per week according
to the schedule established under section 6(b)(1);
   (5)   Watering of livestock; and
   (6)   Public works projects and actively irrigated environmental mitigation
projects.
(Ord. 1540, eff. September 14, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.1108.   Declaration of drought response.
   (a)   The Director shall monitor water supply and conservation data and
shall regularly report his/her findings to the Board of Supervisors to
recommend a Level 2 or higher Drought Response Level. The Board of Supervisors
may declare a Drought Conservation Level by resolution adopted at a regular or
special meeting of the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors shall declare the existence of a Level 5 or
higher Drought Response Level pursuant to Water Code section 350 et seq. (water
shortage emergency) at a noticed public meeting unless an immediate emergency,
as set forth in Water Code section 351, exists.
   (c)   Within ten (10) days following adoption of a resolution declaring a
Level 2 or higher Drought Response, a copy of the resolution shall be published
pursuant to Government Code section 6061 in a newspaper of general circulation
and shall be effective on the date of publication.
   (d)   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the authority of the Board
of Supervisors or the Director of Emergency Services to declare a local
emergency and to exercise the emergency powers conferred by Government Code
section 8630 et seq. and Chapter 1 of Title 4 of the Yolo County Code.
(Ord. 1540, eff. September 14, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.1109.   Additional conservation measures.
   The Board of Supervisors may adopt additional regulations or mandatory water
use restrictions at each Drought Response Level as it deems necessary to ensure
the continued availability of water for human consumption, sanitation, and fire
protection or as may be required by federal, state, or other local water
restrictions.
(Ord. 1540, eff. September 14, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.1110.   Relief from compliance; Waiver.
   (a)   Undue or Disproportional Hardship. If, due to unique circumstances, a
specific requirement of this water conservation ordinance would result in undue
hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that
is disproportionate to the impacts to the water users generally or to similar
property or classes of water users, then the person may apply for a waiver to
the requirements as provided in this section.
   (b)   Establishment of Waiver. A waiver may be granted only where it is
found and determined that failure to grant a waiver would:
   (1)   Cause an unnecessary and undue hardship on applicant or the public,
including but not limited to, the substantial loss of trees or landscaped areas
installed or renovated prior to the implementation of a Drought Response level
or proclamation of a drought emergency additional watering is required to plant
and maintain those landscaped areas for a limited amount of time; or
   (2)   Cause an emergency condition affecting the health, sanitation, fire
protection or safety of the applicant or the public.
   If such a determination is made, the County will provide the customer with
an allowable watering schedule, which will include an allocated increase in
water use, and when such watering schedule exception will expire. Any violation
of the schedule will be punishable as set forth in this article. Approval of
establishment waivers will be based on current water conservation targets, the
customer’s ability to provide alternative means of providing comparable water
conservation, and the County’s ability to meet those targets.
   (c)   Application. A person wishing to receive a waiver pursuant to this
section must submit a written request/application to the Community Service
Director or the Director’s designee, which should include a statement
describing the reasons for the request, a detailed watering schedule, duration
of waiver, and any other relevant information to support the request, including
but not limited to any photographs, drawings, or maps.
   (d)   Written Finding. The waiver may be granted or conditionally granted
only upon a written finding of the existence of unique circumstances and facts
demonstrating an undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon
which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users
generally or to similar property or classes of water use due to specific and
unique circumstances of the user or the user’s property. The findings must also
include a determination that, based on the information in the request/
application and any other relevant information, a waiver does not constitute a
grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other
residents and businesses.
   (e)   Approval Authority. The Community Services Director or authorized
delegate of the County must act on any completed application no later than
fifteen (15) business days after submittal. The County may request a site
visit, if needed, to verify or collect any missing information needed to make
the final decision. The Community Services Director or authorized delegate may
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the waiver request. The applicant
requesting the waiver must be promptly notified in writing of any action taken.
The decision of the Community Services Director or authorized delegate is
final.
(Ord. 1540, eff. September 14, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.1111.   Enforcement; Violations.
   (a)   Violations of this Article shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to
the following penalties:
   (1)   Each violation of this ordinance may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than thirty (30)
days or by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or by both as provided in Water Code
section 377.
   (2)   Each day that a violation of this ordinance occurs is a separate
offense.
   (b)   Public Nuisance. Any violation of this Article is hereby declared a
public nuisance and may be subject to administrative citations with fines up to
$1,000 per violation per day and abated pursuant to Chapter 5 (Code
Enforcement) of Title 1 of the Yolo County Code.
(Ord. 1540, eff. September 14, 2021)
Article 12.
Cache Creek
Sec. 6-8.1201.   Findings.
   The Board of Supervisors finds and declares that the people of the County
have a primary interest in the control and utilization of the waters of Cache
Creek, which is an invaluable and irreplaceable resource of the County for,
inter alia, agricultural, recreational, and domestic uses, and that the quality
of the waters of Cache Creek shall be protected for the use and enjoyment by
the people of the County. The Board of Supervisors further finds and declares
that activities and factors, both within and outside the County, which may
affect the quality of the waters of Cache Creek within the County shall be
regulated to attain the highest water quality which is reasonable, considering
all demands being made and to be made on those waters, and the total values
involved, beneficial and detrimental, economic and social, tangible and
intangible. The Board of Supervisors further finds and declares that the
health, safety, and welfare of the County require that the County exercise its
full power and jurisdiction to protect the quality of the waters of Cache Creek
within the County from degradation originating inside or outside the boundaries
of the County. (§ 2, Urgency Ord. 1052, eff. April 7, 1987; as amended by § 3,
Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-8.1202.   Prohibition against dumping, discharge, and the like: Scope of
application: Nuisances.
   (a)   Any other provision of this Code notwithstanding, no person shall
deposit or discharge, or cause to be deposited or discharged, any sewage,
industrial waste, or effluent, or treated sewage, industrial waste, or
effluent, directly or indirectly (including, but not limited to, percolation)
in or upon Cache Creek or any creek, stream, river, or other defined
watercourse draining into the waters of Cache Creek.
   (b)   The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall apply without
limitation to all persons and activities within and/or outside the County to
the extent that such activities affect the waters of Cache Creek within the
unincorporated territory of the County.
   (c)   In addition to any other penalties and remedies provided by law, a
violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a nuisance,
actionable as such. (§ 2, Urgency Ord. 1052, eff. April 7, 1987; as amended by
§ 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 13.
Violations: Penalties
Sec. 6-8.1301.   Violations: Penalties.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of
not more than Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or imprisonment in
the County Jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day during any portion of which a violation of this chapter is
committed, continued, or permitted by such person. (§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. October
7, 1976, as renumbered by § 1, Urgency Ord. 1052, eff. April 7, 1987; as
amended by § 3, Ord. 1470, eff. July 14, 2016)
Chapter 9
PUBLIC HEALTH PERMITS
Sections:
Article 1. Authority and Purpose
   
6-9.101   Title.
   
6-9.102   Authority.
   
6-9.103   Findings.
   
6-9.104   Purpose.
   
6-9.105   Application.
Article 2. Definitions
   
6-9.201   Scope.
   
6-9.202   Restaurant.
   
6-9.203   Retail food production and marketing establishment.
   
6-9.204   Food processing establishment. (Repealed).
   
6-9.205   Mobile food preparation unit.
   
6-9.206   Itinerant restaurant.
   
6-9.207   Vending machine.
   
6-9.208   Food vehicle.
   
6-9.209   Roadside stand.
   
6-9.210   Public swimming pool.
   
6-9.211   Public water system.
   
6-9.212   Injection well.
Article 3. Prohibitions
   
6-9.301   Permits: Required.
   
6-9.302   Violations of conditions.
   
6-9.303   Permits: Changes in conditions.
   
6-9.304   Permits: Revoked: Effect.
Article 4. Permits
   
6-9.401   Applications.
   
6-9.402   Applications: Investigations: Issuance: Denial.
   
6-9.403   Form.
   
6-9.404   Terms.
   
6-9.405   Applications: Fees.
   
6-9.406   Applications: Appeals.
   
6-9.407   Applications: Decisions: Finality.
   
6-9.408   Applications: Decisions: Appeals: Procedure.
   
6-9.409   Applications: Decisions: Appeals: Hearings: Determinations.
   
6-9.410   Nontransferability.
   
6-9.411   Revocation.
   
6-9.412   Revocation: Petitions.
   
6-9.413   Revocation: Hearings: Determinations.
Article 5. Standards
   
6-9.501   Scope.
   
6-9.502   Standards.
   
6-9.503   Restaurants. (Repealed).
   
6-9.504   Retail food production and marketing establishments. (Repealed).
   
6-9.505   Food processing establishments. (Repealed).
   
6-9.506   Mobile food preparation units. (Repealed).
   
6-9.507   Itinerant restaurants. (Repealed).
   
6-9.508   Vending machines. (Repealed).
   
6-9.509   Vending machine and vehicle identification.
   
6-9.510   Food vehicles. (Repealed).
   
6-9.511   Roadside stands. (Repealed).
   
6-9.512   Public swimming pools.
   
6-9.513   Public water systems.
   
6-9.514   Injection wells.
   
6-9.515   Food crop growing and harvesting operations.
   
6-9.516   Infectious waste.
Article 6. Violations: Penalties
   
6-9.601   Violations: Penalties.
Article 1.
Authority and Purpose
Sec. 6-9.101.   Title.
   This chapter may be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Public
Health Permit Law of the County of Yolo”. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25,
1979)
Sec. 6-9.102.   Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Health
and Safety, Public Resources, and Water Codes of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 858,
eff. October 25, 1979, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1074, eff. May 12, 1988)
Sec. 6-9.103.   Findings.
   The Board hereby determines, pursuant to Section 510 of the Health and
Safety Code of the State, that the expense of the Health Officer in the
enforcement of statutes, orders, quarantines, rules, or regulations prescribed
by State officers or departments relating to the public health, which either
require or authorize the Health Officer to perform specified acts, are not met
by any fees prescribed by the State. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.104.   Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to authorize the prescription of such fees
as will pay the reasonable expenses of the Health Officer incurred in such
enforcement as to the establishments, businesses, or activities for which a
public health permit is required by this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October
25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.105.   Application.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply within any city in the County
when the governing body thereof consents to County health administration for
that city pursuant to Section 476 of the Health and Safety Code of the State,
and the schedule of fees authorized by this chapter shall be applicable in the
area in which the Health Officer enforces any statute, order, quarantine, rule,
or regulation prescribed by a State Health Officer or department relating to
public health. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Article 2.
Definitions
Sec. 6-9.201.   Scope.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as set
forth in this article. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.202.   Restaurant.
   “Restaurant” shall mean any restaurant as defined by Section 28522 of the
Health and Safety Code of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.203.   Retail food production and marketing establishment.
   “Retail food production and marketing establishment” shall mean any such
establishment as defined by Section 28802 of the Health and Safety Code of the
State. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.204.   Food Processing establishment.
(§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979; repealed by Ord. 1099, eff. October 19,
1989)
Sec. 6-9.205.   Mobile food preparation unit.
   “Mobile food preparation unit” shall mean that term as defined by subsection
(a)of Section 13601 of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code. (§ 1,
Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.206.   Itinerant restaurant.
   “Itinerant restaurant” shall mean that term as defined by Section 28523 of
the Health and Safety Code of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.207.   Vending machine.
   “Vending machine” shall mean that term as defined by Section 28525 of the
Health and Safety Code of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.208. Food vehicle.
   “Food vehicle” shall mean any vehicle as defined by Section 28524 of the
Health and Safety Code of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.209.   Roadside stand.
   “Roadside stand” shall mean that term as defined by subsection (k)of Section
13650 of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff.
October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.210.   Public swimming pool.
   “Public swimming pool” shall mean that term as defined by Section 24100 of
the Health and Safety Code of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.211.   Public water system.
   “Public water system” shall mean that term as defined by subsection (e)of
Section 4010.1 of the Health and Safety Code of the State and by subsection
(b)of Section 64411 of Title 22 of the California Administrative Code. (§ 1,
Ord. 890, eff. September 18, 1980)
Sec. 6-9.212.   Injection well.
   "Injection well" shall mean a Class II injection well as defined in Title 8
of this Code. (§ 4, Ord. 1074, eff. May 12, 1988)
Article 3.
Prohibitions.
Sec. 6-9.301.   Permits: Required.
   No person shall maintain any of the following establishments, businesses, or
activities without a valid public health permit to do so:
   (a)   Public swimming pools;
   (b)   Public water systems with fewer than 200 service connections;
   (c)   Food crop growing and harvesting operations;
   (d)   Infectious waste. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979, as amended by
§ 2, Ord. 890, eff. September 18, 1980, § 5, Ord. 1074, eff. May 12, 1988, and
§ 2, Ord. 1099, eff. October 19, 1989)
Sec. 6-9.302.   Violations of conditions.
   No person shall maintain any of the establishments, businesses, or
activities listed in Section
6-9.301 of this article in violation of the conditions of a public health
permit. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.303.   Permits: Changes in conditions.
   No person shall make a material change in any establishment, business, or
activity set forth in Section
6-9.301 of this article without making an application for a new public health
permit. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.304.   Permits: Revoked: Effect.
   No person shall maintain any of the establishments, businesses, or
activities listed in Section
6-9.301 of this article with a revoked public health permit. (§ 1, Ord. 858,
eff. October 25, 1979)
Article 4.
Permits
Sec. 6-9.401.   Applications.
   Any person required to apply for and obtain a permit under the provisions of
this chapter shall prepare and submit to the Health Officer an application for
such permit on forms provided for such purpose by the County. (§ 1, Ord. 858,
eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.402.   Applications: Investigations: Issuance: Denial.
   The Health Officer shall cause an investigation to be made of the facts
stated in the application and of the establishment, business, or activity for
which the application is made. If the Health Officer finds that the applicant
is in compliance with the standards specified by this chapter, the Health
Officer shall order the issuance of the public health permit. If he finds that
compliance with such standards can be obtained by the applicant, the Health
Officer may issue a permit subject to reasonable conditions. If he finds that
the applicant cannot comply with the standards specified by this chapter the
Health Officer shall deny the permit. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.403.   Form.
   All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in the form prescribed
by the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.404.   Terms.
   The term of a public health permit shall be one year. Every public health
permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall terminate at the
expiration of one year after the date of issuance. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October
25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.405.   Applications: Fees.
   Each application shall be accompanied by the fees prescribed by resolution
of the Board. Such fees shall in no event exceed the actual cost to the County
in carrying out the purposes of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25,
1979, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1074, eff. May 12, 1988)
Sec. 6-9.406.   Applications: Appeals.
   All decisions, determinations, and actions of the Health Officer as to
applications for public health permits may be appealed by the applicant to the
Board. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.407.   Applications: Decisions: Finality.
   The decision of the Health Officer rendered pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be final, unless appealed to the Board within thirty (30)
days after such decision is rendered in writing, and notice of the decision is
given to the applicant by certified mail. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25,
1979)
Sec. 6-9.408.   Applications: Decisions: Appeals: Procedure.
   Appeals from decisions of the Health Officer shall be made in writing, and
shall specify and set forth the grounds for the appeal, and shall be filed by
the appellant with the Clerk of the Board. The Board shall set the matter for a
hearing no later than thirty (30) days after such filing and shall give the
appellant and the Health Officer no less than fifteen (15) days’ written notice
of such date of hearing. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.409.   Applications: Decisions: Appeals: Hearings: Determinations.
   Upon hearing the appeal, the Board shall grant the public health permit, or
grant the public health permit upon conditions, if it is found that the
establishment, business, or activity applied for meets the standards prescribed
by this chapter. In the event such establishment, business, or activity fails
to meet the standards prescribed by this chapter, the Board shall deny the
application. The Board, for good cause shown, may impose other conditions or
requirements for such public health permits. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25,
1979)
Sec. 6-9.410.   Nontransferability.
   Public health permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not
be transferred, assigned, or set over by the permittee to any other person. All
public health permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall refer
to and be limited to the establishment, business, or activity applied for. If
such establishment, business, or activity is conducted upon a particular site,
location, or address, such permit shall not be transferable to any other site,
location, or address. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.411.   Revocation.
   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the Board upon
a petition by the Health Officer if the Board finds that:
   (a)   The establishment, business, or activity has caused or become a public
nuisance; or
   (b)   The permittee has violated a condition of the permit; or
   (c)   Due to a change of circumstances and conditions, the continuance of
the establishment, business, or activity is hazardous to the public health,
welfare, or safety; or
   (d)   The applicant for the permit made a material misrepresentation of
facts in his application; or
   (e)   The establishment, business, or activity is maintained in violation of
the standards described by this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.412.   Revocation: Petitions.
   A petition to revoke a permit shall be filed with the Clerk of the Board by
the Health Officer, accompanied by a statement of the grounds or reasons for
such action. Upon the receipt of such petition, the Clerk of the Board shall
set the matter for a public hearing and shall serve the permittee with a notice
of the hearing by mail and a copy of such petition no less than fifteen (15)
days prior to the hearing. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.413.   Revocation: Hearings: Determinations.
   Upon hearing the petition of the Health Officer and the response of the
permittee at such public hearing, the Board may revoke the permit if the Board
finds that any of the grounds set forth in Section
6-9.411 of this article exist or have occurred. The Board shall deny the
petition for revocation if the Board finds that none of such grounds for
revocation exist or have occurred. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Article 5.
Standards
Sec. 6-9.501.   Scope.
   Applications for the issuance of public health permits and petitions for the
revocation of public health permits shall be determined in accordance with the
standards prescribed by this article. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.502.   Standards.
   The standards shall consist of any statute, order, quarantine, rule, or
regulation prescribed by a State officer or department relating to public
health or by this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.503.   Restaurants.
(§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979; repealed by Ord. 1099, eff. October 19,
1989)
Sec. 6-9.504.   Retail food production and marketing establishments.
(§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979; repealed by Ord. 1099, eff. October 19,
1989)
Sec. 6-9.505.   Food processing establishments.
(§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979; repealed by Ord. 1099, eff. October 19,
1989)
Sec. 6-9.506.   Mobile food preparation units.
(§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979; repealed by Ord. 1099, eff. October 19,
1989)
Sec. 6-9.507.   Itinerant restaurants.
(§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979; repealed by Ord. 1099, eff. October 19,
1989)
Sec. 6-9.508.   Vending machines.
(§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979; repealed by Ord. 1099, eff. October 19,
1989)
Sec. 6-9.509.   Vending machine and vehicle identification.
   (a)   Each vending machine shall have affixed thereon, in an accessible
place, an identification plate made of durable material setting forth the model
number or symbol of the machine and the serial number identifying each machine.
   (b)   In addition, there shall be affixed to each vending machine or food
vehicle a decal or other identification tag furnished by the Health Officer
indicating that the required health permit fee has been paid for the current
fiscal year. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.510.   Food vehicles.
(§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979; repealed by Ord. 1099, eff. October 19,
1989)
Sec. 6-9.511.   Roadside stands.
(§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October 25, 1979; repealed by Ord. 1099, eff. October 19,
1989)
Sec. 6-9.512.   Public swimming pools.
   The standards for a public swimming pool shall include those specified for
such pools by Article 3 of Chapter 1 of Division 20 of the Health and Safety
Code of the State (commencing with Section 24100). (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October
25, 1979)
Sec. 6-9.513.   Public water systems.
   The standards for a public water system shall include those specified for
such water systems by Chapter 7 of Division 5 of the Health and Safety Code of
the State (commencing with Section 4010). (§ 3, Ord. 890, eff. September 18,
1980)
Sec. 6-9.514.   Injection wells.
   (a)   The standards for the establishment, operation and maintenance of an
injection well shall be as follows:
   (1)   The site shall be constructed to prevent seepage and runoff. A berm
made of impervious materials and with a fluid holding capacity of 110 percent
of the maximum on-site storage volume shall be constructed and appropriately
located and maintained.
   (2)   The site shall be adequately secured against vandalism and
unauthorized entry, including but not limited to security fencing of the entire
site and an adequate safety lock system for all points of fluid discharge and
unloading.
   (3)   The operator and the site shall be properly authorized and permitted
for an injection well operation by all appropriate regulatory agencies,
including but not limited to the Division of Oil and Gas and the Yolo County
Community Development Agency.
   (4)   The application shall be accompanied by a list identifying all
companies which will transport
waste to the site for injection. The operator shall notify the Health Officer
on a monthly basis of any new company transporting waste to the site.
   (5)   An automatic shut-off valve, triggered by a significant increase or
decrease in pressure, shall be installed and maintained.
   (6)   A sample tap for the sampling and testing of injection fluid shall be
installed on line.
   (7)   Continuous tamper-proof pressure and volume recording devices shall be
installed.
   (8)   Proof of liability insurance, issued by a carrier licensed in
California shall be provided, naming the County as an additional named insured
and providing the County not less than thirty (30) days’ advance written notice
of cancellation, in an amount not less than One Million and no/100ths
($1,000,000) Dollars per occurrence and Two Million and no/100ths ($2,000,000)
Dollars annual aggregate, for the duration of the permit period plus three (3)
years thereafter. A certificate of insurance shall be provided in a form
satisfactory to the ’’County’ ’’Administrator’ and the ’’’’County’ ’’Counsel’’.
The Board of Supervisors may approve an equivalent financial resource proposed
by an operator, as specified in Article X of the Health Services Agency’s
regulations.
   (9)   The operator shall execute a satisfactory hold harmless and
indemnification clause, in a form satisfactory to the County Administrator and
the County Counsel, in favor of the County and any city whose general plan area
is within one-half (1/2) mile of the injection well site.
   (10)   The operator shall comply with all standards and requirements
otherwise imposed by law, including but not limited to all local, State and
Federal laws and regulations.
   (b)   No injection well shall be established, operated or maintained in such
a manner as to cause degradation to any water supply well.
   (c)   In addition to the fees imposed and collected pursuant to Section
6-9.405, the operator shall pay fees on a monthly basis based upon the volume
of waste injected at the site during the preceding month. Such fees shall be
set by resolution of the Board and shall not exceed the costs of regulating and
monitoring the injection wells and of otherwise enforcing the provisions of the
section.
   (d)   The Health Officer is authorized to adopt regulations to carry out the
provisions of this section, including specifying the manner, place and interval
for the testing and monitoring of injection wells and water supply wells within
the County. Such regulations shall include, but not be limited to, baseline
testing and subsequent monitoring of water supply wells and injection well
sites, unannounced random and periodic testing of the materials being
transported, sorted and injected, examination and copying of all Division of
Oil and Gas reports (including test results) provided by or to the injection
well operator, and the application of appropriate elements of the Safe Drinking
Water Act of 1986. The cost of such monitoring and testing shall be borne by
the injection well operators and included in the permit fees. Such regulations,
and any amendments thereto, shall be filed with the Board of Supervisors and
not less than forty-five (45) days prior to their effective date. The
Administrative Regulations considered by this Board on October 25, 1988, hereby
are ratified.
   (e)   The injection well operator shall immediately report to the Health
Officer any extraordinary occurrence at the site that may adversely affect the
public health, safety or welfare, including but not limited to earthquake or
vandalism causing structural damage, significant change in well pressures,
accidental spill or discharge, and fire.
   (f)   The injection well operator shall provide copies of all recorded
material from the pressure and volume recording devices to the Health Officer
on a monthly basis.
   (g)   The injection well operator shall notify the Health Officer of any
testing of the injection well by the Division of Oil and Gas in advance of such
testing and not more than two (2) working days after receiving notification
from the Division of Oil and Gas, and the Health Officer shall be allowed to be
present to monitor and obtain the results of such testing. The operator shall
forward copies of all reports of such testing and the results thereof to the
Health Officer within two (2) working days of their receipt by the operator.
   (h)   The injection well site shall only be used for the holding and
injection of Class II waste fluid generated by conventional oil and/or natural
gas production wells. Materials other than those used or generated in the
settling and injection operations shall not be stored at the site.
   (i)   All operator-owned vehicles used to transport the waste shall be
clearly identified by company name and address with letter not less than three
(3”) inches high on both sides of the vehicle exterior and of colors
contrasting with the vehicle exterior.
   (j)   The operator shall file a report for each load of waste delivered to
the site, on a form designated by the Health Officer. The report shall be filed
on a monthly basis, and shall contain the following information: date and
location of delivery, name and address of hauling company, and origin of the
waste.
   (k)   Upon the occurrence of an earthquake which results in National Watch
System notification to the County Emergency Services Director, the Health
Officer may enter the injection well site for inspection and appropriate
testing.
   (l)   No injection well shall be abandoned except in compliance with
applicable Federal and State laws and regulations. A copy of a certificate of
abandonment evidencing such compliance shall be filed with the Health Officer
within thirty (30) days of its receipt.
   (m)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all pre-existing and
future injection wells. The operator of a pre-existing injection well shall
apply for the required permit and pay the appropriate fees on or before July 1,
1989, and shall comply with all other requirements of this section on or before
January 1, 1989; provided, however, that the Health Officer may extend the
compliance period for one or more requirements of this section to a date no
later than July 1, 1989, upon determination that compliance with such
requirement(s) by January 1, 1989, is impracticable. (§ 7, Ord. 1074, eff. May
12, 1988, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1085, eff. January 19, 1989)
Sec. 6-9.515.   Food crop growing and harvesting operations.
   The standard for food crop growing and harvesting operations are set forth
in Chapter 6.5 of Part 3 of Division 5 of the Health and Safety Code,
commencing with Section 5474.2 and regulations promulgated thereunder,
including Group 11 of Subchapter 1 of Chapter 5 of Part 1 of Title 17 of the
Code of California Regulations, commencing with Section T-17-8000. (§ 4, Ord.
1099, eff. October 19, 1989)
Sec. 6-9.516.   Infectious waste.
   The standards for the regulation of infectious waste are as set forth in
Chapter 6.5 of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code commencing with
Section 25100, including the regulations promulgated under Section 25157.3
thereof, which include Article 13 of Chapter 30 of Division 4 of Title 22 of
the Code of California Regulations, commencing with Section 66335 of which
Section 66865 authorizes enforcement by local health officers and which are
made applicable to a general acute care hospital by 22 CCR Section 70849, to an
acute psychiatric hospital by 22 CCR Section 71651, to a skilled nursing
facility by 22 CCR Section 72647, to an intermediate care facility by 22 CCR
Section 73645, to an intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled-
nursing by 22 CCR Section 73947, to a primary care clinic by 22 CCR Section
75069, and to an intermediate care facility for the developmentally disabled by
22 CCR Section 76657. (§ 5, Ord. 1099, eff. October 19, 1989)
Article 6.
Violations: Penalties
Sec. 6-9.601.   Violations: Penalties.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of
not more than Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment
in the County Jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day during a portion of which a violation of this chapter is
committed, continued, or permitted by such person. (§ 1, Ord. 858, eff. October
25, 1979)
Chapter 10
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
Article 1. Arrest Authority
   
6-10.101   Arrest authority.
Article 1.
Arrest Authority
Sec. 6-10.101.   Arrest authority.
   In the performance of his duties, the Health Officer, and his duly
authorized agents and employees, including the Chief of the Environmental
Health Department and registered sanitarians employed by the County as such,
shall have the authority and immunities of public officers and employees as set
forth in Section 836.5 of the Penal Code of the State to make arrests without a
warrant whenever such officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe that
the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in his presence which is
in violation of any provision of State law, this Code, or any city ordinance,
the violation of which is a misdemeanor, and which officer or employee has the
duty to enforce. (§ 1, Ord. 887, eff. August 28, 1980)
Chapter 11*
*   Chapter 11 entitled "Underground Storage of Hazardous Substances",
consisting of Sections 6-11.01 through 6-11.23, codified from Ordinance No.
970, repealed in its entirety by § 2, Ord. 1575, eff. August 22, 2025.
Chapter 12
REGULATION OF BIOSOLIDS
Sections:
   
6-12.01   Purpose and intent.
   
6-12.02   Definitions.
   
6-12.03   General requirements and restrictions on biosolids application.
   
6-12.04   Permits for the use and application of biosolids.
   
6-12.05   Revocation of permits.
   
6-12.06   Fees.
   
6-12.07   Delinquency dates and penalties.
   
6-12.08   Insurance.
   
6-12.09   Bonds.
   
6-12.10   Technical standards.
   
6-12.11   Sampling, testing and monitoring.
   
6-12.12   Reporting.
   
6-12.13   Right of entry.
   
6-12.14   Enforcement.
   
6-12.15   Violation/penalties.
   
6-12.16   Public nuisance declaration.
Sec. 6-12.01.   Purpose and intent.
   The Yolo County Board of Supervisors finds and determines that human,
household and other waste products that are processed at municipal wastewater
(sewage)treatment plants and from septic systems, which material is
collectively referred to herein as “biosolids,” poses a potential threat to the
public health, safety and welfare of the citizens, residents and businesses of
Yolo County, when used as a soil additive or fertilizer. Further the Board of
Supervisors finds that biosolids can contain heavy metals, pathogenic organisms
and chemical pollutants, which can pose a threat to human health, agriculture
and to water quality. When biosolids are applied to lands in agricultural
areas, the mere fear of contamination to agricultural crops produced on such
land and/or on neighboring properties can result in a loss of value for the
agricultural products and to the land itself. Accordingly, the Board of
Supervisors finds that in order to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare and to safeguard water quality and the viability of agriculture
within the County, it is necessary to regulate the manner and conditions under
which biosolids may be used and applied to land within the unincorporated area
of the County.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the land
application of biosolids on unincorporated areas of Yolo County in a manner
that is consistent with agronomic rates, which protects public health, ground
and surface waters, agricultural markets, sensitive wetland and habitat areas.
To protect critical ground water basins and food production areas, this chapter
provides local control and establishes minimum standards for the safe use of
biosolids. The provisions of this chapter shall be effective only within the
unincorporated territory of the County. (§ 1, Ord. 1204, eff. January 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-12.02.   Definitions.
   Whenever in the chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section.
   (a)   “Agronomic rate” means a rate at which biosolids applications do not
exceed nitrogen or other nutrient fertilizer rates or element additions for the
crop to be grown and do not result in phytotoxicity or the excess accumulation
of heavy metals and/or nutrients adverse to normal crop growth or quality, or
which threatens to impact groundwater or wetlands.
   (b)   “Applicator” means any person, company, organization, or other legal
entity who uses and/or places biosolids on any land within the County for any
purpose, including but not limited to enhancing the growth of plants.
   (c)   “Biosolids” also referred to as “sewage sludge,” means any material
taken or derived from the processing of municipal wastewater and/or from septic
systems and shall include, but not be limited to, solid or semisolid material
that contains suspended solids.
   (d)   “Class A biosolids” means biosolids meeting the Class A pathogen
reduction requirements listed in 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 503,
Section 503.32 or its revisions.
   (e)   “Class B biosolids” means biosolids meeting the Class B pathogen
reduction requirements listed in 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 503,
Section 503.32 or its revisions.
   (f)   “County” means the County of Yolo, State of California.
   (g)   “Department” means the Department of Public Health, Division of
Environmental Health of the County of Yolo.
   (h)   “Field” means a discrete, discernable, and identifiable individual
piece of land used or capable of being used for crop production under the
provisions of the Yolo County zoning ordinances.
   (i)   “Feed crops” means crops produced for consumption by animals.
   (j)   “Fiber crops” means crops such as flax and cotton.
   (k)   “Food crops” means those crops consumed by humans.
   (l)   “Grower” means the operator of the site involved in production of
agricultural crops.
   (m)   “Irrigation tail water” means the water applied to a field that does
not infiltrate the soil, but collects or runs off at the lower end of a field.
   (n)   “Land application” means the spraying or spreading of biosolids onto
the land surface; the injection of biosolids below the surface; or the
incorporation of biosolids into the soil so that the biosolids can either
condition the soil or fertilize crops or vegetation grown in the soil.
   (o)   “Person” means any person, firm, business, city, district, special
district, water district, or other governmental agency, including but not
limited to a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, trust,
association, or corporation whether for profit or non-profit.
   (p)   “Septage” means liquid or solid material removed from septic tanks,
cesspools, portable toilets, type III marine sanitation devices or any similar
device or receptacle. Septage does not include pits or grease removed from
grease pits or traps.
   (q)   “Site” means a single parcel or contiguous parcels of land under the
same ownership for which the use of biosolids is either requested or approved
under the provisions of this Chapter.
   (r)   “Sludge” means any solid, semisolid or liquid waste containing human
fecal matter and/or high concentrations of putrescible organic material
generated from a municipal, community or industrial sewage treatment plant or
containing septage.
   (s)   “Biosolids staging area” means the location on a site, where biosolids
is deposited on the ground for loading onto a vehicle, for application, on the
same or nearby sites in connection with an approved biosolids permit.
   (t)   “Treatment” means a process which alters, modifies, or changes the
biological, physical or chemical characteristics of sludge or biosolids.
   (u)   “Units” means the pounds per acre of applied nutrients or elements
(pounds per acre x 1.12 = kilograms per hectare (kg/hectare) and kilograms per
hectare x .893= pounds per acre (lbs/A)).
   (v)   “Wastewater treatment plant” means a facility designed and constructed
to receive, treat, or store sewage and operating under a permit from the State.
(§ 1, Ord. 1204, eff. January 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-12.03.   General requirements and restrictions on biosolids application.
   (a)   Biosolids shall not be applied to any land within the unincorporated
territory of the County without the prior issuance of a permit from the County
Public Health Department, Environmental Health Division, nor shall biosolids be
applied or used on land except in strict compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and all applicable laws and regulations pertaining thereto.
   (b)   Biosolids shall not be applied to any land between November 15 and
April 15.
   (c)   Biosolids shall not be applied to any land that is within the Delta
Primary Zone.
   (d)   All water coming into contact with the land which has received any
biosolid material, shall, for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of any
application of biosolid material, be captured and disposed of on the site of
the biosolid application and the water shall not be allowed to leave the site.
It shall be the responsibility of any party applying biosolids to land to
construct such berms or other temporary measures as may reasonably be necessary
to capture storm or irrigation runoff from the site receiving the biosolids
application.
   (e)   Biosolids shall not be applied to any land within any designated
floodway or flowage easements designated by the Reclamation Board of the State
of California, or on land within floodways as shown on maps published by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, or on any land designated as a special
flood hazard area by the County’s Flood Ordinance.
   (f)   The wastewater treatment plant generating the biosolids to be applied
to land in Yolo County must have a current waste discharge permit from a
Regional Water Quality Control Board or the equivalent permit meeting Federal
and State requirements applicable in the jurisdiction of the wastewater
treatment plan. Each truck load of biosolids must be from an identified
wastewater treatment plant and no mixed loads of biosolids (where the biosolid
material is from more than a single plant) will be allowed to be applied to
land within Yolo County. Biosolids to be applied within the County must meet
the following standards:
   (1)   Class A or Class B pathogen requirements in 40 Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 503.
   (2)   One of the vector attraction reduction requirements identified in 40
Code of Federal Regulations, Part 503.
   (3)   The pollutant limits in 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 503,
Section 503.13 and State standards established by the Regional Water Quality
Control Board.
   (g)   Biosolids application rates shall not exceed agronomic rates, or any
rates which cause specific constituents to exceed single, annual, or lifetime
application limits, based on all of the following:
   (1)   40 Code of Federal Regulations 503, Criteria for Standards for the Use
or Disposal of Sewage Biosolids or its revisions.
   (2)   Regional Water Quality Control Board laws and regulations.
   (3)   Nitrogen demand of the crop.
   (h)   Biosolids shall be landspread within forty-eight (48) hours of arrival
at the site and shall be incorporated into the soil by disc or other acceptable
method within twenty-four (24) hours after spreading; provided however,
biosolids may be applied to land without incorporation if plant residue levels
exceed 1000 pounds per acre with twenty (20%) percent having a vertical height
no less than four (4”) inches. Total nitrogen additions shall not exceed
seventy (70) pounds per acre, unless approved by the Department.
   (i)   If biosolids are applied on ground surfaces having an Erodibility
Index (EI) of eight (8) or above as classified by USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS), a report and plan for application shall be
prepared by a Certified Agronomist, Soil Scientist, or Certified Professional
Erosion and Sediment control Specialist (CPESC). The application shall not
exceed erosion levels as specified in any existing NRCS plans and achieve
erosion reduction levels that do not exceed the soil loss level specified in
the plan.
   (1)   Biosolids applied to any land classified as
   Highly Erodible Land (HEL) by NRCS shall comply with all aspects of the NRCS
Conservation Compliance Plans for erosion control.
   (2)   There shall be no incorporation of biosolids on HEL land.
   (j)   Staging areas and biosolids application shall be at least:
   (1)   Twenty-five (25’) feet from property lines; and
   (2)   500 feet from domestic or public water supply wells (wellhead
protection area); occupied dwellings; schools; hospitals or similar facilities
unless approved by Department; and
   (3)   200 feet from nondomestic water supply wells; and
   (4)   Fifty (50’) feet from public roads; and
   (5)   100 feet from surface waters, including, but not limited to creeks,
ponds, lakes, vernal pools, marshes, wetlands or floodways; and
   (6)   Ten (10’) feet from any agricultural structures.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Department shall have the authority to
decrease any required setback where the Department finds that the reduction
will not compromise the public health and safety nor the purposes of this
chapter; and the Department shall also have the authority to increase any
setback required as a condition to the issuance of a permit, where the
Department finds that such action is appropriate to protect the public health
and safety and/or to further the purposes of this chapter.
   (k)   Unless approved by the Department, biosolids shall not be applied to
soils where depth to groundwater is less than five (5’) feet at historic
seasonal high from the soil surface.
   (l)   Biosolids shall not be applied or incorporated into the soil or to
water-saturated ground, during periods of rainfall or, in order to prevent the
biosolids material and/or soil from creating dust during the application and/or
incorporation process, when wind speeds at the site exceed five (5) m.p.h. The
five (5) m.p.h. windspeed requirement for application and incorporation may be
waived by the Department if the biosolids or soil has a moisture content of not
less than twenty-five (25%) percent. In addition, the application and
incorporation of biosolids shall comply with the local air district regulations
including, but not limited to, PM-10 and fugitive dust rules, if applicable.
   (m)   Neither the distribution nor application of biosolids shall cause a
nuisance.
   (n)   The applicator and/or generator shall comply with the Monitoring and
Reporting Program (Sections
6-12.11 and
6-12.12).
   (o)   The applicator must comply with all requirements of the California
Regional Water Quality Control Board and any other regulations adopted by any
agency of the State or Federal government.
   (p)   The applicator shall obtain, and submit to the Department, a written
statement showing that the grower and landowner are desirous of, and consent to
receiving biosolids.
   (q)   The applicator shall notify the Department in writing, by facsimile
transmission of its proposed delivery schedule of biosolids to the site at
least two (2) working days in advance.
   (r)   The areas at the site to receive biosolids application, shall be
clearly marked with stakes or other prominent markers before the biosolids
application.
   (s)   Maintenance yard in Yolo County.
   (1)   Biosolids transportation vehicle parking or parking/service yards in
Yolo County shall be maintained in a clean and safe condition.
   (2)   Vehicle washing facilities in Yolo County shall drain to an approved
drainage system. The entire area shall be adequately sloped for drainage
control.
   (t)   Biosolids staging areas shall be restricted to sites approved for
biosolids application. Staging areas may not be located in buffer zones. All
biosolids within a staging area must be land applied within forty-eight (48)
hours from the time of delivery to the staging area. The staging area shall be
sufficiently cleaned of biosolids so that application rate within the staging
area is equivalent to the approved application rate for the site.
   (u)   After the application of Class B biosolids in each field, the
applicator shall ensure the following:
   (1)   For at least thirty (30) days:
   (i)   Public access to the application sites is prohibited.
   (ii)   Feed and fiber crops are not harvested.
   (iii)   Animals do not graze on land.
   (2)   For at least twelve (12) months: Any turf that is harvested may not be
used on land that will be used by the public.
   (3)   For at least fourteen (14) months: Food crops with harvested parts
that touch the biosolids/soil mixture, and are totally above the land surface
are not harvested.
   (4)   For at least thirty-eight (38) months: Food crops with harvested parts
below the surface are not harvested. (§ 1, Ord. 1204, eff. January 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-12.04.   Permits for the use and application of biosolids.
   Unless otherwise required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, a
permit for the use and/or application of biosolids to any land within Yolo
County (referred to herein as a “biosolids permit” or “permit”) may be issued
by the County Department of Public Health, Environmental Health Division, in
accordance with the following permit procedures. Any permit issued under the
provisions of this chapter shall be conditioned on and shall require strict
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any applicable laws or
regulations, otherwise the permit shall be deemed to be null and void. In the
processing and review of any permit application, the Department shall be
authorized to call upon and to receive assistance from such other County
Departments or Officials as the Department may deem appropriate.
   Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be
issued jointly to the property owner, any lessee thereof, and the applicator
and each of these parties shall jointly be responsible for compliance with the
terms and conditions of the permit and compliance with this chapter. Upon
issuance of a permit, the permit shall be recorded in the official records
maintained by the County Recorder.
   (a)   Ministerial permits.
   A ministerial permit may be issued only to the property owner together with
any lessee and to the applicator where it is demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the Department, compliance with all of the following:
   (1)   No part of the site has a slope in excess of three (3%) percent; and
   (2)   The site has previously been intensively cultivated (leveled, tilled
and irrigated) or grazed. (It is the purpose of this provision to require a
detailed evaluation (through the discretionary permit review process) of a
proposal to apply biosolids to land that has not previously been intensively
cultivated or grazed); and
   (3)   The site is not designated for future residential use or development
under the County’s General Plan; and
   (4)   The applicants have submitted a plan for application demonstrating to
the satisfaction of the Department that the application complies with all of
the regulatory provisions of this chapter.
   A lessee of property shall not be issued a permit since the application of
biosolids may affect the property beyond the lease. A lessee and property owner
may jointly be granted a ministerial permit or a discretionary permit as
provided for herein.
   Notwithstanding compliance with the foregoing, a ministerial permit shall
not be issued where the applicator and/or the property owner or lessee has
failed to comply with the provisions of any other biosolids permit issued in
Yolo County or in any other jurisdiction or has generally demonstrated a
failure to comply with any local, State or Federal laws or regulations
pertaining to the use and development of property or the use of biosolids or
any other regulated material. Any party who is denied a ministerial permit
under this provision shall have a right to appeal same by seeking the issuance
of a discretionary permit in accordance with the procedures and provisions
below. In addition to any other matter that is to be determined by the
Department with regard to such discretionary permit, the Department shall hear
such evidence as the County staff, the applicator and/or the property owner and
any other interested party may reasonably provide regarding the issue of the
compliance or noncompliance by the applicator and/or property owner with the
law.
   (b)   Discretionary permits. A permit may be issued to the property owner
together with any lessee and to the applicator in accordance with the following
procedures and compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The County
reserves the right to exercise its judgement and discretion in determining
whether to issue a permit under the provisions of this subsection, and nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to create a right in any person or entity to
obtain a permit for which the exercise of discretion is hereby reserved.
   Any application for issuance of a discretionary permit shall require that an
appropriate environmental analysis be prepared and certified by the County in
accordance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act
(“CEQA”). The applicant for the permit shall be responsible for the payment of
all fees and costs associated with the preparation and review of the
environmental document. The application and the preparation of the
environmental document shall be prepared by or with the concurrence of the Yolo
County Community Development Agency, consistent with the procedures followed
for other discretionary land use applications and shall include a right of
appeal to the Board of Supervisors on the part of the applicant and any
interested person. Any such appeal shall be conducted in the same manner as
provided for appeals of land use permits under the jurisdiction of the County
Planning Agency.
   Upon preparation of the environmental document, the Director of the
Department or his or her designated subordinate (collectively referred to as
the “Director”) shall conduct at least one public hearing which shall be
noticed in the same manner as required for other discretionary land use
applications. The Director shall, based upon the information contained in the
application (or the lack thereof), the environmental document and such other
information as may be provided at the hearing and from any interested party or
agency, determine whether the use of biosolids in accordance with the
application poses any threat to the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the community (including but not limited to impacts on human health, ground
or surface water, wildlife, wildlife habitat or sensitive plants) or to any
specific property owner or interested party. In making this determination the
Director shall be guided by the purpose and intent of this chapter.
   It shall be sufficient for the purpose of denying any application for a
discretionary permit for the Director to find that there is insufficient
information upon which to make an affirmative finding that the use of biosolids
as proposed will not create a threat to the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the community or to any specific property owner or interested party.
The party or parties seeking approval of the use of biosolids shall have an
affirmative obligation to provide such conclusive information as the Director
may require to reach his or her decision.
   (c)   Permit application procedure. The application for a biosolid permit
shall be submitted to the County Department of Public Health, Environmental
Health Division. The application shall be signed by the property owner and any
lessees, and the party actually proposing to apply the biosolid material to the
!and. The application shall be accompanied by such fees as the Board of
Supervisors may from time to time establish pursuant to resolution or other
official action and shall include the following information and/or documents:
   (1)   Name, address and phone number for each of the following: the
applicant, landowner, any lessee, and applicator and a local emergency contact
person.
   (2)   Type of organization such as sole proprietorship, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, business, or trust, including names of all officers.
   (3)   Identification of the local manager and responsible office personnel.
   (4)   A complete listing of the crops or other plants that are being grown
or will be grown on the property including the numbers of acres that are
devoted to each type of crop.
   (5)   A list of the predominant soils on the site.
   (6)   An analysis of representative soil samples for each of the significant
soil types that exist on the site, prepared in accordance with the provisions
of Section
6-12.11. Representative soil samples shall be collected and analyzed by an
independent laboratory, from a list approved by the Department, with the
results submitted at the time of the application. Testing shall be performed no
longer than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the application.
   (7)   A complete list for each of the following:
   (i)   Adjoining properties containing the names and address of the owners
thereof;
   (ii)   All contracts for the purchase of the crops or agricultural products
to be grown on the property including a statement of the processor where known;
   (iii)   All lenders holding any mortgages or deeds of trust on the property.
   (8)   A statement of information regarding the site, including net acreage
to be used for the biosolids application, total acreage of the site, depth to
groundwater at the historic shallowest known location, annual application rate,
lifetime application rate (pursuant to 40 Code of Federal Regulations 503), and
buffer zones for occupied dwellings, property line, roads, watercourses,
wetlands and wells.
   (9)   A detailed site plan acceptable to the Department depicting current
topography and ground slope, site boundaries, location of any previous biosolid
application within the previous five (5) years and proposed biosolid
application, drainage courses, homes and other buildings, wetlands, wells
(whether in use or not), irrigation structures and dikes within 500 feet of the
site.
   (10)   A statement by a professional certified by the American Registry of
Certified Professionals in Agronomy, Crops and Soils (ARCPACS) indicating the
recommended agronomic rates for biosolids application to the site. Such
recommendation must be based on soil conditions in the area and be applicable
to the crops grown or to be grown on the site.
   (11)   A statement regarding the applicant’s experience and capability in
the collection and transportation and application of biosolids.
   (12)   A statement of the biosolids characteristics prepared in accordance
with the provisions of Section
6-12.11.
   (i)   Describing the characteristics of the biosolids proposed to be
applied, including a certification that the biosolids have been treated to
Class A or Class B pathogen requirements as set forth in 40 Code of Federal
Regulations 503 et seq.
   (ii)   Source of biosolids (including names of each wastewater treatment
plant from which the biosolids will originate).
   (13)   A statement describing the proposed application rates in dry tons per
acre.
   (14)   A detailed plan of operation which shall include:
   (i)   Identification of the site, including Assessors Parcel Number;
   (ii)   Generalized description of biosolids application including location,
dimension and area description of land that can be identified in the field;
   (iii)   Description of equipment to be used;
   (iv)   Special procedures for equipment breakdown;
   (v)   Spill prevention and response plans;
   (vi)   Soil incorporation methods;
   (vii)   Inclement weather plan;
   (viii)   Description of soil and plant testing methodology;
   (ix)   Dust control plans;
   (x)   Transportation plans including:
   (aa)   Source and owner of vehicle,
   (bb)   Proposed delivery truck route(s) to site,
   (cc)   Proposed frequency and hours of delivery,
   (dd)   Local traffic conditions,
   (ee)   Proposed measures to prevent tracking of biosolids on to roadways,
   (ff)   Nuisance avoidance measures.
   (15)   Evidence of notification from applicant to the water delivery and/or
drainage agency in whose jurisdiction the biosolids is applied.
   (16)   Evidence of notification to any lenders holding a mortgage or deed of
trust on the property and to any food processors or other parties who have
contracted to purchase the crops or other agricultural products grown on the
property, of the submission of an application to use biosolids on the property.
   (17)   The permit application shall be accompanied by a site application
disclosure statement signed by the property owner and any lessees,
acknowledging that the use of the property may be impacted by the application
of biosolids.
   (18)   In addition to the foregoing, the applicant shall be required to
provide any other relevant information requested by the Department.
   To facilitate the submission of an application for a biosolids permit, any
prospective applicant may request a preapplication conference with the
Department. The Department shall require the payment of fees for all
preapplication conferences consistent with the latest fee schedules as approved
by the Board of Supervisors.
   (d)   Application review procedures and action.
   (1)   The Department shall notify all appropriate agencies and individuals,
including but not limited to adjoining property owners, of the receipt of any
application filed for a biosolids permit.
   (2)   Applicants shall be notified of incomplete or inaccurate applications
within thirty (30) working days after the date of the filing of the
application. The applicant may make the necessary corrections and additions and
resubmit the application within thirty (30) days of notification.
   (3)   Upon receipt of an application for a biosolids permit which the
Department finds to be complete, the Department shall either approve or deny
same in days of the date of the mailing of written decision a timely fashion.
Written notice of the approval or denial of an application for a biosolids
permit shall be given by mail to the applicant at the address shown on the
application.
   (e)   Term of permits. Biosolids permits shall remain valid for the calendar
year in which the permit is issued. (§ 1, Ord. 1204, eff. January 16,
1997)
Sec. 6-12.05.   Revocation of permits.
   (a)   A biosolids permit may be summarily suspended or revoked by the
Department when unforeseen adverse conditions make the use of biosolids
inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter or when the applicator
has violated any provision(s) of this chapter, including its fee requirements,
any Federal/State laws or regulations, or violated a provision(s) of the waste
discharge permit of the Regional Water Quality Control Board. This remedy shall
be available to the Department in addition to that set forth elsewhere in this
chapter or in County ordinance. If the Department suspends or revokes the
permit, a written notice to this effect shall be delivered in person or by
certified mail to the business address of the name appearing on the
application. The written notice shall state the grounds for the revocation.
   (b)   The applicator may appeal any revocation to the Board of Supervisors
by filing a written request for a hearing before the Board of Supervisors with
the Clerk of the Board not more than ten (10) calendar days after notice of the
revocation has been delivered. Unless the Department finds the grounds for the
revocation to constitute an immediate threat to public health and safety, any
revocation by the Department shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal
therefrom which has been properly and timely filed. Upon receipt of a written
request for a hearing, the Clerk of the Board shall set the matter for public
hearing on a date not more than sixty (60) calendar days following receipt of
such written request, and shall give the applicant and the Board of Supervisors
at least thirty (30) calendar days written notice of the time, date, and place
of the hearing. After the Hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall issue its
written decision and findings on the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days
after the close of the hearing. Such decision will be final.
   (c)   Any legal action seeking to set aside the decision of the Board of
Supervisors with regard to any biosolids permit shall be filed within thirty
(30) days of the date of the mailing of written decision and findings of the
Board of Supervisors Any such action shall be brought pursuant to the
provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.5 et seq. (§ 1,
Ord. 1204, eff. January 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-12.06.   Fees.
   (a)   Fees shall be paid to the County, in an amount set by Resolution
adopted by the Board of Supervisors for the following activities: Any
application for a biosolids permit; any preapplication conferences; any appeals
filed under the provisions of this chapter; any other activities relating to
the processing of an application for a biosolids permit; the monitoring and/or
enforcement of any permit; and/or the use of biosolids within the County. It is
the intent of this chapter that such fees shall be in an amount necessary to
fully fund the actual costs incurred by the County in administering this
chapter, with no costs of administrating or enforcement of this chapter passed
on to Yolo County residents. Application fees shall be due upon submittal of
application.
   (b)   All costs of laboratory analysis of biosolids, soil, water and
vegetation samples collected by the Department shall be the responsibility of
and shall be paid by the applicant. (§ 1, Ord. 1204, eff. January 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-12.07.   Delinquency dates and penalties.
   (a)   Any fee required by or any cost incurred by the County in accordance
with this shall be paid by the permittee within thirty (30) days following the
billing date.
   (b)   If any fee or cost specified is not paid within thirty (30) days from
the date of mailing of any billing, the permittee shall pay a penalty. A
penalty fee of ten (10%) percent of the initial billing will be imposed upon
its delinquency. If the permit fee is not paid within sixty (60) days of the
initial billing the penalty fee will be increased to fifteen (15%) percent and
the permit may be suspended until the fees and/or costs and penalties are paid,
or the permit may be revoked. (§ 1, Ord. 1204, eff. January 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-12.08.   Insurance.
   (a)   Prior to the issuance of a biosolids permit and the application of
biosolids to any land within the County, the applicator shall obtain insurance
for the amounts and types of coverage as provided herein. The applicator shall
at all times during the term of its biosolids permit maintain in full force and
effect a policy of Workers’ Compensation insurance; a policy of General
Liability insurance in a minimum of One Million and no/100ths ($1,000,000.00)
Dollars; a policy of auto liability covering personal injury and property
damage in a minimum of One Million and no/100ths ($1,000,000.00) Dollars; and a
policy of pollution insurance, covering personal injury, property damage and
clean up liability in a minimum of Two Million and no/100ths ($2,000,000.00)
Dollars.
   All insurance shall be by insurers acceptable to the County. Evidence of
insurance in the form of certificates of insurance or in such other form as may
be required by the Department and/or County Counsel shall be provided prior to
the issuance of a biosolids permit and before commencement of the application
of any biosolids to any real property within the County. The certificates shall
include the following express obligation:
   “This is to certify that the policies of insurance described herein have
been issued to the insured for whom this certificate is executed and are in
force at this time. In the event of cancellation or material change in a policy
affecting the certificate, 30 days notice will be given the certificate
holder.”
   The County shall not be liable for the payment of premiums or assessments on
the policy.
   (b)   In the event applicator’s insurance coverage fails or lapses, the
permit approval issued hereunder shall terminate immediately, and applicator
shall be deemed in default.
   (c)   All insurance policies shall state that they shall not be canceled
without thirty (30) days prior written notice to the County.
   (d)   The pollution insurance policy shall contain the following special
endorsement:
   “The County of Yolo, its officers, employees, and agents are hereby declared
to be additional insured under the terms of this policy both as to the
activities of applicator and as to the activities of the County, its officers,
employees, and agents related to this activity described herein.”
   (e)   The general liability and pollution liability insurance policies shall
be written on an “occurrence basis,” provided however, that “claims made
policies” shall be accepted by the County where the policy expressly provides
that it shall provide coverage for any claim made or filed for a period of
thirty-eight (38) months from the termination of the biosolids permit for which
the insurance policy provides coverage.
   (f)   The Department, County Counsel and County Risk Manager shall review
all insurance policies to assure compliance with the provisions of this
section. (§ 1, Ord. 1204, eff. January 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-12.09.   Bonds.
   (a)   Security bond. Prior to the issuance of a biosolids permit and the
application of biosolids to any land within the County, the applicator shall
furnish a corporate surety bond as security for performance under the biosolids
permit and any enforcement, monitoring or clean up that the County may
undertake or require. The purpose of the bond is to provide financial resources
to Yolo County in the event of noncompliance with this chapter. The amount of
the bond shall be determined by the Department based on the quantity, size and
scope of biosolids application as set forth in the application and permit. Yolo
County shall be named as the obligee.
   (b)   Premium. The premium for the above-described bond(s) shall be paid by
the applicator. A certificate from the surety showing that bond premiums have
been paid, in full, shall accompany the bond.
   (c)   Authorized company. The surety on the bond shall be a company
acceptable to the County and shall be a corporate surety company authorized to
do business in the State.
   (d)   The Department, County Counsel and County Risk Manager shall review
the bond to assure compliance to this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1204, eff. January
16, 1997)
Sec. 6-12.10.   Technical standards.
   Technical standards governing biosolids application rates, cumulative soil
metals, etc. shall be as established by the Regional Water Quality Control
Board and 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 503 or its revisions. (§ 1, Ord.
1204, eff. January 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-12.11.   Sampling, testing and monitoring.
   Whenever any provision of this chapter requires soil sampling, testing,
analysis and/or monitoring, it shall be performed in a manner as set forth
below and consistent with generally accepted principles and standards.
   (a)   Under the supervision of certified professional personnel, all samples
for the purpose of testing, analysis or monitoring shall be collected and
handled in accordance with established methods and standards (i.e., agronomist,
geologist, chemist, environmental health specialist, certified laboratory
personnel, etc.).
   (b)   Biosolids testing shall be performed consistent with the following:
   (1)   Representative samples shall be collected on a daily basis from each
wastewater treatment plant producing biosolids proposed for or actually applied
to land in Yolo County and shall be composited to form a monthly composite
sample which shall be analyzed for land application parameters as follows:
   Total Kjeldahl-Nitrogen, Ammonium-Nitrogen, Nitrate Nitrogen, Organic-
Nitrogen, Total Potassium, Total Phosphorus, Total Copper, Total Lead, Total
Cadmium, Total Zinc, Total Nickel, pH (1:1), Total Solids, Total Boron, Total
Arsenic, Total Chromium, Total Molybdenum, Total Sodium, Total Selenium and
Total Mercury.
   (2)   Biannual biosolids monitoring. Representative samples from each
wastewater treatment plant which generates biosolids to be applied to land in
Yolo County, shall be composited and analyzed a minimum of twice per year,
unless otherwise indicated, for the following, unless the biosolids has been
stockpiled longer than five (5) years, in which case additional testing may be
required. The Department may require additional testing for specific
constituents (e.g., radioactivity) if it determines that wastewater treatment
plants may be processing waste containing those contaminants.
 
Constituent        Units 1
Chlorinated Pesticides and PCBs*
(EPA Method #8080)
Base/Neutral Extractable Organic Priority Pollutants*
(EPA Method #8270)
Fecal Coliform     MPN/gram dry weight
 
* The Department may require testing at a frequency no greater than required by
the generator’s current permits issued through the Regional Water Quality
Control Board. The applicator may be required to perform these tests in
instances where the generator is exempted from testing by the RWQCB. These may
be required by the Department at a frequency rate of no more than once per
year, unless significant concentrations are detected or if other factors
indicate in the judgement of the County that additional testing is required or
reasonably beneficial to serving the purposes of this chapter.
To be reported as dry weight corrected for percent moisture.
   (3)   Class A/Class B pathogen requirements. Applicator shall provide
documentation to verify Class A/Class B certification. Records and biosolids
analyses results shall be made available to the Department upon request for the
purpose of verifying Class A/Class B pathogen compliance.
   (c)   Soil testing. Soils on application sites will be sampled and analyzed
by the applicator for metals and cation exchange capacity prior to initial
application of biosolids.
   (1)   Sampling procedures. The surface soil will be sampled at a depth of
zero (0”) to eight (8”) inches. The sample will consist of a minimum of twenty
(20) individual cores taken from a location in the field. Surface litter will
be removed before collecting a core, to ensure only mineral soil is sampled.
Obvious anomalies such as wet spots, turn rows and minor soil textural
inclusions will not be sampled. The number of soil samples will be determined
by the Department prior to sampling and will depend on the field size, and soil
types. Samples will be taken on a grid at random locations as approved by the
County.
   (2)    Analysis.
   Soils will be analyzed for the following parameters: Olson’s extractant for
Phosphorus, Ammonium Acetate for Potassium, saturated paste pH, saturated paste
extract, Calcium, Magnesium, and Sodium, Total Zinc, Total Copper, Total
Cadmium, Total Chromium, Total Lead, Total Mercury, Total Nickel, Total
Nitrogen, Total Sulfur, Total Selenium and Total Boron.
   (d)   Forage vegetation. Additional sampling may be required by the
Department for nutrients and/or elements contained in forage vegetation being
fed to animals.
   (e)   Laboratory testing. All biosolids, water, soil and vegetation analyses
must be conducted by a California State Department of Health Services
accredited laboratory, pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1010, with
all costs associated with sampling paid by the applicant. Laboratory test
methods shall be those approved by EPA and/or the Regional Water Quality
Control Board.
   (f)   Ground water testing. The Department shall have the authority to
require an applicator to conduct ground water testing where the Department
deems such information to be desirable in the administration and implementation
of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1204, eff. January 16, 1997)
 
Notes
1  
Sec. 6-12.12.   Reporting.
   (a)   Application records. Application records shall be prepared and
maintained by the applicant for five (5) years.
   A record shall be maintained of each load of biosolids stating, the load
size, the time, date and specific location where each load of biosolids was
delivered in Yolo County and stating the source of the biosolids, and the
application method.
   (b)   Site reporting (post-application). Site reports shall be prepared and
maintained for five (5) years for each field that received biosolids. The site
report shall state:
   (1)   Location of field;
   (2)   Tons of wet biosolids per acre and tons of dry biosolids per acre
applied;
   (3)   Soil cation exchange capacity;
   (4)   Number of acres;
   (5)   Types of crops grown on land which biosolids is applied;
   (6)   Amount applied to date for the year;
   (7)   Lifetime amount of biosolids applied;
   (8)   The following constituents applied current year to date, total pounds
per acre (Ibs/acre) applied and lifetime limit where applicable pursuant to 40
CFR, Part 503 or Regional Water Quality Control Board standards:
   Nitrogen, Lead, Copper, Nickel, Mercury, Cadmium, Zinc, Arsenic, Chromium,
Molybdenum, Boron, Selenium, and Sodium.
   (c)   Report submission.
   (1)   Monthly reports shall be submitted indicating the total amount of dry
and wet tons of biosolids applied in the County, by location.
   (2)   Site Reports shall be submitted within sixty (60) days of the last
biosolids application for the calendar year for ongoing application operations.
   (3)   Annual reports shall be submitted by March 1 for the preceding
calendar year. The report shall include: a summary of the quantity (tons), the
source of the biosolids, and location of application for each field on which
biosolids were applied during the preceding calendar year; the date(s)   of the
Site Report(s)   applicable to each application; and a statement concerning
compliance with land use restrictions identified in this chapter.
   (4)   In reporting the monitoring data, the applicator shall arrange the
data in tabular form so that the date, the constituents, and the concentrations
are readily discernible. The data shall be summarized in such a manner to
clearly indicate compliance to this chapter. The results of any monitoring
conducted more frequently than required shall be reported to the Department.
   Results of analyses performed in accordance with the monitoring requirements
of Section
6-12.11 shall also be submitted to the County on electronic media (computer
diskette) in a format amendable to data analysis by the County (common database
format). (§ 1, Ord. 1204, eff. January 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-12.13.   Right of entry.
   As a requirement of the issuance of a permit under this chapter, the
applicator, farm operator, landowner or lessee shall agree to allow the
Department or other regulatory agencies at reasonable times and upon
presentation of credentials to:
   (a)   Have access to and copy any records required to be kept under the
terms and conditions of this chapter or application permit;
   (b)   Inspect any monitoring equipment or observe any monitoring method
required in this chapter or application permit;
   (c)   Inspect any collection, transport vehicles, treatment, pollution
management, or control facilities required under this chapter or application
permit;
   (d)   Enter any site where biosolids is proposed to be used or has been used
or stored and sample any ground or surface waters, soils, vegetation, biosolids
or other materials on the site;
   (e)   Obtain any photographic documentation or evidence;
   (f)   Generally inspect, observe, and monitor the biosolids application
operation. (§ 1, Ord. 1204, eff. January 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-12.14.   Enforcement.
   The Department is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Department shall issue a report to the Board of Supervisors relating to the
implementation of the biosolids program when deemed necessary. (§ 1, Ord. 1204,
eff. January 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-12.15.   Violation/penalties.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of or failing to comply with any
of the mandatory requirements of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is
subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Yolo County
Code. (§ 1, Ord. 1204, eff. January 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-12.16.   Public nuisance declaration.
   In addition, any violation of this chapter may be deemed by the Department
to be a public nuisance, and may be abated, or enjoined by the Department,
irrespective of any other remedy herein provided. (§ 1, Ord. 1204, eff. January
16, 1997)
Chapter 13
CAMPING WITHIN THE UNINCORPORATED AREA OF YOLO COUNTY*
* Chapter 12, added by Ordinance No. 1189, was renumbered to Chapter 13 by
codifier as Chapter 12 is already in use.
Sections:
   
6-13.01   Authority and purpose.
   
6-13.02   Definitions.
   
6-13.03   Camping on public property.
   
6-13.04   Camping on private property.
   
6-13.05   Campfires.
Sec. 6-13.01.   Authority and purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect public and private property within
the unincorporated area of the County from the destruction that accompanies
camping. It is also enacted to ensure that proper health and safety
accommodations are provided to those who do camp. It is enacted to prevent
degradation of public and private lands and assure that such lands can be
utilized for their intended purpose. The Board of Supervisors enacts this
chapter in accordance with the authority granted to counties by Article XI,
Section 7 of the California Constitution. (§ 1, Ord. 1189, eff. August 22,
1996)
Sec. 6-13.02.   Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, camping is defined as residing in or using any
public or private property for one or more nights for living accommodation
purposes, such as sleeping activities or making preparations to sleep
(including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping), or storing
personal belongings (including, but not limited to clothing, sleeping bags, bed
rolls, blankets, sheets, luggage, backpacks, kitchen utensils, cookware, and
similar material), or making any fire or using any tents, regularly cooking
meals, or living in a parked vehicle. These activities constitute camping when
it reasonably appears, in light of all the circumstances, that a person(s) is
using public or private property as a living accommodation for one or more
nights, with intent to camp. (§ 1, Ord. 1189, eff. August 22, 1996)
Sec. 6-13.03.   Camping on public property.
   Except as may be permitted within parks by the Park and Recreation Director,
it is unlawful to camp or squat upon any public property owned or maintained by
the County, including, without limitation, streets, easements, parks, dump
sites, creek beds, electric utility substations, parking lots, or corporation
yards. No person shall set up tents, shacks, house trailers, motor homes,
campers, or any other temporary or permanent shelter for the purpose of
overnight camping or squatting, nor shall any person leave in any such place
any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for
such a purpose, such as a house trailer, tent, automobile, or the like.
Violation of this section shall be charged as a misdemeanor. (§ 1, Ord. 1189,
eff. August 22, 1996)
Sec. 6-13.04.   Camping on private property.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful to camp or
squat upon private property within the unincorporated area of the County. No
person shall set up tents, shacks, campers, or any other temporary or permanent
shelter for the purpose of overnight camping or squatting, nor shall any person
leave upon any private property any movable structure or special vehicle to be
used or that could be used for such a purpose, such as a tent or automobile, or
the like. Violation of this section shall be charged as a misdemeanor.
   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to persons camping upon their own
land or camping with the owner of the land, or to persons camping with the
written consent of the owner of the land, provided that such written consent is
in their possession at the time and is shown upon demand of any peace officer,
and provided that all local zoning ordinances of the County are met and all
Health Code sections of the State are complied with. This section shall not
apply to persons lawfully camping within campgrounds or trailer parks
specifically designated or approved for such use pursuant to the Zoning
Ordinance of the County. (§ 1, Ord. 1189, eff. August 22, 1996)
Sec. 6-13.05.   Campfires.
   No person shall kindle or maintain an open campfire or bonfire, except on
park property as designated by the Parks and Recreation Director.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit fires otherwise
prohibited by law or to negate the requirement for burning permits otherwise
required by law. (§ 1, Ord. 1189, eff. August 22, 1996)
Chapter 14
LIMITATIONS TO ACCESS TO TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Sections:
   
6-14.01   Purpose.
   
6-14.02   Findings.
   
6-14.03   Definitions.
   
6-14.04   Identification required.
   
6-14.05   Vendor-Assisted sales.
   
6-14.06   Out-of-Package sales.
   
6-14.07   Posting of signs.
   
6-14.08   Severability.
   
6-14.09   Enforcement.
   
6-14.10   Violations: infractions.
   
6-14.11   Public education.
Sec. 6-14.01.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this ordinance is to reduce the ability of minors to purchase
cigarettes by eliminating self service displays in the unincorporated areas of
Yolo County . (§ 1, Ord. 1226, eff. October 1, 1998)
Sec. 6-14.02.   Findings.
   (a)   Each year 400,000 Americans die prematurely from tobacco related
illnesses. Tobacco use has been linked to cancer, emphysema, heart disease and
a variety of other life threatening health problems.
   (b)   These health problems create a burden for local communities, and more
specifically for Yolo County. In addition to the health care cost for these
diseases, there is the lost human and economic contributions of each individual
who suffers from the preventable effects of tobacco use.
   (c)   The 1994 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse showed that 90% of
tobacco users start well before the age of eighteen, the average child smoker
started at age 13 while the average age for smokeless tobacco initiation is 9
years. According to the California State Department of Health Services Tobacco
Control System, while adult tobacco use has been declining, youth use has been
rising.
   (d)   All fifty states, and the District of Columbia , prohibit the sale of
tobacco products to minors. California Penal Code Sections 308(a) and 308
(b)   prohibit the sale of tobacco products and paraphernalia to minors and
possession of tobacco by a minor. Yet, over 29 million packs of cigarettes are
sold to    California children annually.
   (e)   The Synar Amendment to the 1992 Alcohol, Drug Abuse and Mental Health
Reorganization Act requires that states reduce sales of cigarettes to minors to
below 20% by the year 2000 or lose federal Drug and alcohol funding.
   (f) California ’s sales rate sales of cigarettes to minors in is still 21%.
Studies show that over 40% of grade school students who smoked daily have
shoplifted cigarettes, at some time, from self service displays and that sales
to minors drops by between 40% and 80% after enactment of ordinances requiring
vendor assisted sales of tobacco products.
   (g)   Similar legislation in other counties and cities in California have
reduced youth access to tobacco products without negatively affecting
businesses. (§ 1, Ord. 1226, eff. October 1, 1998)
Sec. 6-14.03.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   Business. “Business” shall mean a fixed location, whether indoors or
outdoors, at which merchandise is offered for sale at retail.
   (b)   Minor. “Minor” shall mean any person under 18 years of age.
   (c)   Self-Service Displays.  “Self-Service Displays” shall mean open
displays of tobacco products and point-of-sale tobacco promotional products
that the public has access to without the intervention of a store employee.
   (d)   Tobacco Product.  “Tobacco Product” shall mean any tobacco cigarette,
cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco or any other form of tobacco or tobacco
product which may be used for smoking, chewing, inhalation or other means of
ingestion.
   (e)   Vendor-Assisted.  “Vendor-Assisted” shall mean only a store owner or
employee shall have access to the tobacco product and assists the customer by
supplying the product. The customer may not take possession of the product
until after it is purchased. (§ 1, Ord. 1226, eff. October 1, 1998)
Sec. 6-14.04.    Identification Required.
   No retailer or vendor shall sell or permit to be sold cigarettes or other
tobacco products to an individual without requesting and examining photographic
identification establishing the purchaser’s age as eighteen years or greater,
unless the vendor or employee has a reasonable basis in fact to know the buyer
is over the age of eighteen. (§ 1, Ord. 1226, eff. October 1, 1998)
Sec. 6-14.05.    Vendor-Assisted Sales.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, business or tobacco retailer to
sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale or display for sale any tobacco product
by means of self-service display rack or shelf that allows self-service sales
or any means other than vendor-assisted sales.
   (b)   All tobacco products shall be displayed and offered for sale
exclusively by means of vendor/employee assistance, with tobacco products in a
location which requires vendor or employee assistance to retrieve the tobacco
product. (§ 1, Ord. 1226, eff. October 1, 1998)
Sec. 6-14.06.    Out-of-Package Sales.
   No person, business, tobacco retailer, or other establishment in the
unincorporated areas shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes or other tobacco
products not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with
all required health warnings. (§ 1, Ord. 1226, eff. October 1, 1998)
Sec. 6-14.07.    Posting of Signs.
   Any person, business, tobacco retailer, or other establishment in the
unincorporated area which sells tobacco products shall post plainly visible
signs at the point of purchase of tobacco products which comply with California
State Business and Professions Code Section 22952 (STAKE Act). All letters of
said sign shall be at least one half inch high or larger. (§ 1, Ord. 1226, eff.
October 1, 1998)
Sec. 6-14.08.    Severability.
   If any portion of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
chapter are severable. (§ 1, Ord. 1226, eff. October 1, 1998)
Sec. 6-14.09.    Enforcement.
   (a)   Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the County
Administrative Officer. The County Administrative Officer shall not undertake
further enforcement against a person without giving one warning and/or offering
an education session with a staff person designated by the Director of the
County Health Department.
   (b)   Notice of this chapter shall be given to all applicants for a business
license or renewal thereof.
   (c)   Any citizen who wishes to register a complaint under this chapter may
initiate enforcement by bringing the matter to the attention of the staff
person designated by the Director of the County Health Department.
Sec. 6-14.10.    Violations: Infractions.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or
otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to this regulation of this
Chapter to refuse to comply with any of its provisions.
   (b)   Any person, business, tobacco retailer, owner, manager or operator of
any establishment subject to this chapter who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction punishable by:
   (1)   A fine not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for the first
violation;
   (2)   A fine not exceeding Two Hundred and no/100ths ($200.00) Dollars for a
second violation within one year; and
   (3)   A fine not exceeding Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars for
a third violation for each additional violation of this chapter within one
year.
   (c)   A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the
violation continues. (§ 1, Ord. 1226, eff. October 1, 1998)
Sec. 6-14.11.    Public Education.
   The County Health Department shall engage in a continuing program to explain
and clarify the purpose and requirements of this chapter to citizens effected
and business effected by it, and to guide owners, operators and managers in
their compliance with it. Such program may include publication of a brochure
for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this
chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1226, eff. October 1, 1998)
Chapter 15
TOBACCO RETAILER PERMIT
Sections:
   
6-15.01   Purpose.
   
6-15.02   Definitions.
   
6-15.03   Tobacco Retailer Permit Required.
   
6-15.04   Limits on Tobacco Retailer Permits.
   
6-15.05   Application Procedure.
   
6-15.06   Fees.
   
6-15.07   Issuance; Denial; Effect.
   
6-15.08   Permit Nontransferable.
   
6-15.09   Permit Term, Renewal and Expiration.
   
6-15.10   Tobacco Product Pricing and Packaging.
   
6-15.11   Other Tobacco Retailing Requirements and Prohibitions.
   
6-15.12   Compliance Monitoring.
   
6-15.13   Revocation of Permit.
   
6-15.14   Appeal; Judicial Review.
   
6-15.15   Enforcement: Tobacco Retailing Without a Permit; Tobacco Retailing in
Violation of Chapter.
   
6-15.16   Additional Enforcement.
   
6-15.17   Severability.
Sec. 6-15.01. Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to discourage violations of tobacco-related
laws, particularly those which prohibit or discourage the sale or distribution
of tobacco products to minors, by requiring a tobacco retailing permit in the
unincorporated areas of the County of Yolo as set forth in this Chapter. (§ 2,
Ord. 1350, eff. June 15, 2006)
Sec. 6-15.02. Definitions.
   As used herein:
   (a)   “Arm's Length Transaction” means a sale in good faith and for valuable
consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between
two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to
participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or
partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of
the violations of this Chapter, is not an Arm's Length Transaction.
   (b)   “Cigar” means:
      (1)   Any roll of tobacco wrapped entirely or in part in tobacco or in
any substance containing tobacco; or
      (2)   Any paper or wrapper that contains tobacco and is designed for
smoking or ingestion of tobacco products. For the purposes of this subsection,
"cigar" includes, but is not limited to, tobacco products known or labeled as
"cigar," "cigarillo," "tiparillo," or "little cigar."
   (c)   “Coupon” means any voucher, rebate, card, paper, note, form,
statement, ticket, image, or other issue, whether in paper, digital, or other
form, used for commercial purposes to obtain an article, product, service, or
accommodation without charge or at a discounted price.
   (d)   “Department” means the Department of Health and Human Services.
   (e)   “Director” shall mean the Director of the Department of Health and
Human Services or the Health Officer of the Department of Health and Human
Services or their written designee.
   (f)   “Drug Paraphernalia” means all equipment, products and materials of
any kind which are designed for use or marketed for use, in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance.
   (g)   “Electronic Smoking Device” means any device that may be used to
deliver any aerosolized or vaporized substance to the person inhaling from the
device, including, but not limited to, an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape
pen, or e-hookah. “Electronic Smoking Device” includes any component, part, or
accessory of the device, and also includes any substance that may be
aerosolized or vaporized by such device, whether or not the substance contains
nicotine. “Electronic Smoking Device” does not include drugs, devices, or
combination products authorized for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act.
   (h)   “Flavored Tobacco Product” means any Tobacco Product that contains a
constituent that imparts a characterizing flavor to the tobacco product or
smoke produced by the tobacco product, either by the addition of artificial or
natural flavors or an herb or spice, including, but not limited to, menthol,
strawberry, grape, orange, clove, cinnamon, pineapple, vanilla, coconut,
licorice, cocoa, chocolate, cherry, or coffee.
   (i)   “Person” means any natural person, partnership, cooperative
association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee,
or any other legal entity.
   (j)   “Proprietor” means a Person with an ownership or managerial interest
in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a Person has
a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a
business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial
interest shall be deemed to exist when a Person can or does have or share
ultimate control over the day-today operations of a business.
   (k)   “Self-Service Display” means the open display of Tobacco Products or
Tobacco Paraphernalia in a manner that is accessible to the general public
without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer. A Vending
Machine is a form of Self-Service Display.
   (l)   “Significant Tobacco Retailer” means any Tobacco Retailer whose
principal or core business is selling Tobacco Products, Tobacco Paraphernalia,
or both, as evidenced by any of the following: (i) twenty percent (20%) or more
of floor area and display area is devoted to the sale or exchange of Tobacco
products, Tobacco Paraphernalia, or both; (ii) fifty percent (50%) or more of
completed sales transactions include a Tobacco Product or Tobacco
Paraphernalia; or (iii) sixty-seven percent (67%) or more of gross sales
receipts are derived from the sale or exchange of Tobacco Products, Tobacco
Paraphernalia, or both.
   (m)   “Smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted
or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated product
containing, made, or derived from nicotine, tobacco, marijuana, or other plant,
whether natural or synthetic, that is intended for inhalation. “Smoking”
includes using an electronic smoking device.
   (n)   “Tobacco Paraphernalia” means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes,
holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette-rolling machines, and any
other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, consumption or
ingestion of Tobacco Products.
   (o)   “Tobacco Product” means:
      (1)   Any product containing, made of, or derived from tobacco or
nicotine that is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed,
whether inhaled, absorbed, or ingested by any other means, including but not
limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or
snus;
      (2)   Any electronic smoking device and any substances that may be
aerosolized or vaporized by such device, whether or not the substance contains
nicotine; or
      (3)   Any component, part, or accessory of (1) or (2), whether or not any
of these contains tobacco or nicotine, including but not limited to filters,
rolling papers, blunt or hemp wraps, hookahs, mouthpieces, and pipes. “Tobacco
product” does not mean drugs, devices, or combination products authorized for
sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, as those terms are defined in
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   (p)   “Tobacco Retailer” means any Person who sells, offers for sale, or
does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, Tobacco
Products, or Tobacco Paraphernalia, or who distributes free or low cost samples
of Tobacco Products or Tobacco Paraphernalia, without regard to the quantity of
tobacco, Tobacco Products, or Tobacco Paraphernalia sold or offered for sale,
exchanged or offered for exchange, or distributed or offered for distribution.
"Tobacco Retailing" means the doing of any of these things.
   (q)   “Tobacco Retailing Permit Hearing Authority” or “Hearing Authority”
means one or more persons assigned by the County Administrative Officer the
responsibility of conducting a hearing pursuant to this Chapter, and may
hereafter be referred to as the Hearing Authority. The County Administrative
Officer shall assign hearing responsibility to any of the following:
      (1)   County management personnel whom the County Administrative Officer
finds to be qualified by training and experience to conduct such hearings;
      (2)   Any person(s) qualified by training or experience whom the County
Administrative Officer may employ or who are retained by contract to conduct
such hearings; or
      (3)   Administrative Law Judges assigned by the State Office of
Administrative Hearings. The County Administrative Officer is hereby authorized
to contract in the name of the County for the retention of hearing services at
rates that do not exceed the financial limitations established by the County's
annual budget and contracting rules, regulations and policies.
   (r)   “Vending Machine” means a machine, appliance, or other mechanical
device operated by currency, token, debit card, credit card, or any other form
of payment that is designed or used for vending purposes, including, but not
limited to, machines or devices that use remote control locking mechanisms.
   (s)   “Youth Decoy” means persons aged 20 and younger used as decoys to
purchase Tobacco Products or Tobacco Paraphernalia from licensed Tobacco
Retailers.
(§ 2, Ord. 1350, eff. June 15, 2006, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1474, eff. May 1,
2017,§§ 3-5, Ord. 1559, eff. December 22, 2022, and § 2, Ord. 1571, eff. March
13, 2025)
Sec. 6-15.03. Tobacco Retailer Permit Required.
   (a)   Tobacco Retailer's Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any
person to act as a Tobacco Retailer or a Proprietor in the county without first
obtaining and maintaining a valid Tobacco Retailer's Permit pursuant to this
Chapter. Tobacco retailing without a valid Tobacco Retailer's Permit is a
nuisance as a matter of law.
   (b)   False and Misleading Advertising Prohibited. A Tobacco Retailer or
Proprietor without a valid Tobacco Retailer Permit, including, for example, a
person whose permit has been suspended or revoked:
      (1)   Shall keep all tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia out of
public view. The public display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in
violation of this provision shall constitute tobacco retailing without a
license under Paragraph (a) above; and
      (2)   Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products or
tobacco paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of such products
from the Tobacco Retailer or Proprietor's location or that could lead a
reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at that
location.
   (c)   Drug Paraphernalia. It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any
Tobacco Retailer or Proprietor or any of the Tobacco Retailer or Proprietor’s
agents or employees to sell Drug Paraphernalia where Tobacco Products or
Tobacco Paraphernalia are sold. (§ 2, Ord. 1350, eff. June 15, 2006, as amended
by § 3, Ord. 1571, eff. March 13, 2025)
Sec. 6-15.04.   Limits on Tobacco Retailer Permits.
   (a)   The following locations are eligible to apply for a tobacco retailer
license:
RETAILER                       STREET ADDRESS          COMMUNITY
ZAMORA MINI MARKET             9920 COUNTY RD 99 W     ZAMORA
PILOT TRAVEL CENTER #168       30035 COUNTY RD #8      DUNNIGAN
FARMERS MARKET                 29020 COUNTY RD 6       DUNNIGAN
DUNNIGAN MARKET                3660 COUNTY RD 99W      DUNNIGAN
UNITED TRUCK STOP              29770 COUNTY RD # 8     DUNNIGAN
DUNNIGAN CHEVRON               4040 COUNTY RD 89       DUNNIGAN
EL CHINO MINI MARKET           2501 COUNTY ROAD 88     DUNNIGAN
DUNNIGAN EXPRESS               29029 COUNTY RD 6       DUNNIGAN
CASA RUIZ                      15190 STATE HIGHWAY 113 WOODLAND
WILLOW OAK GROCERY             37030 HWY. 16           WOODLAND
HOLLAND MARKET                 52945 NETHERLAND AVE    CLARKSBURG
ESPARTO SUPERMARKET            17343 FREMONT ST        ESPARTO
EL TORO FOODS - ESPARTO        16939 YOLO AVE          ESPARTO
ESPARTO GRAB & GO              16814 FREMONT ST        ESPARTO
DOLLAR GENERAL STORE #16171    26875 STATE HIGHWAY 16  ESPARTO
GUY'S CORNER                   17776 COUNTY ROAD #89   MADISON
KNIGHTS LANDING GROCERY STORE  9518 LOCUST ST          KNIGHTS LANDING
WAYSIDE MARKET                 9696 LOCUST ST          KNIGHTS LANDING
PLUG AND JUG MARKET            9425 LOCUST ST          KNIGHTS LANDING
CORNER STORE                   7530 STATE HIGHWAY 16   GUINDA
ROAD TRIP BAR AND GRILL MARKET 24989 STATE HIGHWAY 16  CAPAY
YOLO MARKET                    14212 1st STREET        YOLO
ERIC'S ARCO                    16435 CR 99             WOODLAND
TBD (ONE RETAIL LOCATION)      30056 COUNTY ROAD 8     DUNNIGAN
 
   In addition, any other retail location that was legally selling tobacco
products as of May 1, 2017 may receive or renew a tobacco retailer license. No
tobacco retailing licenses may otherwise be issued or renewed.
   (b)   A tobacco retailer license may be renewed for any location covered by
subsection (a), above, so long as: (1) no permanent revocation (as opposed to
temporary suspension) of a license previously held for the location has
occurred; (2) tobacco retailing has not ceased at the location for sixty (60)
consecutive days or longer, whether due to a business closure or otherwise; (3)
the licensee does not substantially change the business premises or business
operation; and (4) the licensee retains the right to operate under other
applicable laws, including without limitation the zoning ordinance, building
codes, or other applicable codes. (§ 2, Ord. 1350, eff. June 15, 2006, as
amended by § 3, Ord. 1474, eff. May 1, 2017, and Ord. 1512, eff. August 8,
2019)
Sec. 6-15.05.   Application Procedure.
   (a)   An application for a Tobacco Retailer’s Permit shall be submitted in
the name of each Proprietor proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and shall
be signed by each Proprietor or an authorized agent thereof. It is the
responsibility of each Proprietor to be informed regarding all laws applicable
to Tobacco Retailing, including those laws affecting the issuance of a Tobacco
Retailer’s Permit.
   (b)   All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the
Department, shall be accompanied by the application and permit fee established
pursuant to this Chapter, and shall contain the following information:
   (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of each Proprietor of the
business that is seeking the Permit.
   (2)   The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed
location for which the Permit is sought.
   (3)   The name and mailing address authorized by each Proprietor to receive
all permit-related communications and notices (the Authorized Address). If an
Authorized Address is not supplied, each Proprietor shall be understood and
deemed to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified
in subparagraph (2) above.
   (4)   Proof that the location for which a Tobacco Retailer’s Permit is
sought has been issued a valid State tobacco retailer’s license by the
California Board of Equalization.
   (5)   Whether or not any Proprietor has admitted violating, or has been
found to have violated, this Chapter, or whose proprietorship has admitted
violating, or has been found to have violated, this Chapter, and, if so, the
dates and locations of all such violations within the previous six years.
   (6)   Such other information as the Department deems necessary for the
administration or enforcement of this Chapter.
   (c)   Each Tobacco Retailer who has been issued a Permit shall update with
the Department all information required to be submitted in order to apply for
the Permit whenever the information changes. A Tobacco Retailer shall provide
the Department with all such updates within ten (10) business days of a change.
   (d)   The information specified in subparagraphs (b)(1), (2) and (3) shall
be available to the public. (§ 2, Ord. 1350, eff. June 15, 2006)
Sec. 6-15.06.   Fees.
   The fee to apply for and obtain or renew a Tobacco Retailer’s Permit shall
be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The fee shall be
calculated so as to recover no more than the total cost of permit
administration and enforcement, including but not limited to receiving,
reviewing and processing the application and the information contained therein,
issuing the permit, administering the permit program, retailer education,
retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, and
sanction and prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the
regulatory program authorized by this Chapter. All fees shall be used
exclusively to find the regulatory program authorized by this Chapter. Fees are
nonrefundable except as may otherwise be required by law. (§ 2, Ord. 1350, eff.
June 15, 2006)
Sec. 6-15.07.   Issuance; Denial; Effect.
   (a)   Upon the receipt of an application for a Tobacco Retailer’s Permit and
the application and permit fee, the Department shall issue a permit unless
substantial evidence in the record demonstrates one or more of the following
bases for denial:
   (1)   The application is incomplete or inaccurate.
   (2)   The application seeks authorization for Tobacco Retailing by a
Proprietor or other Person to whom this Chapter prohibits a Permit to be
issued.
   (3)   The application seeks authorization for Tobacco Retailing at a
location for which this Chapter prohibits a Permit to be issued.
   (4)   The application seeks authorization for Tobacco Retailing by a
Proprietor or other Person for whom, or at a location for which, a Permit
revocation is in effect pursuant to this Chapter.
   (5)   The application seeks authorization for Tobacco Retailing that is
prohibited pursuant to this Chapter (e.g., mobile vending), that is unlawful
pursuant to this Code (e.g., the zoning code), or that is unlawful pursuant to
any other law.
   (b)   If the Department denies a Permit application, the Department shall
notify the applicant in writing of the denial. A notice of denial shall be
personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the Permit holder. The
notice shall state the basis of the Department’s determination(s)   and denial,
and shall include an advisement of the right to appeal as set forth in Section
6-15.13.
   (c)   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to grant any Person
obtaining and maintaining a Tobacco Retailer’s Permit any status or right other
than the right to act as a Tobacco Retailer at the location in the County
identified on the face of the Permit. For example, nothing in this Chapter
shall be construed to render inapplicable, supercede, or apply in lieu of, any
other provision of applicable law, including but not limited to County zoning
ordinances, building codes, and business Permit requirements, and any condition
or limitation on smoking in enclosed places of employment made applicable to
business establishments by California Labor Code Section 6404.5 or any other
law or regulation. Obtaining a Tobacco Retailer Permit also does not make the
Retailer a “retail or wholesale tobacco shop” for the purposes of California
Labor Code Section 6404.5.
   (d)   The issuance of a Permit does not constitute a determination by the
County that the Tobacco Retailer or Proprietor has complied with all laws
applicable to Tobacco Retailing. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to
vest in any Person obtaining and maintaining a Permit any status or right to
act as a Tobacco Retailer in contravention of any provision of law.
   (e)   A Permit issued in error, contrary to this Chapter, contrary to any
other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a
Proprietor may be revoked pursuant to Section
6-15.12. (§ 2, Ord. 1350, eff. June 15, 2006)
Sec. 6-15.08.   Permit Nontransferable.
   (a)   A Tobacco Retailer’s Permit may not be transferred from one Person to
another or from one location to another. Whenever a Tobacco Retailing location
has a change in Proprietors, a new Tobacco Retailer’s Permit is required.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, prior violations
at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and Permit
ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless:
   (1)   The location has been fully transferred to a new Proprietor or
entirely new Proprietors; and,
   (2)   The new Proprietor(s)   provide the Department with clear and
convincing evidence that the new Proprietor(s) have acquired or is acquiring
the location in an Arm’s Length Transaction. (§ 2, Ord. 1350, eff. June 15,
2006)
Sec. 6-15.09.   Permit Term, Renewal and Expiration.
   (a) The term of a Tobacco Retailer Permit is one (1) year.
   (b)   Each Tobacco Retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her
Tobacco Retailer’s Permit and submit the Permit fee no later than thirty (30)
days prior to expiration of the term.
   (c)   A Tobacco Retailer’s Permit that is not timely renewed as set forth
above shall expire at the end of its term.
   (d)   To reinstate a Permit that has expired, or to renew a Permit not
timely renewed as set forth above, the Proprietor(s) must:
   (1)   Submit the Permit fee plus a reinstatement fee of ten percent (10%) of
the Permit fee.
   (2)   Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the Proprietor:
   (A)   Has not sold and will not sell any Tobacco Product or Tobacco
Paraphernalia after the Permit expiration date and before the Permit is
renewed; or
   (B) Has waited the appropriate ineligibility period established for Tobacco
Retailing without a Permit, as set forth in Section
6-15.14(a) of this Chapter, before seeking renewal of the Permit. (§ 2, Ord.
1350, eff. June 15, 2006)
Sec. 6-15.10.   Tobacco Product Pricing and Packaging.
   (a)   Packaging and Labeling. No tobacco retailer shall sell any tobacco
product to any consumer unless the tobacco product:
   (1)   is sold in the manufacturer’s packaging intended for sale to
consumers;
   (2)   conforms to all applicable federal labeling requirements; and
   (3)   conforms to all applicable child-resistant packaging requirements.
   (b)   Display of Price. The price of each tobacco product offered for sale
shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on the tobacco product or on any
related shelving, posting, advertising, or display at the location where the
item is sold or offered for sale.
   (c)   Distribution of Tobacco Samples or Promotional Items. It is unlawful
for any person to distribute free or nominally priced tobacco products.
   (d)   Prohibition of Tobacco Coupons and Discounts. No tobacco retailer
shall:
   (1)   Honor or redeem, or offer to honor or redeem, a coupon to allow a
consumer to purchase a tobacco product for less than the full retail price;
   (2)   Sell any tobacco product to a consumer through a multiple-package
discount or otherwise provide any such product to a consumer for less than the
full retail price in consideration for the purchase of any tobacco product or
any other item; or
   (3)   Provide any free or discounted item to a consumer in consideration for
the purchase of any tobacco product.
   (e)   Minimum Package Size for Little Cigars and Cigars. No tobacco retailer
shall sell:
   (1)   Any little cigar unless it is sold in a package of at least five (5)
little cigars; or
   (2)   Any cigar unless it is sold in a package of at least five (5) cigars;
provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to a cigar that has a
price of at least seven dollars ($7.00) per cigar, including all applicable
taxes and fees.
   (f)   Minimum Prices for Cigarettes, Little Cigars, and Cigars. No tobacco
retailer shall sell:
   (1)   Cigarettes at a price that is less than nine dollars ($9.00) per
package of twenty (20) cigarettes, including all applicable taxes and fees;
   (2)   Little cigars at a price that is less than nine dollars ($9.00) per
package of little cigars, including all applicable taxes and fees; or
   (3)   Cigars at a price that is less than seven dollars ($7.00) per cigar,
including all applicable taxes and fees.
   The minimum price established in this Section shall be adjusted annually by
the Department in proportion with Consumer Price Index, using a system
established by the Department. (§ 6, Ord. 1559, eff. December 22, 2022)
Sec. 6-15.11.   Other Tobacco Retailing Requirements and Prohibitions.
   (a)   Each Proprietor shall prominently display each Permit at the location
where Tobacco-Retailing is permitted by the Permit.
   (b)   In the course of Tobacco Retailing or in the operation of the business
or maintenance of the location for which a Permit issued, it shall be a
violation of this Chapter for a Proprietor or Tobacco Retailer, or any of the
Proprietor's or Tobacco Retailer's agents or employees, to:
   (1)   Violate any Federal, State or local law applicable to Tobacco
Products, Tobacco Paraphernalia, or Tobacco Retailing.
   (2)   Violate any Federal, State or local law regulating exterior,
storefront, window, or door signage.
   (c)   No Person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age shall engage
in Tobacco Retailing.
   (d)   No Tobacco Retailer shall display Tobacco Products or Tobacco
Paraphernalia by means of a Self-Service Display or engage in Tobacco Retailing
by means of a Self-Service Display.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, it shall be a
violation of this Chapter for any licensee or any of the licensee's agents or
employees to sell, offer for sale, or exchange for any form of consideration:
   (1)   Any Flavored Tobacco Product.
(§ 2, Ord. 1350, eff. June 15, 2006; as amended by § 4, Ord. 1474, eff. May 1,
2017, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1477, eff. December 22, 2016, as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1559, eff. December 22, 2022)
Sec. 6-15.12.   Compliance Monitoring.
   (a)   Compliance with this Chapter shall be monitored by the HHSA Tobacco
Prevention Staff. Any number of persons may be designated to monitor compliance
with this Chapter.
   (b)   HHSA Tobacco Prevention Staff, or other person designated to enforce
the provisions of this Chapter shall inspect each Tobacco Retailer at least
once every twelve (12) months. The Yolo County Sheriff's Office and Yolo County
Health and Human Services agency shall also have authority to assist in the
enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. Nothing in this Paragraph shall
create a right of action in any Tobacco Retailer, Proprietor or other person
against the county or its agents.
   (c)   Compliance checks shall determine, at a minimum, if the Tobacco
Retailer is conducting business in a manner that complies with Federal, State
and local laws regulating access to Tobacco and Tobacco Paraphernalia.
   (d)   The County shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age for
tobacco purchases or possession against a Person who otherwise might be in
violation of such law because of the Person's age (hereinafter "Youth Decoy")
if the potential violation occurs when:
      (1)   The youth decoy is acting as an agent of a person designated to
monitor compliance with this Chapter; or
      (2)   The youth decoy is participating in an inspection funded in part,
either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the Department or the
California Department of Health Services. (§ 2, Ord. 1350, eff. June 15, 2006,
as amended by §§ 2 and 7, Ord. 1559, eff. December 22, 2022, and § 4, Ord.
1571, eff. March 13, 2025)
Sec. 6-15.13.   Revocation of Permit.
   (a)   In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a Tobacco
Retailer's Permit shall be revoked if any court of competent jurisdiction
determines, or if the Director finds after the Tobacco Retailer or Permitee is
afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that the Tobacco Retailer or
Permitee, or any of the Tobacco Retailer's or Permitee's officers, agents or
employees, has violated any of the requirements, conditions, or prohibitions of
this Chapter or, in a different legal proceeding, has pleaded guilty, "no
contest" or its equivalent, or admitted to, a violation designated in Sections
6-15.10 and
6-15.11.
   (b)   A Tobacco Retailer's Permit shall be revoked if the Department finds,
after the Permitee is afforded reasonable notice and an opportunity to be
heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a Permit under Section
6-15.07 existed at the time the Permit application was submitted or at any time
thereafter and before the Permit issued. The revocation shall be without
prejudice to the filing of a new Permit application.
   (c)   A decision to revoke a Permit is appealable to the Tobacco Retailing
Permit Hearing Authority pursuant to Section
6-15.13. If such an appeal is made within the time provided in that Section, it
shall stay enforcement of the appealed action.
   (d)   A notice of revocation shall be personally served on, or sent by
certified mail to, the Permit holder. The notice shall state the basis of the
Department's determination(s) and the revocation, and shall include an
advisement of the right to appeal as set forth in Section
6-15.13.
   (e)   During the period that any permit is revoked, the Proprietor shall
prominently display a notice advising the public of the revocation, in the form
and in the manner designated by the Department.
   (f)   After revocation pursuant to subsection (a) above, a new permit may be
issued only in accordance with the following:
   (1)   After revocation for a first violation of this Chapter at any location
within any sixty- (60) month period, no new Permit may issue for that location,
or that Proprietor or other Person, until not less than ten (10) days have
passed from the date of revocation.
   (2)   After revocation for a second violation of this Chapter at any
location within any sixty- (60) month period, no new Permit may issue for that
location, or that Proprietor or other Person, until not less than ninety (90)
days have passed from the date of revocation.
   (3)   After revocation for a third violation of this Chapter at any location
within any sixty- (60) month period, no new Permit may issue for that location,
or that Proprietor or other Person, until not less than one (1) year has passed
from the date of revocation.
   (4)   After revocation for four or more violations of this Chapter at any
location within any sixty- (60) month period, no new Permit may issue for that
location, or that Proprietor or other Person, until not less than five (5)
years have passed from the date of revocation. (§ 2, Ord. 1350, eff. June 15,
2006, as amended by §§ 2 and 8, Ord. 1559, eff. December 22, 2022)
Sec. 6-15.14.   Appeal; Judicial Review.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided by law, any decision made appealable to
the Hearing Authority pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to the
following requirements and procedures.
   (b)   Any appeal must be in writing, shall state the specific reasons
therefore and the grounds asserted for relief and the specific relief
requested, and shall be filed with the County Administrative Officer within ten
(10) calendar days of personal service of the notice of the action being
appealed, or within fifteen (15) calendar days of mailing if the notice is only
served by mail. If any Person to whom the notice of violation was given does
not file a written appeal within the time and in the manner set forth above,
the right to review of the Department's determination shall be deemed to have
been waived, and the Department's decision shall be final.
   If a written appeal is filed within the time and in the manner set forth
above, the matter shall be heard by the Hearing Authority.
   (c)   Not later than fifteen (15) days after receipt of the appeal, the
County Administrative Officer shall provide written notice to the parties of
the date, time, and place of the hearing, in the manner specified above for a
notice of revocation.
   (d)   The provisions of the Administration Procedure Act (commencing with
Section 11500 of the Government Code of the State) shall not be applicable to
such hearing, nor shall formal rules of evidence in civil or criminal judicial
proceedings be so applicable.
   A record of the hearing shall be made by any means, including electronic
recording, so long as a reasonably accurate and complete written transcription
of the proceedings can be made. Technical rules of evidence shall not apply to
the hearing, but relevant evidence may be admitted and given probative effect
only if it is the kind of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed
to rely in the conduct of serious affairs.
   A decision of the Hearing Authority shall be supported by substantial
evidence. The Hearing Authority shall sustain the Department's decision if the
Hearing Authority finds that any lawful basis for the Department's action
exists.
   (e)   Following the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Authority shall
prepare a written decision that either grants or denies the appeal, contains
findings of facts and conclusions of law, and includes notification that the
time limit within which a judicial review shall be sought is governed by Code
of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. Notice of the written decision, including a
copy thereof, shall be filed with the County Administrative Officer and served
upon all parties not later than seven (7) days following the date on which the
hearing is closed.
   The Hearing Authority's written decision shall be the final decision of the
County, and shall become final upon the date that notice thereof is mailed to
the appellant by certified mail.
   (f)   Any determination of the Hearing Authority shall be subject to
judicial review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. (§ 2, Ord.
1350, eff. June 15, 2006, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1559, eff. December 22, 2022)
Sec. 6-15.15.   Enforcement: Tobacco Retailing Without a Permit; Tobacco
Retailing in Violation of Chapter.
   (a)   In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if the Department
finds or any court of competent jurisdiction determines, after notice and an
opportunity to be heard, that any Person has engaged in Tobacco Retailing at a
location without a valid Tobacco Retailer's license, either directly or through
the Person's agents or employees, the Person shall be ineligible to apply for
or be issued a Tobacco Retailing license for that location as follows:
   (1)   After a first violation of this Chapter at a location within any
sixty- (60) month period, no license may issue for the Person at the location
until not less than thirty (30) days have passed from the date of the
violation.
   (2)   After a second violation of this Chapter at a location within any
sixty- (60) month period, no license may issue for the Person at the location
until not less than ninety (90) days have passed from the date of the
violation.
   (3)   After of a third or subsequent violation of this Chapter at a location
within any sixty- (60) month period, no license may issue for the Person at the
location until not less than five (5) years have passed from the date of the
violation.
   (b)   Tobacco Products and Tobacco Paraphernalia offered for sale or
exchange in violation of this Chapter are subject to seizure by the Department
or any peace officer, and shall be forfeited after the licensee and any other
owner of the Tobacco Products and Tobacco Paraphernalia seized is given
reasonable notice by the Department and an opportunity to demonstrate that the
Tobacco Products and Tobacco Paraphernalia were not offered for sale or
exchange in violation of this Chapter. The decision by the Department may be
appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section
6-15.13. Forfeited Tobacco Products and Tobacco Paraphernalia shall be
destroyed.
   (c)   Each day after the effective date of this Chapter on which Tobacco
Products or Tobacco Paraphernalia are offered for sale in violation of this
Chapter shall constitute a violation of this Chapter separate and apart from
any other violation of this Chapter.
   (d)   For a first or second alleged violation of this Chapter within any
sixty- (60) month period, the Director may engage in settlement negotiations
and, with the County Counsel 's concurrence, may enter into a settlement
agreement with a Tobacco Retailer alleged to have violated this Chapter without
approval from the Board of Supervisors. Notice of any settlement shall be
provided to the Board, and no hearing shall be held. Settlements shall not be
confidential and shall contain the following minimum terms:
   (1)   After a first alleged violation of this Chapter at a location within
any sixty- (60) month period:
   (A)   An admission that the violation occurred and a stipulation that the
violation will be counted when considering what penalty will be assessed for
any future violations;
   (B)   An agreement to stop acting as a Tobacco Retailer for at least one (1)
day; and;
   (C)   A settlement payment to the County of at least one thousand dollars
($1,000).
   (2)   After a second alleged violation of this Chapter at a location within
any sixty- (60) month period:
   (A)   An admission that the violation occurred and a stipulation that the
violation will be counted when considering what penalty will be assessed for
any future violations;
   (B)   An agreement to stop acting as a Tobacco Retailer for at least ten
(10) days; and,
   (C)   A settlement payment to the County of at least five thousand dollars
($5,000). (§ 2, Ord. 1350, eff. June 15, 2006, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1559,
eff. December 22, 2022)
Sec. 6-15.16.   Additional Enforcement.
   (a)   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of
any provision of this Chapter shall also constitute a violation of this
Chapter.
   (b)   Violations of this Chapter may, in the discretion of the District
Attorney, be prosecuted as criminal infractions or misdemeanors.
   (c)   Violations of this Chapter are subject to a civil action brought by
the District Attorney, punishable as follows:
   (1)   A fine not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250) and not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000) for a first violation in any sixty-
(60) month period;
   (2)   A fine not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) and not exceeding
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) for a second violation in any sixty-
(60) month period; or
   (3)   A fine not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) and
not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000) for a third or subsequent
violation in any sixty- (60) month period.
   (d)   Any violation of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance as well as a private nuisance that is presumed to at least nominally
damage each and every resident of the community in which the business operates.
   (e)   In addition to other remedies provided by this Chapter or by other
law, any violation of this Chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by
the District Attorney, including but not limited to, administrative or judicial
nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings,
and suits for injunctive relief.
   (f)   Any Person, including the County of Yolo , acting for the interests of
itself, its members, or the general public (hereinafter "the Private Enforcer")
may bring a civil action to enforce this Chapter.
   (1)   Upon proof of a violation, a court shall award to the Private Enforcer
the following:
   (A)   Damages in the amount of either:
   (i)   Upon proof, actual damages; or,
   (ii)   With insufficient or no proof of the amount of actual damages, five
hundred dollars ($500) for each violation of this Chapter (hereinafter
"Statutory Damages"). Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this Chapter, no Private Enforcer suing on behalf of the
general public shall recover Statutory Damages based upon a violation of this
Chapter if a previous claim brought on behalf of the general public for
Statutory Damages and based upon the same violation has been adjudicated,
whether or not the Private Enforcer was a party to that adjudication.
   (B)   Exemplary damages, where it is proven by clear and convincing evidence
that the defendant is guilty of oppression, fraud, malice, or a conscious
disregard for the public health.
   (C)   Injunctive Relief.
   (i)   Notwithstanding any legal or equitable bar against a Private Enforcer
seeking relief on his/her/its own behalf, a Private Enforcer may bring an
action to enforce this Chapter solely on behalf of the general public. When a
Private Enforcer brings an action solely on behalf of the general public,
nothing about such an action shall act to preclude or bar the Private Enforcer
from bringing a subsequent action based upon the same facts but seeking relief
on the Private Enforcer's own behalf.
   (ii)   Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the Private Enforcer from
bringing an action in small claims court to enforce this Chapter, so long as
the amount in demand and the type of relief sought are within the
jurisdictional requirements of small claims court as set forth in California
Code of Civil Procedure section 116.220.
   (g)   Whenever evidence of a violation of this Chapter is obtained in any
part through the participation of a Person under the age of eighteen (18) years
old, such a Person shall not be required (but shall be permitted) to appear or
give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this
Chapter and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the
sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented.
   (h)   The remedies provided by this Chapter are cumulative and in addition
to any other remedies available at law or in equity.
   (i)   Any peace officer may enforce the penal provisions of this Chapter. (§
2, Ord. 1350, eff. June 15, 2006, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1559, eff. December
22, 2022)
Sec. 6-15.17.   Severability.
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this Chapter, or its application to any person or circumstance, is
for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable, such invalidity or
unenforceability shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the
remaining sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses
or phrases of this Chapter, or its application to any other person or
circumstance. The Board of Supervisors of the County of Yolo hereby declares
that it would have adopted each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more other sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses
or phrases hereof be declared invalid or unenforceable. (§ 2, Ord. 1350, eff.
June 15, 2006, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1559, eff. December 22, 2022)
Chapter 16
RECYCLING AND DIVERSION OF DEBRIS FROM CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION
   
Sec. 6-16.01   Title.
   
Sec. 6-16.02   Definitions.
   
Sec. 6-16.03   Applicable Projects.
   
Sec. 6-16.04   Exemptions.
   
Sec. 6-16.05   Diversion Requirements.
   
Sec. 6-16.06   Reporting Requirements.
   
Sec. 6-16.07   Administrative Fees.
   
Sec. 6-16.08   Deposits, Refunds and Penalties.
   
Sec. 6-16.09   Appeal.
   
Sec. 6-16.10   Severability.
Sec. 6-16.01.   Title.
This Chapter shall be known as the “CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS
RECYCLING AND DIVERSION ORDINANCE” of Yolo County, and may be so cited. (§ 3,
Ord. 1375, eff. Aug 23, 2008)
Sec. 6-16.02.   Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
   (a)   Administrative Fee shall mean a non-refundable fee submitted by the
applicant to the County as described in Section
6-16.07. Portions of this fee shall be deposited into the County’s Division of
Integrated Waste Management (DIWM) Recycling Fund and the remaining portions
shall be transferred to the Building Division’s and Auditor’s Office Funds as
allocated in the fee section of this Ordinance to cover costs associated with
this Chapter.
   (b)   Applicant shall mean any individual, firm, contractor, limited
liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government
agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other
entity whatsoever that applies to the County for the applicable permits to
undertake any construction or demolition project within the County.
   (c)   Construction shall mean the building of any facility or structure or
any portion thereof including any tenant improvements to an existing facility
or structure.
   (d)   Construction and Demolition Debris shall mean:
   (1)   Discarded materials generally not considered water soluble and non-
hazardous in nature, including but not limited to steel, copper, aluminum,
glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard, roofing
materials and lumber from the construction or demolition of a structure as part
of a construction or demolition project or from the renovation of a structure
and/or landscaping, including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other
vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and
development operations for a construction project;
   (2)   Remnants of new materials, including but not limited to: cardboard,
paper, plastic, wood, and metal scraps from any construction and/or landscape
project;
   (3)   Other non-hazardous wastes that are generated at construction or
demolition projects provided such amounts are consistent with best management
practices of the industry.
   (e)   Contractor shall mean any person or entity holding, or required to
hold, a contractor's license of any type under the laws of the State of
California, or who performs (whether as contractor, subcontractor, owner-
builder, or otherwise) any construction, demolition, remodeling, renovation, or
landscaping service relating to buildings or accessory structures in the
unincorporated area of Yolo County.
   (f)   Demolition shall mean the decimating, razing, tearing down or wrecking
of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part,
whether interior or exterior.
   (g)   Deposit shall mean a cash dollar amount provided to the DIWM at the
time of submitting the Diversion Plan for those applicants where prior projects
have been determined as Good Faith Effort or Non-Compliance status. Refunds of
the deposits (without interest) are dependent on the level of compliance with
this Chapter as described in Section
6-16.08. Forfeited deposits shall be deposited in the County’s DIWM Recycling
Fund and will be used to implement the Division’s recycling programs.
   (h)   Designated Recyclable and Reusable Materials shall mean and includes
but not limited to:
   (1)   Corrugated Cardboard (OCC);
   (2)   Inert materials generally used in construction including but not
limited to, asphalt, concrete, rock, stone, mortar and brick;
   (3)   Metals, including all metal scrap such as, but not limited to, pipes,
siding, window frames, door frames and fences;
   (4)   Roofing materials including wood shingles and shakes as well as
asphalt, stone and slate based roofing material;
   (5)   Salvageable materials and structures, including, but not limited to
doors, windows, fixtures, hardwood flooring, sinks, bathtubs and appliances;
   (6)   Vegetative materials, including trees, tree parts, shrubs, stumps,
logs, brush or any other type of plants that are cleared from a site for
construction or other use;
   (7)   Wallboard materials including gypsum and drywall;
   (8)   Wood materials, including any and all dimensional lumber, fencing or
construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, CCA pressure
treated, contaminated or painted; and
   (9)   Any other materials that the County determines can be diverted due to
the identification of a recycling facility, reuse facility, or market
accessible from the County.
   (i)   Diversion shall mean the use of material for any purpose other than
disposal to include but not be limited to reuse and recycling.
   (j)   Diversion Plan shall mean a completed County-provided form submitted
before the issuance of a building and/or demolition permit, approved by the
Waste Reduction Manager for the purpose of compliance with this Chapter.
   (k)   Diversion Report shall mean a completed County provided form submitted
quarterly and after demolition or construction, as a precedent to final
inspection and issuance of any certificate of occupancy, approved by the
Compliance Officer for the purpose of compliance with this Chapter.
   (l)   Good Faith Effort shall mean and be applicable to projects where the
availability of markets for construction and demolition debris were a
determining factor in not meeting full compliance and where sufficient evidence
of the project through documented efforts, such as weight receipts, demonstrate
the applicant attempted to divert construction and demolition debris but did
not meet full compliance.
   (m)   Project shall have the meaning set forth in Section
6-16.03 of this Chapter.
   (n)   Recycling shall mean the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing,
treating and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste
and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of a raw material for
new, reused or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards
necessary to be used in the marketplace.
   (o)   Renovation shall mean any change, addition or modification in an
existing structure.
   (p)   Reuse shall mean further or repeated use of construction of demolition
debris.
   (q)   Waste Reduction Manager shall mean the person(s)   designated by the
Director of the Planning and Public Works Department authorized and responsible
for implementing this Chapter. (§ 3, Ord. 1375, eff. Aug 23, 2008)
Sec. 6-16.03.   Applicable Projects.
   Projects subject to the requirements of this Chapter include any project
which consists of one or more of the following:
   (a)   Construction of a new agricultural, commercial, industrial or
institutional building or structure that is equal to or greater than 5,000
square feet;
   (b)   Construction of multifamily dwellings, such as duplexes, where two or
more units are under construction at a given time or apartment complexes, where
three or more units are under construction at a given time;
   (c)   Construction of new residential dwellings, each dwelling equal to or
greater than 2,000 square feet, in a subdivision housing tract where a
homebuilder has a construction phase that includes multiple residential lots
(two or more) under construction at a given time;
   (d)   Demolition of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, that is
equal to or greater than 1,500 square feet (agricultural, residential, multi-
family, commercial, industrial or institutional); and
   (e)   Renovation, addition or alteration of any agricultural, commercial,
industrial, institutional or multifamily building or structure that is equal to
or greater than 1,000 square feet. (§ 3, Ord. 1375, eff. Aug 23, 2008)
Sec. 6-16.04.   Exemptions.
   The following projects shall not be subject to the provisions of this
Chapter:
   (a)   A project contaminated by hazardous substances or hazardous waste as
defined by the state or federal law;
   (b)   Construction or renovation of one residential dwelling, or two or more
residential dwellings where each dwelling in less than 2,000 square feet;
   (c)   Demolition of a building or structure, or a portion, thereof, that is
less than 1,500 square feet;
   (d)   Emergency work (addition, alteration, construction, demolition,
renovation performed in conjunction with an emergency (i.e. fire, earthquake,
flood) or a building or structure deemed substandard by the California Building
Code through the Chief Building Official); and
   (e)   Renovation, addition or alteration of any agricultural, commercial,
industrial, institutional or multifamily building structure that is less than
1,000 square feet. (§ 3, Ord. 1375, eff. Aug 23, 2008)
Sec. 6-16.05.   Diversion Requirements.
   Fifty percent (50%) of construction and demolition debris generated from
every applicable construction, renovation, or demolition project shall be
diverted from going to landfills by using recycling, reuse and diversion
programs. Reports will be required for verification of such activities.
Acceptable diversion methods are:
   (a)   Taking all mixed or segregated construction and demolition debris to
the Mixed Construction and Demolition Debris Recycling Facility located at the
Yolo County Central Landfill (YCCL), 44090 County Road 28H, Woodland,
California 95776, which is an approved facility, meets the diversion
requirements of this Ordinance on every load accepted. Other such mixed
facilities may be utilized as long as they are County-approved; or
   (b)   Source separating designated materials, such as cardboard, wood,
metals, green waste, wallboard, tile, concrete, and other easily recycled
materials, and directing them to recycling facilities, approved by the DIWM,
and taking the remainder (but no more than 50% by weight or yardage) to YCCL
for disposal. (§ 3, Ord. 1375, eff. Aug 23, 2008)
Sec. 6-16.06.   Reporting Requirements.
   (a)   The following plan will need to be submitted and approved prior to
issuance of a permit:
   (1)   Every contractor shall submit a properly completed Diversion Plan on a
form prescribed by the County, as a requirement of the construction and
demolition permit process. The plan can cover multiple building permits for
lots where construction activity is occurring at the same time by the same
applicant. Separate plans must be submitted for each batch of building permits
requested. The Diversion Plan shall identify the materials to be recycled or
reused and/or disposed of and shall list facilities and providers to be used.
An administrative fee for each requested permit and the corresponding deposit
must be submitted with the Diversion Plan.
   (2)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, no construction
or demolition permit shall be issued for any project as defined in Section
6-16.03 of this Ordinance unless and until the Waste Reduction Manager has
approved the Diversion Plan. The Waste Reduction Manager shall only approve a
Diversion Plan if he or she determines that it contains all of the information
set forth in subsection (a)above. If the Waste Reduction Manager determines
that all of the above conditions have been met, he or she shall mark the
Diversion Plan “Approved”, return a copy of the plan to the applicant, and
notify the Building Division that it has been approved.
   (3)   If the Waste Reduction Manager determines that the Diversion Plan in
incomplete he or she shall return it to the applicant marked “Denied” or
“Further Explanation Required”. The applicant must then submit additional
information before the Diversion Plan can be reviewed again and the
construction or demolition permit issued. The applicant may resubmit the
Diversion Plan within 60 calendar days without forfeiting the administrative
fee.
   (b)   The following reports will need to be submitted and approved prior to
issuance of Certificate of Occupancy:
   (1)   Quarterly reports, due no later than April 30th, July 30th, October
30th and January 30th, will be required as well as a final report due no later
than thirty (30) days following the completion of a construction or demolition
project, the contractor shall, as a condition of final approval and for
issuance of any certificate of occupancy, submit a final Diversion Report to
the DIWM that demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (2)   The documentation shall consist of photocopies of receipts and weight
tags or other records of measurement or equivalent documentation from recycling
companies, deconstruction contractors, and landfill and disposal companies. If
the Mixed Construction and Demolition Debris Recycling Facility, located at the
YCCL, was utilized, corresponding attached receipts will be reflective of
automatically meeting the diversion requirements of such load(s).
The contractor's approved Diversion Report shall be completed by recording and
confirming the type of debris diverted and the facilities to which it was
taken. Receipts from vendors or facilities shall clearly state the project
title and date. If the receipt provides information for multiple projects, the
project titles and the amounts of materials for each project must be clearly
identified. The contractor shall sign the completed Diversion Report to certify
its accuracy as part of the documentation of compliance.
   (3)   All documentation submitted pursuant to this section is subject to
verification by the DIWM.
   (4)   It is unlawful for any person to submit documentation to the DIWM
under this section which that person knows to contain any false statements,
including but not limited to false statements regarding tonnage of materials
recycled or diverted, or to submit any false or fraudulent receipt or weight
tag or other record of measurement. (§ 3, Ord. 1375, eff. Aug 23, 2008)
Sec. 6-16.07.   Administrative Fees.
   A non-refundable administrative fee of $300.00, as established by resolution
of the County Board of Supervisors, will be charged for each building or
demolition permit to cover the costs for all County expenses incurred in
administering this Chapter. This fee shall be split between the Division of
Integrated Waste Management ($158.00) and the Building Division ($142.00).
   If a Diversion Plan is re-submitted after 60 calendar days, the original
administrative fee is forfeited and an additional administrative fee of $100.00
per permit will be required prior to review of the Diversion Plan and issuance
of the construction or demolition permit. This additional fee shall also be
split between the Division of Integrated Waste Management ($25.00) and the
Building Division ($75.00). (§ 3, Ord. 1375, eff. Aug 23, 2008)
Sec. 6-16.08.   Deposits, Refunds and Penalties.
   (a)   Deposits.
   (1)   No deposit is required for first time applicants or for applicants
that are in good standing having met Full Compliance on an immediate past
project.
   (2)   A deposit of $2,500 will be required if the previous project received
a determination of Good Faith Effort, based upon quarterly Diversion Reports or
if the applicant did not submitted required reports. This $2,500 deposit will
apply following a Good Faith Effort determination. Upon the Waste Reduction
Manager’s determination that the applicant has complied with this Chapter for
one consecutive project, the applicant shall not pay a deposit on future plans
so long as applicant stays in compliance.
   (3)   A deposit of $5,000 will be required if the previous project received
a final determination of Non-Compliance. This $5,000 deposit will apply for two
subsequent projects following the Non-Compliance determination. Upon the Waste
Reduction Manager’s determination that the applicant has complied with this
Chapter for two consecutive projects, the applicant shall not pay a deposit on
future plans so long as applicant stays in compliance.
   (b)   Refunds.
   (1)   Section
6-16.08(b)   is applicable when projects are subject to either the $2,500 or
$5,000 Deposit.
   (2)   Full Compliance: The Waste Reduction Manager will notify both the
applicant and Building Division when he or she determines that the diversion
requirements have been met. The cash deposit shall be returned in full, without
interest, within 30 calendar days of the compliance determination.
   (3)   Good Faith Effort: If the Waste Reduction Manager determines that the
diversion requirement has not been achieved, he or she shall determine on a
case-by-case basis whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply
with this Chapter. In making this determination, the Waste Reduction Manager,
shall consider the availability of markets for construction and demolition
debris, the size of the project and the documented efforts of the applicant to
divert construction and demolition debris. The applicant and Building Division
shall be notified once this determination has been made. A partial (50%) refund
of the deposit will be issued to applicant within 30 calendar days of the
compliance determination. An applicant that receives a Good Faith Effort
determination will be required to post a deposit for future projects in the
amount of $2,500 as described in Section
6-16.08(a)(2) above.
   (4)   Non-Compliance: If the Waste Reduction Manager determines that the
applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with this Chapter, no
refund will be issued. The deposit shall be forfeited entirely for failure to
comply with the requirements of this Chapter. Any deposit that is forfeited
shall be deposited into the DIWM’s Recycling Fund and will be used to implement
and promote the Division’s recycling programs. An applicant that receives a
Non-Compliance determination will be required to post a deposit for future
projects in the amount of $5,000 as described in Section
6-16.08(a)(3) above.
   (c)   Penalties.
   (1)   For Projects not originally subject to a deposit, upon determination
of Non-Compliance by the Waste Reduction Manager, a penalty of $2,500 will be
assessed to all construction projects and a penalty of $5,000 will be assessed
to all demolition projects. Final approvals and a Certificate of Occupancy will
not be issued until the appropriate penalty has been paid in full as described
in this Section and all penalties shall be non-refundable. (§ 3, Ord. 1375,
eff. Aug 23, 2008)
Sec. 6-16.09.   Appeal.
   (a)   Any person wishing to appeal a decision made under this Chapter must
submit a written appeal to the Director of Planning and Public Works. Such
written appeal must be hand-delivered or placed in the U.S. mail, properly
addressed with postage pre-paid, within ten (10) calendar days of the date the
written decision is mailed to the applicant.
   (b)   The appeal shall provide a description of the complaint and decision
complained of, the reason(s) alleging that the action or decision should be
altered or overruled, and shall be signed by the applicant or their authorized
agent.
   (c)   The Director of Planning and Public Works shall set the appeal for
hearing before the Waste Advisory Committee (W.A.C.) within 45 days after the
appeal is filed. Upon hearing the matter, the W.A.C. may grant, conditionally
grant, or deny the appeal. The decision on the appeal shall be announced at the
close of the hearing and shall become final at that time. (§ 3, Ord. 1375, eff.
Aug 23, 2008)
Sec. 6-16.10.   Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter is
for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this Chapter. The County Board of Supervisors
declares that it would have adopted this Chapter, including every section,
subsection, sentence, clause and phrase, irrespective of whether one or more
section, subsection, sentences, clauses or phrases is held invalid. (§ 3, Ord.
1375, eff. Aug 23, 2008)
Chapter 17
WASTE, RECYCLABLES, AND ORGANICS
Sections:
Article 1. Title and Purpose
   
6-17.101   Title and purpose.
   
6-17.102   Enforcement.
Article 2. Definitions
   
6-17.201   Definitions.
Article 3. Waste Collection.
   
6-17.301   Mandatory Service; Exemptions.
   
6-17.302   Containers - Requirement and Use.
   
6-17.303   Containers - Size and Number.
   
6-17.304   Containers - Placement for Collection.
   
6-17.305   Loose Pile Yard Trimmings - Requirements and Use.
   
6-17.306   Loose Pile Yard Trimmings - Size and Number.
   
6-17.307   Loose Pile Yard Trimmings - Placement for Collection.
Article 4. Waste Transportation and Disposal Requirements, Generally.
   
6-17.401   Transportation, Generally.
   
6-17.402   Responsibility for Discarded Materials, Generally.
   
6-17.403   Containers – Deposit of Excluded Waste Prohibited, Generally.
   
6-17.404   Containers – Interfering With, Generally.
Article 5. Franchises.
   
6-17.501   Franchise Required; Exceptions.
   
6-17.502   Franchises – Exclusivity and Non-Exclusivity.
   
6-17.503   Franchise Application Process.
   
6-17.504   Franchise Agreements – Required Terms.
   
6-17.505   Rates for Services.
   
6-17.506   Billing Procedures and Practices.
   
6-17.507   Delinquent Accounts; Liens.
Article 1.
Title and Purpose.
Sec. 6-17.101.   Title and Purpose.
   This Chapter shall be known as the "Waste, Recyclables, and Organics
Regulations." Its purpose is to regulate the Collection and Disposal of Solid
Waste, Recyclables, Organics, and other materials from Residential and
Commercial Premises in the unincorporated area, to provide for the issuance of
exclusive franchises for the removal of Solid Waste, Recyclables, and Organics,
and to establish other regulatory requirements in connection with these
purposes.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.102.   Enforcement.
   Any person violating any article in this Ordinance is guilty of an
infraction. The Director of the Community Services Department or designee shall
be the enforcement officer for the enforcement of the provisions of this
Chapter, under
Title 1, Chapter 5 of the Yolo County Code of Ordinances regarding
administrative citations and code enforcement.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Article 2.
Definitions.
Sec. 6-17.201.   Definitions.
   As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as
follows:
   (a)   "AB 341" means the California Jobs and Recycling Act of 2011 (Chapter
476, Statutes of 2011 [Chesbro, AB 341]), also commonly referred to as "AB
341", as amended and supplemented, superseded, and replaced from time to time.
   (b)   "AB 1826" means the Organic Waste Recycling Act of 2014 (Chapter 727,
Statutes of 2014 modifying Division 30 of the California Public Resources
Code), also commonly referred to as "AB 1826", as amended and supplemented,
superseded, and replaced from time to time.
   (c)   "Act" means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989
(California Public Resources Code § 400000 et seq.), as amended, supplemented,
superseded and replaced from time to time and as implemented by the regulations
of the California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery (CalRecycle),
or its successor agency.
   (d)   "Bin" means a Container with capacity of approximately one to six
cubic yards, with a hinged lid, and with wheels where appropriate, that is
serviced by a front end-loading Collection vehicle.
   (e)   "Cart" means a plastic Container with a hinged lid and wheels that is
serviced by an automated or semi-automated Collection vehicle. A Cart has
capacity of 32, 64 or 96 gallons (or similar volumes).
   (f)   "Collection" means the act of collecting Solid Waste, Recyclable
Materials, Yard Trimmings, Organics, and C&D and other material at the place of
generation in the County.
   (g)   "Commercial" shall mean of, from or pertaining to non-Residential
Premises where business activity is conducted, including, but not limited to,
retail sales, services, wholesale operations, manufacturing and industrial
operations, agricultural, and food generating establishments, but excluding
businesses conducted upon Residential property which are permitted under
applicable zoning regulations and are not the primary use of the property.
   (h)   "Compactor" means a mechanical apparatus that compresses materials
together with the Container that holds the compressed materials or the
Container that holds the compressed materials if it is detached from the
mechanical compaction apparatus. Compactors include two to four cubic yard Bin
Compactors serviced by front- end loader Collection vehicles and 10 to 50 cubic
yard Drop Box Compactors serviced by roll-off Collection vehicles.
   (i)   "Construction and Demolition Debris, or C&D Debris" includes discarded
building materials, packaging, debris, and rubble resulting from construction,
alteration, remodeling, repair or demolition operations on any pavements,
excavation projects, houses, Commercial buildings, or other structures,
excluding Excluded Waste.
   (j)   "Containers" mean Bins, Carts, Compactors, and Drop Boxes.
   (k)   "Curb (or Curbside)" means the location of a Container for pick-up,
where such Container is placed on the street or alley against the face of the
Curb, or where no Curb exists, the Container is placed not more than five feet
from the outside edge of the street or alley nearest the property's entrance;
or alternate location designated by the County for flagship lots and other
special circumstances.
   (l)   "Customer" means the Person whom Contractor submits billing invoice to
and collects payment from for Collection services provided to a Premises. The
Customer may be either the Occupant or Owner of the Premises.
   (m)   "Designated Waste" means non-Hazardous Waste which may pose special
Disposal problems because of its potential to contaminate the environment and
which may be Disposed of only in Class II Disposal Sites or Class III Disposal
Sites pursuant to a variance issued by the California Department of Health
Services.
   (n)   "Discarded Materials" means Solid Waste, Recyclable Materials, Yard
Trimmings, Organics, and C&D placed by a Generator in a Container or other
receptacle and/or at a location for the purposes of Collection, excluding
Excluded Waste.
   (o)   "Disposal or Dispose (or variation thereof)" means the final
disposition of Solid Waste at a Disposal Site.
   (p)   "Disposal Site" means a facility for ultimate Disposal of Solid Waste.
   (q)   "Drop Box" means an open-top Container with a capacity of 10 to 50
cubic yards that is serviced by a roll-off Collection vehicle.
   (r)   "Excluded Waste" means Hazardous Substance, Hazardous Waste,
Infectious Waste, Designated Waste, volatile, corrosive, biomedical,
infectious, biohazardous, and toxic substances or material. It also includes
waste that a Franchisee or other authorized Collection enterprise reasonably
believes would, as a result of or upon Disposal, be a violation of local, state
or federal law, regulation or ordinance, including land use restrictions or
conditions, waste that cannot be Disposed of in Class III landfills, waste that
in the opinion of the Franchisee or other authorized Collection enterprise
would present a significant risk to human health or the environment, cause a
nuisance or otherwise create or expose such enterprise or County to potential
liability. It does not, however, include de minimis volumes or concentrations
of waste of a type and amount normally found in Residential Solid Waste after
implementation of programs for the safe Collection, recycling, treatment and
Disposal of batteries and paint in compliance with Sections 41500 and 41802 of
the California Public Resources Code.
   (s)   "Exclusive Single-Family Collection Area", also known as the
“Exclusive Boundary Area”, is the geographic region(s) designated by the Board
of Supervisors, which are shown on maps maintained by the Yolo County Community
Services Department. Such region(s) may be expanded into contiguous or adjacent
areas upon direction of the Board of Supervisors.
   (t)   “Food Waste” means food scrap materials from both residential and
commercial kitchens, stores at which food products are sold, and food
processing activities, including fruits, vegetables, pasta, bread, rice, meat,
dairy, coffee grounds and filters, tea bags, egg shells and cartons, and
biodegradable products such as paper plates, paper towels, paper napkins,
compostable bags, and compostable cutlery/culinary products.
   (u)   "Franchise(es)" mean the party or parties that have entered into a
franchise agreement with the County that remains in effect for Discarded
Materials, Recyclable Materials, Yard Trimmings, Organics, or C&D Debris
Collection services in the unincorporated area of the County.
   (v)   "Generator" means any "Person" as defined by the Public Resources
Code, whose act or process produces Solid Waste, Recyclable Materials, Yard
Trimmings, Organics, or C&D Debris as defined herein, or whose act first causes
any such material to become subject to regulation.
   (w)   "Hazardous Substance" means any of the following: (a) any substances
defined, regulated or listed (directly or by reference) as "Hazardous
Substances", "hazardous materials", "Hazardous Wastes", "toxic waste",
"pollutant" or "toxic substances" or similarly identified as hazardous to human
health or the environment, in or pursuant to (i) the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) of 1980, 42 USC
§ 9601 et seq. (CERCLA); (ii) the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act, 49
USC § 1802, et seq.; (iii) the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USC §
1609 et seq. ; (iv) the Clean Water Act, 33 USC § 1251 et seq.; (v) California
Health and Safety Code §§ 25115-25117, 25249.8, 25281, and 25316; (vi) the
Clean Air Act, 42 USC § 7901 et seq.; and (vii) California Water Code § 13050;
(b) any amendments, rules or regulations promulgated there under to such
enumerated statutes or acts currently existing or hereafter enacted; and (c)
any other hazardous or toxic substance, material, chemical, waste or pollutant
identified as hazardous or toxic or regulated under any other applicable law
currently existing or hereinafter enacted, including, without limitation,
friable asbestos, polychlorinated biphenyl's ("PCBs"), petroleum, natural gas
and synthetic fuel products, and by-products.
   (x)   "Hazardous Waste" means all substances defined as Hazardous Waste,
acutely Hazardous Waste, or extremely Hazardous Waste by the State of
California in Health and Safety Code Sections 25110.02, 25115, and 25117 or in
the future amendments to or recodifications of such statutes or identified and
listed as Hazardous Waste by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
pursuant to the Federal Resources Conservation and Recovery Act (42 USC § 6901
et seq.), all future amendments thereto, and all rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   (y)   "Household Hazardous Waste" means Hazardous Waste generated at
Residential Premises within the County.
   (z)   "Infectious Waste" means biomedical waste generated at hospitals,
public or private medical clinics, dental offices, research laboratories,
pharmaceutical industries, blood banks, mortuaries, veterinary facilities and
other similar establishments that are identified in Health and Safety Code
Section 25117.5 as may be amended from time to time.
   (aa)   "Multi-Family" means any Residential Premises, other than a Single-
Family Premises, with five or more dwelling units used for Residential purposes
(regardless of whether residence therein is temporary or permanent) and which
receive centralized Collection service for all units on the Premises with
billing to one Customer at one address.
   (bb)   "Occupant" means the Person who occupies a Premises.
   (cc)   "Organics" means Food Waste, or commingled Yard Trimmings and Food
Waste. No Discarded Materials shall be considered Organics unless such
materials are separated from Solid Waste, Recyclable Materials and C&D.
   (dd)   "Owner" means the Person(s) holding legal title to real property and/
or any improvements thereon, and shall include the Person(s) listed on the
latest equalized assessment roll of the County Assessor.
   (ee)   "Person(s)" means any individual, firm, association, organization,
partnership, corporation, trust, joint venture, or public entity.
   (ff)   "Premises" means any land or building in the County where Solid
Waste, Recyclable Materials, Yard Trimmings, Organics, or C&D are generated or
accumulated.
   (gg)   "Processing" means to prepare, treat, or convert through some special
method.
   (hh)   "Recyclable Materials or Recyclables" means those Discarded Materials
that the Generators set out in Recyclables Containers for Collection for the
purpose of Recycling; that are at least ninety percent (90%) Recyclable; and
that exclude Excluded Waste. No Discarded Materials shall be considered
Recyclable Materials unless such material it is separated from Solid Waste,
Yard Trimmings, Organics, and C&D. Recyclable Materials shall include, but not
be limited to: newspaper (including inserts, coupons, and store
advertisements); mixed paper (including office paper, computer paper,
magazines, junk mail, catalogs, brown paper bags, brown paper, paperboard,
paper egg cartons, telephone books, grocery bags, colored paper, construction
paper, envelopes, legal pad backings, shoe boxes, cereal and other similar food
boxes yet excluding paper tissues, paper towels, paper with plastic coating,
paper contaminated with food, wax paper, foil-lined paper, Tyvex non-tearing
paper envelopes); chipboard; corrugated cardboard; glass containers of any
color (including brown, clear, and green glass bottles and jars); aluminum
(including beverage containers, small pieces of scrap metal); steel, tin or bi-
metal cans; mixed plastics such as plastic containers (no. 1 to 7) and bottles
including containers made of HDPE, LDPE, or PET.
   (ii)   "Recycle or Recycling" means the process of sorting, cleansing,
treating and reconstituting at a Recyclable Materials Processing Site materials
that would otherwise be Disposed of at a landfill for the purpose of returning
such materials to the economy in the form of raw materials for new, reused, or
reconstituted products.
   (jj)   "Residential" shall mean of, from, or pertaining to a Single-Family
Premises or Multi-Family Premises including single-family homes, apartments,
condominiums, townhouse complexes, mobile home parks, and cooperative
apartments.
   (kk)   "Single-Family" means, notwithstanding any contrary definition in the
County Code, any detached or attached house or residence designed or used for
occupancy by one family, provided that Collection service feasibly can be
provided to such Premises at an adjacent unit, and the Owner or Occupant of
such independent unit is billed directly for the Collection service. Single-
Family also includes Residential units of a duplex or tri-plex Residential
structure.
   (ll)   "Solid Waste" means Solid Waste as defined in California Public
Resources Code Section 40191 and regulations promulgated thereunder. Excluded
from the definition of Solid Waste are Excluded Waste, C&D Debris, source
separated (i.e., separated by the Generator) Recyclable Materials, source
separated Yard Trimmings, source separated Organics and radioactive waste.
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, "Solid Waste" may include de
minimis volumes or concentrations of waste of a type and amount normally found
in Residential Solid Waste after implementation of programs for the safe
Collection, recycling, treatment and Disposal of Household Hazardous Waste in
compliance with Sections 41500 and 41802 of the California Public Resources
Code as may be amended from time to time.
   (mm)   "Transportation" means the act of transporting or state of being
transported.
   (nn)   "Yard Trimmings" means those Discarded Materials that will decompose
and/or putrefy, including but not limited to, green trimmings, grass, weeds,
leaves, prunings, branches, dead plants, brush, tree trimmings, dead trees, and
small pieces of unpainted and untreated wood (limbs, branches, trees and small
pieces of wood material are limited to 3 inches in diameter and 36 inches in
length), excluding Excluded Waste.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Article 3.
Waste Collection.
Sec. 6-17.301.   Mandatory Service; Exemptions.
   (a)   Unless exempted pursuant to this Section, the Owners or Occupants of
all Single-Family, Multi-Family and Commercial Premises shall subscribe to
weekly Discarded Materials Collection services provided by an authorized County
Franchisee. In addition, unless exempted pursuant to this Section, all Owners
and Occupants of Single-Family Premises in a Densely Populated Area shall
subscribe to bi-weekly Recyclables Collection and Organics Collection services
provided by an authorized County Franchisee.
   (b)   All Owners and Occupants of Single-Family Premises, Multi-Family
Premises and Commercial Premises are considered subscribers, without the need
for a signed contract or similar arrangement with an authorized County
Franchisee.
   (c)   The Owner, or by special arrangement approved by the Department, the
Occupant, of any Single-Family, Multi-Family, or Commercial Premises may apply
to the Department to be exempt from the mandatory service requirement set forth
in subsection (a) above. Such application shall be made on a form supplied by
the Department, and shall be granted provided the Owner or Occupant can
demonstrate one or more of the following:
   (1)   The Owner or Occupant will personally haul away all Discarded
Materials and Recyclable Materials at least as frequently as once every other
week, but no less than 26 times per calendar year to an approved facility. The
method of collecting and hauling away such materials must be consistent with
the intent of this Chapter and any conditions imposed by the Department,
including the requirement that such activities occur in a manner that will not
create unsanitary conditions, potential public health threat, environmental
contamination or nuisance;
   (2)   The Premises are presently undeveloped, such that no Discarded
Materials are generated thereon;
   (3)   The Premises are vacant for a period in excess of two months (e.g.,
renovation, property for sale, extended vacation) such that no Discarded
Materials will be generated thereon;
   (4)   The Premises is inaccessible due to weight limitations of Contractor
provided trucks and both Contractor and County have verified such limitations;
   (5)   The Single-Family Premises owner has demonstrated that they actively
Compost both Yard Trimmings and Food Waste onsite or have other means for
diverting such waste and therefore have been granted an exemption from
Residential Organics services;
   (6)   Accessory dwelling unit in immediate proximity of Single-Family
Premises that is serviced by Contractor and has sufficient container size to
accommodate waste of two households;
   (7)   Vacation hold may only apply once per calendar year if requested by
Customer, however, in no event shall collection service or billing be placed on
hold for more than 3 weeks;
   (8)   Two neighboring parcels are owned by members of the same family and
one Single- Family Premises owner has sufficient container size to accommodate
waste of two households;
   (9)   The Single-Family Premises owner has demonstrated that they have a
commercial solid waste and recycling dumpster in their name within Yolo County
that they agree to haul their residential waste to for proper disposal and
recycling.
   (d)   The mandatory service requirement set forth in subsection (a), above,
also shall not apply to any Premises owned by a school district, city or
county, or by the State of California or the federal government.
   (e)   The Department may for good cause permit additional exemptions
provided that such exemptions will not create an unsanitary condition,
potential public health threat, environmental contamination or nuisance. Any
Owner or Occupant that is granted an exemption under subsections(c) or (e)
shall, at such intervals as are reasonably established by the Department,
provide proof to the Department of compliance with the requirements set forth
herein and any additional requirements or conditions imposed by the Department.
   (f)   An exemption may be revoked by the Director of the Community Services
Department or designee upon a finding that there is a violation of any of the
requirements of this Section or the exemption, or that an unsanitary condition,
potential public health threat, environmental contamination or nuisance
condition is being created.
   (g)   Any exemption issued shall be valid for a period of one year and is
non-transferable. The exemption may be renewed at the end of one year upon
reapplication and demonstration that the terms and condition of the exemption
(s) still exists.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.302.   Containers-Requirement and Use.
   All Discarded Materials shall be placed in acceptable Containers, with the
exception of Yard Trimmings that will be Disposed of by the Generator or
collected by a Franchisee that has not provided a Container for Yard Trimmings.
The following Containers are acceptable for the deposit of such materials:
   (a)   Containers supplied by a County Franchisee or other enterprise
eligible to provide Collection services under this Chapter, generally referred
to as "Carts." The Owner or Occupant shall maintain such Carts in a reasonably
clean condition. Upon the Owner or Occupant's request, such Carts may either be
steam cleaned or replaced by the Franchisee, and the Franchisee will remove any
graffiti. There will generally be no charge for such services unless, in the
case of steam cleaning, such cleaning is requested by an Owner or Occupant more
frequently than reasonably necessary to maintain a clean appearance.
   (b)   Other Bin-type Containers, adequate in capacity and, if Owner or
Occupant receives Collection services provided for in this Chapter,
structurally designed so as to be compatible with the Collection equipment used
by County Franchisees or other enterprise eligible to provide Collection
services under this Chapter.
   Carts or Bins shall be kept continuously closed, except when Discarded
Materials, Recyclable Materials or Organics are being placed therein or removed
therefrom, and shall at all times be closed against the access of flies,
rodents and other animals. Such Carts or Bins shall be of a size approved by
the Department as being adequate for the particular use or occupancy of the
Premises using the Carts or Bins. The Owner or Occupant of the Premises shall
keep all Carts or Bins closed or covered at all times, sanitary, and emptied on
a regular schedule as required by this Chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.303.   Containers-Size and Number.
   The Owner or Occupant of any Single-Family, Multi-Family, or Commercial
Premises shall maintain a sufficient number of acceptable Containers for
receiving and holding, with the Cart or Container lid fully closed, all
Discarded Materials, Recyclable Materials or Organics produced, created,
deposited, or accumulated upon their Premises, and all such Discarded
Materials, Recyclable Materials or Organics shall be deposited in such
Containers with the exception of Yard Trimmings that will be Disposed of by the
Generator or collected by a Franchisee that has not provided a Container for
Yard Trimmings. In determining the sufficiency of the number of Containers
required, the following minimum standards shall apply:
   (a)   Single-Family Residential Units. A minimum of one 64-gallon Container
for Discarded Materials, one 96-gallon Cart for Recyclable Materials, and one
96-gallon Cart for Organics. Unless otherwise requested by an Owner or
Occupant, a County Franchisee will provide separate Containers for Discarded
Materials and Recyclables.
   (b)   Multi-Family Residential Units, Motels, Hotels, and Trailer or Mobile
Home Parks. A minimum of one 64-gallon Container for Discarded Materials and
one 96-gallon Cart for Recyclable Materials per dwelling unit, unless a lesser
number or alternative arrangement, such as the use of Bins or Drop Boxes, is
negotiated with a County Franchisee providing such services. Premises receiving
Collection service from a County Franchisee will receive 64-gallon Containers
for each unit.
   (c)   Commercial Premises. Commercial Premises are to make appropriate
Container, Bin, Drop Box, or Compactor arrangements with County Franchisees to
enable compliance with the provisions of this Chapter requiring the weekly
removal and Disposal of Discarded Materials, weekly removal of Recyclable
Materials and weekly removal of Organics as mandated by State Assembly Bill (AB
341) and Assembly Bill (AB1826).
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.304.   Containers-Placement for Collection.
   (a)   Single Family Residences. Discarded Materials Containers shall be
placed at the Curb/Roadside for Collection unless a County Franchisee agrees to
collect such Containers from an alternative location due to the disability of a
Customer. Curb/Roadside placement shall occur no earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the
day prior to Collection, and emptied Containers shall be removed from the Curb
by 7:00 a.m. on the day after Collection, except for the Old Willowbank
community where Containers shall be removed from the Curb by 9:00 a.m. on the
day after Collection. Except for Containers placed at the Curb/Roadside for
Collection, Discarded Materials Containers, including any Recyclables
Containers, or Organics Containers, shall not be placed or allowed to remain in
or on any street or alley right-of-way unless authorized by the Department.
   (b)   All Other Premises. Carts, Bins, Containers, Drop Boxes or Compactors,
as applicable, shall be placed in a location that is easily accessible for
Collection, to be decided between the Owner or Occupant and an authorized
County Franchisee.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.305.   Loose Pile Yard Trimmings – Requirements and Use.
   Single-Family Residential Units within the Old Willowbank area of
unincorporated Davis, shall be required to have loose pile Yard Trimmings
Collection provided by the County Franchisee.
(§ 2, Ord. 1529, eff. November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.306.   Loose Pile Yard Trimmings – Size and Number.
   Yard Trimming piles are authorized for Collection by County Franchisee
subject to the following regulations:
   (1)   Only Yard Trimming waste may be placed in piles, provided that:
   (a)   Tree trunks and branches may not have a diameter greater than eight
inches, or length greater than five feet;
   (b)   Grass clippings and dropped fruit from Premises trees shall be placed
in Organics Collection Cart unless the Cart is already full or has been
reasonably reserved for other Organics; and
   (c)   No Yard Trimmings piles shall exceed five feet in width or five feet
in height or five (5) feet in length.
(§ 2, Ord. 1529, eff. November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.307.   Loose Pile Yard Trimmings – Placement for Collection.
   Yard trimming piles are authorized to be placed adjacent to or in the street
for scheduled collection by County Franchisee subject to the following
regulations:
   (1)   Inorganic material (rock, dirt, gravel, concrete, etc.) and painted or
treated wood are not yard waste and shall not be placed in piles for
collection.
   (2)   Depending on the nature of the property, yard waste piles shall be
placed either adjacent to or in the street.
   (A)   If the property has an unpaved shoulder, bare soil, or gravel area
adjacent to the street, placement shall be adjacent to the street.
   (B)   If the property has curbs and gutters or does not have an unpaved
shoulder, bare soil, or gravel area adjacent to the street, placement shall be
in the street.
   (2)   Yard waste piles shall be placed in front of the property from which
the waste was originated except:
   (A)   Such piles may be placed in front of the property of a different owner
or occupant, provided that such owner or occupant has given his or her
permission to do so.
   (B)   If the yard waste originates on a flag lot or landlocked property
which the County’s contract hauler does not service or on a cul-de-sac property
where placement adjacent to the property would be inconsistent with paragraph
(a)(4) of this ordinance, such piles and the trash, recyclable and organics
waste carts for such a property may be placed in front of a nearby property of
a different owner or occupant, provided that (i) such owner or occupant of the
nearby property has given his or her permission to do so or (ii) if such
permission has not been given, the County has independently determined that a
specified location in front of a nearby property would be reasonable and
appropriate for placement of such yard waste piles and the trash, recyclable
and organics waste carts.
   (3)   No yard waste piles shall be placed or maintained:
   (A)   in any part of a designated bicycle lane;
   (B)   in such a way as to restrict reasonable gutter drainage or reasonable
access to a fire alarm box, fire hydrant, mailbox, standpipe, alley, driveway,
public sidewalk, curb cut for accessibility access, or any other public
facility; or
   (C)   on street undulations, traffic calming bulb-outs or near obstructions
in the street that restrict the County contract hauler’s equipment from
collecting yard waste piles or trash, recyclable and organics waste carts.
   (4)   Yard waste piles shall be placed for collection no sooner than seven
(7) days before a scheduled collection day and no later than 6:00 a.m. on a
scheduled collection day.
   (5)   No person shall park or let stand any vehicle or any other item in the
street that blocks the County contract hauler’s equipment from collecting yard
waste piles or trash, recyclable and organics waste carts.
   (6)   As used in this Section
6-17.307, the terms “trash cart,” “recyclables cart” and “organics waste cart”
mean such carts that have been authorized by the County or provided by a County
contract hauler to an owner or occupant of a property.
(§ 2, Ord. 1529, eff. November 19, 2020)
Article 4.
Waste Transportation and Disposal Requirements, Generally.
Sec. 6-17.401.   Transportation, Generally.
   No Person shall Transport Discarded Materials, of any type, upon or across
any public property, public rights-of-way, watercourses, or bank of any
watercourse, or upon the Premises of any other Person, except at a Solid Waste
or Recycling facility approved by the Department, without covering or enclosing
the Discarded Materials and taking effective measures to prevent any Discarded
Materials from blowing, leaking, or dropping from the vehicle during Transport.
Adequacy of load covers and control measures shall be determined by the
Department.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.402.   Responsibility for Discarded Materials, Generally.
   All Discarded Materials shall be the property and responsibility of the
Person that produced them. In the event the Generator of Discarded Materials is
unknown, such materials shall be the property and responsibility of the Owner
of the parcel upon which they have been deposited. Once legally deposited in a
Container that is placed and at the Collection location, with the exception of
Excluded Waste, all Discarded Materials shall become the responsibility of the
authorized County Franchisee or other entity that is responsible for their
Collection. If such County Franchisee or other entity can identify the Person
or business that produced Excluded Waste inadvertently collected by that
enterprise, responsibility for Excluded Waste shall remain with said Person. If
such Person cannot be identified, the County Franchisee or other entity shall
be responsible for proper Disposal of the Excluded Waste and shall assume
responsibility for its Disposal and related costs.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.403.   Containers—Deposit of Excluded Waste Prohibited, Generally.
   No Person shall deposit any Excluded Waste in a Discarded Materials
Container. The storage and Disposal of Excluded Waste shall be subject to all
applicable local, state, and federal laws.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.404.   Containers–Interfering With, Generally.
   No Person, except for the Owner or Occupant of the Premises, shall Dispose
of, place or deposit Discarded Materials in Containers stored on public or
private property without the express written permission of the Owner or
Occupant. In addition, except in connection with the Collection and related
activities authorized in this Chapter, no Person shall tamper with or interfere
in any manner with any Discarded Materials Container or the contents thereof.
Further, no Person shall by any means hinder, obstruct or interfere with the
Collection or Transportation of Discarded Materials by an authorized County
Franchisee or other enterprise eligible to provide Collection services under
this Chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Article 5.
Franchises.
Sec. 6-17.501.   Franchise Required; Exceptions.
   (a)   Requirement. No Person shall collect, handle, transfer, store,
process, Transport or use Discarded Materials (including Recyclable Materials,
Yard Trimmings, Organics and C&D) in the unincorporated area of the County
without first receiving a franchise to engage in such activity from the County.
   (b)   Exceptions. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any of
the following:
   (i)   Materials Collected by the Other Authorized Franchisee. Solid Waste,
Recyclable Materials, Yard Trimmings, Organics, and C&D Collected by other
Franchisee that is not within the scope of Contractor’s exclusive franchise
rights pursuant to this Agreement.
   (ii)   Materials Hauled by Owner or Occupant, or its Contractor. Solid
Waste, Recyclable Materials, Yard Trimmings, Organics, C&D and Specialty
Recyclable Materials that are removed from any Premises by the Owner or
Occupant in accordance with the Yolo County Code, Chapter 17 to Title 6,
Article 3, Section
6-17.301.
   (iii)   Commodities Collected for Compensation. Source Separated Recyclable
Materials, Yard Trimmings, Organics, C&D, and Specialty Recyclable Materials
generated by Commercial businesses, including County facilities, which are
Collected by a Person through a private purchase arrangement with the Generator
where the Generator is compensated reasonably for the materials Collected or
the Generator is not paying a fee for any hauling or other in connection with
such arrangement, purchasers of. In accordance with County ordinance, the
Source Separated Recyclable Materials, Yard Trimmings, Organics, C&D, and
Specialty Recyclable Materials collected shall be separated from Solid Waste by
the Generator so that they are at least 90 percent Recyclable or Compostable,
and the Generator shall be required to subscribe to a minimum level of Solid
Waste Collection under this Agreement.
   (iv)   Hazardous Wastes and Infection Waste. Household Hazardous Waste,
Hazardous Waste, Infectious Waste, and Designated Waste regardless of its
source.
   (v)   Materials Generated by Public Schools, the University of California
Davis (UCD), City, County, State and Federal Facilities, and waste generated on
tribal lands. Materials generated by public schools, UCD, and City, County,
State and Federal facilities (except those Federal facilities subject to 42
U.S.C. 6961 (a)) located in the County provided that the generator has arranged
services with other Persons or has arranged services with the Contractor
through a separate agreement arranged through a form agency procurement
process.
   (vi)   Donations. Items being collected or dropped off for reuse or
repurposing at a thrift store.
   (vii)    Bulky Items Direct from Retailer. Bulky items such as mattresses or
large appliances that are removed and recycled as part of a service, provided
by a retailer, when Customer purchases a new similar product.
   (viii)   Food Delivery. Food delivered to food recovery organizations for
the purposes of human consumption as outlined in SB1383.
   (ix)   Exemptions. Any Single-Family or Commercial Premises who has been
granted an exemption by the County to either self-haul their waste to the Yolo
County Central Landfill or Esparto Transfer Station or be exempted under any of
the categories in Section
6-17.301.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.502.   Franchises – Exclusivity and Non-Exclusivity.
   (a)   Generally. Within the Exclusive Boundary Area(s), all Single-Family
residences, Multi-Family and Commercial Premises are included in an exclusive
franchise area. Within an Exclusive Boundary Area, only a Franchisee with
exclusive rights or, if none exists, other enterprise that is authorized to
provide Collection services under Section
6-17.501 may provide Discarded Material Collection services to Single-Family
residences, Multi-Family and Commercial Premises.
   (b)   Maps. The Department of Community Services shall maintain a map or
maps of the unincorporated area that reflect the boundaries of the Exclusive
Single Family Collection Areas. Such map or maps shall be provided to any
Person for review upon request, and may be posted on the internet or otherwise
made readily available for public review.
   (c)   Alterations. The Board of Supervisors reserves the right to adjust the
boundaries of the Exclusive Boundary Area(s) from time to time, in its sole
discretion.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.503.   Franchise Application Process.
   Franchises shall be granted by the Board of Supervisors in the following
manner. These requirements may be waived or modified by the Board of
Supervisors in appropriate circumstances, in its sole discretion:
   (a)   The Department of Planning and Public Works shall prepare a request
for proposals and submit it to the Board of Supervisors for approval. The
request for proposals shall include, at a minimum:
   (i)   A detailed specification of the scope of services to be provided;
   (ii)   A detailed cost proposal form;
   (iii)   A request for background and qualifications relevant to the type of
services to be provided;
   (iv)   A request for detailed criminal history of(a) each Person, firm or
entity that submits a response to the request for proposals; and(b) where the
responding party is a firm or entity, of each Person who owns 10 percent or
more of the shares of stocks, assets, or other interest in the entity. If
requested by the County, the applicant shall also submit such additional
information, including consent to a background check and agreement of the
applicant to pay all related costs, as may be necessary to fully investigate
the potential criminal history of those Persons and entities subject to this
subsection;
   (v)   Requirements for compliance with all relevant County policies,
including but not limited to policies relating to non-discrimination;
   (vi)   A list of all permits or franchise authorizing similar Collection and
Disposal services in other jurisdictions, together with a detailed description
of the nature of the applicant’s business activities and such other information
as the applicant deems relevant for consideration
   (vii)   A copy of a draft franchise agreement, as approved by the County
Counsel, with the terms stated in Section
6-17.504 below, and such additional terms and provisions as may be appropriate;
   (viii)   The time, date, and place for the opening of sealed proposals;
   (ix)   The criteria that will be used to evaluate proposals; and
   (x)   Any other relevant information, including but not limited to a request
for a plan of operations.
   (b)   Once approved by the Board of Supervisors, the request for proposals
shall be published once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the County. The first such publication shall be at least
four weeks prior to the date given for the opening of sealed proposals. In
addition, the Department may take any other reasonable steps to advertise the
availability of the request for proposals, including internet postings,
publication of notice in trade journals and publications, and similar methods.
   (c)   Proposals shall be opened by the Director of Community Services or
designee, in public, at the time and place designated in the notice to
proposers. Proposals received after the time so specified shall not be accepted
and shall be returned unopened to the Person, firm or entity submitting such
late proposal.
   (d)   In evaluating proposals, the Department shall convene a panel of
evaluators, which shall at a minimum include the Director or designee.
Utilizing criteria specified in the request for proposals, the panel shall
evaluate and score the proposals, and shall upon completion of the evaluation
process provide a written recommendation to the Board of Supervisors as to the
responsible and qualified proposer whose proposal provides Collection service
at the lowest cost. A written notice of the panel’s recommendation shall be
provided to all proposers. Except as provided otherwise in this section, the
Board of Supervisors shall, within the time specified in the request for
proposals, select as the Franchisee the responsible and qualified proposer
whose proposal provides Collection service at the lowest cost.
   (e)   The Board of Supervisors may reject all proposals, and may thereafter
instruct the Director to take such further action as the Board may direct,
including but not limited to engaging in negotiations with one or more firms,
Persons or entities, or issuing a revised request for proposals in accordance
with the procedures specified in this article. The Board of Supervisors may
also, in its discretion, waive any minor irregularities contained in a
proposal.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Board of
Supervisors may, upon finding that it is in the best interests of the county
and upon a vote of two-thirds of the Board, waive the competitive process
required by this Section and may instruct the Director to take such further
action as the Board may direct, including but not limited to engaging in
negotiations with one or more firms, Persons or entities, or engaging in such
other process as the Board may specify.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.504.   Franchise Agreements – Required Terms.
   All franchise agreements shall include the following terms, which are the
basic terms on which the County is willing to enter into a franchise agreement
under this Chapter:
   (a)   Grant and Acceptance of Franchise. Each franchise agreement shall
contain provisions that set forth the offer a franchise for Discarded
Materials, Recyclables, Yard Trimmings, Organics and C&D, or similar services,
and the acceptance thereof by the Franchisee, together with all geographic and
other limitations on the exercise of franchise rights.
   (b)   Term. The duration of each franchise agreement shall be stated.
   (c)   Scope of Agreement. Each franchise agreement shall identify the scope
of the services to be provided by the Franchisee, including whether such
services are to be provided on an exclusive or non-exclusive basis, the
materials covered by such services (i.e., Discarded Materials, Recyclables,
Yard Trimmings, Organics, C&D, and other materials), the Collection area or
areas of the franchisee, appropriate Disposal locations, and other similar
matters relating to the Collection, Transportation, and Disposal services to be
provided by the Franchisee.
   (d)   Public Education and Billing. At a minimum, each franchise agreement
shall provide for the Franchisee to prepare and distributed information to its
Customers describing how to prepare material covered by the franchise for
Collection, materials that are excluded from Collection, and related matters.
   (e)   Performance Standards.  Each franchise agreement shall specify the
hours of Collection, the manner in which Containers, Carts, binds, Drop Boxes,
or Compactors will be serviced, employee training, Franchisee responsibility
for vehicle appearance, leaks, and related matters, and Hazardous Waste
inspection and handling.
   (f)   Record Keeping and Reporting. Each franchise agreement shall require
the Franchisee to maintain accurate accounting, statistical, and other records
relating to services provided under the franchise, report submittal
requirements, and related matters.
   (g)   Franchise Fees and Administrative Charges. Each franchise agreement
shall state the amount of the franchise fee to be paid by the Franchisee as
consideration for the contractual right to provide the services covered by the
franchise agreement in the unincorporated areaand to compensate the County for
its costs and expenses relating to the administration of the franchise. All
franchise agreements shall also contain procedures for the adjustment of these
fees from time to time.
   (h)   Indemnity, Insurance, and Bonding Requirements. Each franchise
agreement shall contain appropriate indemnity and defense provisions, insurance
requirements, and performance bond requirements.
   (i)   Default. Each franchise agreement shall identify the events that
constitute a default thereunder, as well as the remedies available to the non-
defaulting party.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.505.   Rates for Services.
   Rates and charges for Discarded Materials, Recyclables, and other services
performed pursuant to this Chapter shall be as prescribed in the contracts
between the County and authorized Franchisees for services provided in
Exclusive Single-Family Collection Areas. In all other areas, authorized
Franchisees may charge any reasonable amount for services provided to
subscribers, so long as such rates and charges do not exceed maximum rates
established by the Board of Supervisors.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.506.   Billing Procedures and Practices.
   All subscribers of services provided by a County Franchisee will be billed
directly by that Franchisee. Such bills may be paid by check, cash, or credit
card. For periods of vacancy when a subscriber will not require any services
from a County Franchisee, the subscriber may request a temporary
discontinuation of service and related charges. Any such discontinuation will
take effect after an initial vacancy period of 30 days and, unless the
Franchisee agrees otherwise, will be for a minimum period of 30 days.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Sec. 6-17.507.   Delinquent Accounts; Liens.
   Any account with unpaid charges for one year or longer shall be considered a
delinquent account. At the request of a County Franchisee, and upon the
submission to the County of appropriate information demonstrating that an
account is delinquent, the County will send a letter to the Owner of the
property with the delinquent account and request payment within 30 days. If
complete payment is not received by the County within 30 days, the County shall
place a lien on the property in accordance with Government Code Section 25828,
and proceed to collect any unpaid amounts in the manner set forth therein. All
amounts collected by the County pursuant to this Section shall be remitted in
full to the Franchisee, less any offset for amounts due the County from that
Franchisee.
(§ 2, Ord. 1378, eff. Sept. 4, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1529, eff.
November 19, 2020)
Chapter 18
SMOKING IN WORKPLACES AND ENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES
Sections:
   
6-18.001   Findings and purpose.
   
6-18.002   Definitions.
   
6-18.003   Prohibition of smoking in county buildings, on county property, and
enclosed public places.
   
6-18.004   Regulation of smoking in places of employment.
   
6-18.005   Where smoking not regulated.
   
6-18.006   Posting of signs.
   
6-18.007   Nonretaliation.
   
6-18.008   Enforcement.
   
6-18.009   Violations and penalties.
   
6-18.010   Public education.
   
6-18.011   Other applicable laws.
   
6-18.012   Severability.
   
6-18.013   Effect on prior ordinances.
   
6-18.014   Effective date.
Sec. 6-18.001.   Findings and purpose.
   (a)   Findings. The board of supervisors of the county finds that:
      (1)   Smoking is responsible for the premature deaths of approximately
four hundred eighty thousand Americans each year from lung and other cancers,
heart disease, respiratory illness and other disease.
      (2)   Tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution and is
responsible for approximately forty thousand deaths among nonsmokers each year.
      (3)   Breathing sidestream or secondhand smoke is a significant health
hazard for certain population groups, including children, elderly people,
individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired
respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway
disease.
      (4)   Health hazards induced by breathing sidestream or secondhand smoke
include lung cancer, heart attack, respiratory infection, decreased exercise
tolerance, decreased respiratory function, broncho-constriction, and
bronchospasm.
      (5)   Nonsmokers breathing sidestream or secondhand smoke may experience
a loss of job productivity or may be forced to take periodic sick leave because
of adverse reactions to breathing smoke.
      (6)   Credible studies have demonstrated that there are health concerns
regarding the use of electronic smoking devices by users of the devices and
bystanders.
      (7)   Although electronic smoking devices do not produce the same smoke
as conventional tobacco product cigarettes, they do produce a cloud of vapors
containing dangerous substances to which users and bystanders are exposed.
Existing studies on electronic smoking devices' vapor emissions and cartridge
contents have found a number of dangerous substances and concerns including:
         (A)   The existence of chemicals known to the State of California to
cause cancer such as formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, lead, nickel, and chromium;
         (B)   The existence of very small particulate matter that reaches deep
into the lungs (PM 2.5), xylene, acrolein, tin, toluene, and aluminum, which
are associated with a range of negative health effects such as skin, eye, and
respiratory irritation, neurological effects, damage to reproductive systems,
and even premature death from heart attacks and stroke;
         (C)   An increase in the reports of poisonings from electronic smoking
devices and products, including acute poisonings of young children;
         (D)   The existence of nicotine in most electronic smoking devices.
Nicotine is a highly addictive neurotoxin included in the Proposition 65 list
of Chemicals Known to the State to Cause Cancer or Reproductive Toxicity and is
known to cause birth defects. Nicotine is a component of the emissions from
electronic smoking devices containing nicotine and involuntarily exposes non-
users to nicotine.
      (8)   Scientific studies and FDA testing have demonstrated that the
solutions in electronic smoking devices contain toxic chemicals and that
labeling has often misrepresented nicotine content contained in the devices.
      (9)   The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has reported that
from 2011-2013, the use of electronic smoking devices by never- smoking U.S.
middle and high school students more than tripled, including more than a
quarter of a million never-smoking 6-12 graders who initiated using electronic
smoking devices.
      (10)   There are products other than electronic smoking devices approved
by the FDA for smoking cessation. To date, scientific studies have not
consistently demonstrated significant benefit of electronic smoking devices for
smoking cessation and these devices are not approved by the FDA for smoking
cessation.
      (11)   With certain exceptions, state law prohibits smoking inside public
buildings and at places of employment.
      (12)   The use of electronic smoking devices in locations where the
smoking of tobacco is prohibited may cause confusion and uncertainty, and make
it more difficult to enforce smoke-free environments and other prohibitions on
smoking tobacco.
      (13)   The smoking of tobacco, or any other weed or plant is a proven
danger to health.
      (14)   The health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of,
persons employed in, and persons who frequent the county would be benefitted by
the elimination of smoking and the use of electronic smoking devices in
workplaces and enclosed public places.
   (b)   Purpose. The board of supervisors of the county finds and declares
that the purposes of this chapter are (1) to protect the public health and
welfare by prohibiting smoking (which includes the use of electronic smoking
devices) in enclosed public places and places of employment; and (2) to
guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air, and to recognize
that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to
smoke.
(Ord. 1461, eff. November 12, 2015)
Sec. 6-18.002.   Definitions.
   The following words and terms are used and defined as follows for the
purposes of this chapter, unless the context in which any word or term is used
requires another usage or meaning:
   (a)   "Bar" means an area or establishment which is devoted to the serving
of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which
the serving of food, if any, is only incidental to the consumption of such
beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar, the term bar shall not
include the restaurant dining area.
   (b)   "Business" means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture,
corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes,
including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as
professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental,
engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered.
   (c)   "Electronic Smoking Device" means an electronic and/or battery-
operated device, which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or
other substances. "Electronic Smoking Device" includes any such device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an
electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic
hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. "Electronic Smoking Device"
does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food
and Drug Administration for use in the mitigation, treatment, or prevention of
disease.
   (d)   "Employee" means any person who is employed by any employer in
consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person
who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.
   (e)   "Employer" means any person, partnership, corporation, or
governmental, public or other nonprofit entity, which employs the services of
one or more employees.
   (f)   "Enclosed area" or "Enclosed" means all space between a floor and
ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of
door or passage ways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all
space therein screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling.
   (g)   "Place of employment" means any enclosed area under the control of an
employer which one or more employees normally frequent during the course of
employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and
restrooms, conference and class rooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A
private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a child
care, health care, or other care providing facility which is required by state
law or regulation to be licensed as such.
   (h)   "Public place" means any place to which the public is invited or in
which the public is permitted, and includes without limitation those places
specified in Section
6-18.003. A private residence is not a public place.
   (i)   "Restaurant" means any restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria sandwich
stand, private or public school cafeteria, and any other eating establishment
which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as
well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving
elsewhere, including catering facilities, except that the term restaurant shall
not include a cocktail lounge or tavern if said cocktail lounge or tavern is a
bar as defined in this section.
   (j)   "Service line" means any indoor line at which one or more persons are
waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service
involves the exchange of money.
   (k)   "Smoke" means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as
a result of combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization of any substance,
when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition, or
vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting
or vaporizing material contains no tobacco, nicotine, alcohol, nor controlled
substance and the purpose of inhalation is solely olfactory, such as, for
example, smoke from incense. The term "Smoke" includes, but is not limited to,
tobacco smoke and smoke or vapors of any kind from Electronic Smoking Devices.
   (I)   "Smoking" means engaging in an act that generates smoke, such as, for
example: possessing a lighted pipe, a lighted hookah pipe, a lighted cigar,
operating an Electronic Smoking Device, or a lighted cigarette, of any kind; or
lighting or igniting a pipe, a hookah pipe, a cigar, a cigarette or an
Electronic Smoking Device, of any kind.
   (m)   "Sports arena" means a sports pavilion, gymnasium, health spa, boxing
arena, swimming pool, roller or ice skating rink, bowling alley and other
similar enclosed place where members of the general public assemble either to
engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness
sports events.
   (n)   "Tobacco Product" means any product that contains tobacco, is derived
from tobacco, or contains synthetically produced nicotine and is intended for
human consumption. "Tobacco Product" does not include any cessation product
specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use
in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence.
(Ord. 1461, eff. November 12, 2015)
Sec. 6-18.003.   Prohibition of smoking in county buildings, on county
property, and enclosed public places.
   (a)   Smoking is prohibited in:
      (1)   All enclosed areas of all buildings or other structures which are
owned or leased by the county or any agency or department thereof; and
      (2)   All vehicles which are owned or leased by the county or any agency
or department thereof.
   (b)   Smoking is prohibited in all outdoor areas owned or leased by the
county including, but not limited to, parking lots, walkways, and the grounds
of all buildings owned or leased by the county. Smoking on county property will
be allowed only at the following areas:
      (1)   At the Day Reporting Center at the designated smoking area;
      (2)   At the Sheriff's Office, Monroe Detention Center, and Juvenile
Detention Facility in the designated employee smoking areas;
      (3)   At the Public Defender's Office in all areas located 20 feet from
entrances, exits, windows, and intake vents;
      (4)   At the Yolo Emergency Communication Agency at the designated
employee smoking areas.
   (c)   Smoking is prohibited in all those enclosed areas of any public place
which are intended to be accessible to or which are customarily used by the
general public. Such public places include, but are not limited to the
following:
      (1)   Buses, taxicabs and other means of public transit which are based
in and subject to the authority of the county;
      (2)   Public transit stations or depots;
      (3)   Retail stores and any other commercial outlets open to all or any
segment of the public;
      (4)   Restaurants, including those in private clubs;
      (5)   Bars, including those in private clubs;
      (6)   Aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums;
      (7)   Any theater or other facility which is primarily used for
exhibiting any motion picture, stage, drama lecture, musical recital or other
similar performance, except that actors may smoke as part of a stage production
performed therein;
      (8)   Sports arenas and convention halls;
      (9)   Every room, chamber, or other place used for public meetings or
public assembly while a meeting which is open to the general public is in
progress and for a period of time preceding such meeting as necessary to ensure
that residual smoke is not present during the meeting;
      (10)   Waiting rooms, sleeping rooms, hallways, wards and semiprivate and
private rooms of private and public health facilities, including, but not
limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices
and dentists' offices;
      (11)   Malls and other multiple-unit commercial facilities;
      (12)   Polling places;
      (13)   Bingo parlors;
      (14)   Offices when open to the public, including but not limited to
attorneys' and other professionals' offices;
      (15)   Banks;
      (16)   Laundromats;
      (17)   Hotels and motels, except as provided in Section
6-18.005;
      (18)   Educational facilities;
      (19)   Retail service establishments; and
      (20)   Restaurants, hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms and
public or private assembly rooms if one or more employees normally frequent the
enclosed area during the course of employment and while the area is being used
for private functions.
   (d)   Without limiting the generality of subsection(c) of this section,
smoking is specifically prohibited in the following areas of any public place:
      (1)   Waiting areas (only if the public place is enclosed);
      (2)   Restrooms;
      (3)   Service lines (only if the public place is enclosed);
      (4)   Elevators; and
      (5)   Lobbies, hallways and other common areas.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner,
operator, manager, or other person who controls any establishment or facility
may declare that entire establishment or facility as a nonsmoking
establishment, whether enclosed or not.
(Ord. 1461, eff. November 12, 2015; Ord. 1492, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 6-18.004.   Regulation of smoking in places of employment.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, smoking is
prohibited in all enclosed places of employment. Each employer associated with
each such place of employment shall make reasonable efforts, as necessary, to
ensure that all enclosed areas in the place of employment controlled by such
employer are free from tobacco smoke or other smoke emanating from smoking
products. As used in this subsection, "reasonable efforts" shall not include
the incurring of any expense to make structural or other physical
modifications. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent an
employer in its discretion from making any such modifications on a voluntary
basis.
   (b)   Each employer having an enclosed place of employment located within
the county shall adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking
policy which shall contain the following requirements:
   Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within a place of
employment without exception. This includes common work areas, auditoriums,
classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways,
medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, and all
other enclosed areas.
   (c)   The employer shall communicate the requirements of subsection (b) of
this section to all employees concurrently with adoption of the smoking policy.
   (d)   An employer shall supply a written copy of the employer's smoking
policy which includes such requirements upon request to any current or
prospective employee of such employer.
   (e)   Subsection (a) of this section shall apply to any enclosed workplace
occupied by a single individual, whether a sole proprietor, sole employee of a
closely-held corporation or otherwise, if such workplace shares with any other
enclosed workplace a common heating, cooling or ventilation system or any other
opening through which smoke may pass into any other enclosed workplace.
   (f)   Subsection (a) of this section shall apply to those enclosed areas of
buildings owned or used by private clubs, fraternal organizations, health clubs
and similar groups, if one or more employees normally frequent the enclosed
area during the course of employment and while the area is being used by
members or guests of the club, organization or group.
(Ord. 1461, eff. November 12, 2015)
Sec. 6-18.005.   Where smoking not regulated.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the following areas
shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this chapter:
   (a)   Private residences, except when used as a child care, health care, or
other care-providing facility required to be licensed as such by any
governmental entity; and
   (b)   Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests.
(Ord. 1461, eff. November 12, 2015)
Sec. 6-18.006.   Posting of signs.
   Signs saying "No Smoking" or displaying the international "No Smoking"
symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a cigarette enclosed in a
red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and
conspicuously posted in every building or other place where smoking is
prohibited by this chapter, by the owner, operator, manager or other person
having control of or occupying such building or enclosed area. The posting of
any sign allowing or encouraging smoking in such a place is prohibited. Any
failure to comply in whole or in part with the requirements of this section
shall not relieve any person or entity from any obligation to comply with any
other provisions of this chapter applicable to such person or entity.
(Ord. 1461, eff. November 12, 2015)
Sec. 6-18.007.   Nonretaliation.
   No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, discipline, or in any
manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such
employee or applicant claims or exercises any right to a smoke-free environment
afforded by this chapter.
(Ord. 1461, eff. November 12, 2015)
Sec. 6-18.008   Enforcement.
   (a)   The tobacco control/education division of the department of public
health shall have authority to communicate with employers and those having
control of any place wherein smoking is regulated or prohibited pursuant to
this chapter for the purposes of providing information, notifying of alleged
violations of this chapter, informally attempting to resolve disputes that may
arise hereunder, or otherwise implementing the provisions of this chapter in a
manner not inconsistent with this chapter or any other laws.
   (b)   Any owner, manager, operator, or employee of any establishment
regulated by this chapter may inform persons in violation of any provision of
this chapter of the appropriate provisions thereof.
   (c)   The department of resource management shall verify, while an
establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, that the posting
requirements of Section
6-18.006 are met and may issue citations for violations of that section.
   (d)   This chapter may be enforced by the public health officer and his or
her designees, who shall have the authority to issue citations pursuant to
Section
6-18.009.
(Ord. 1461, eff. November 12, 2015)
Sec. 6-18.009.   Violations and penalties.
   (a)   It is a violation of this chapter for any person who owns, manages,
operates or otherwise controls the use of any enclosed area of a public place
subject to regulation under this chapter to fail to comply with any applicable
provision of this chapter. However, an owner, manager, operator or employee of
an enclosed area described in Section
6-18.003(b) or (c) is not obligated to enforce the prohibition against smoking
in the enclosed area as against a customer or other member of the public
visiting the enclosed area, and the failure to enforce the prohibition shall
not subject the owner, manager, operator or employee to prosecution under this
chapter.
   (b)   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to smoke in any area
where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   Any person in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of an infraction, punishable by a civil fine not exceeding one hundred
dollars for each violation.
   (d)   A separate offense is committed for each and every day, or part of a
day, during which any violation is caused, committed, continued or permitted.
Each offense is punishable separately from every other offense.
(Ord. 1461, eff. November 12, 2015)
Sec. 6-18.010.   Public education.
   The department of public health shall engage in a continuing program to
explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this chapter to persons
affected by it, and to guide owners, operators, and managers in their
compliance with it. Such program may include publication of a brochure for
affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1461, eff. November 12, 2015)
Sec. 6-18.011.   Other applicable laws.
   (a)   This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking
where it is otherwise restricted by any other applicable law.
   (b)   This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking
where it is otherwise restricted in any establishment, facility, or location by
any employer, owner, operator, manager, or other person who exercises control
over such establishment, facility, or location.
(Ord. 1461, eff. November 12, 2015)
Sec. 6-18.012.   Severability.
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this ordinance, or its application to any person or circumstance, is
for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable, such invalidity or
unenforceability shall not affect the validity and enforceability of the
remaining sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses,
or phrases of this ordinance, or their application to any other person or
circumstance.
(Ord. 1461, eff. November 12, 2015)
Sec. 6-18.013.   Effect on prior ordinances.
   All former ordinances, or parts thereof, conflicting or inconsistent with
the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. The adoption of this
ordinance shall not in any manner affect any action or prosecution for
violation of ordinances in effect prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty required by
or resulting from any such ordinance, or affect the validity of any bond (or
cash deposit in lieu thereof) required to be posted, filed, or deposited
pursuant to such ordinance.
(Ord. 1461, eff. November 12, 2015)
Sec. 6-18.014.   Effective date.
   This ordinance shall take effect and be in full force and effect 30 days
after its passage. The Clerk shall cause this ordinance to be published as
required by law.
(Ord. 1461, eff. November 12, 2015)
Chapter 19
ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS
Sections:
Article 1: Legal Authority
   
6-19.101   Legal authority.
Article 2: Purposes
   
6-19.201   Purposes.
Article 3: Applicability
   
6-19.301   Applicability.
Article 4: Definitions
   
6-19.401   Alternative system.
   
6-19.402   Appeal.
   
6-19.403   Appeal Board.
   
6-19.404   Applicant.
   
6-19.405   As-built drawing.
   
6-19.406   Authorized representative.
   
6-19.407   Bedroom or potential sleeping room.
   
6-19.408   Beneficial use.
   
6-19.409   Building permit.
   
6-19.410   Cesspool.
   
6-19.411    Cluster system.
   
6-19.412   Community system.
   
6-19.413   Contamination.
   
6-19.414   Contractor.
   
6-19.415    Cumulative impacts.
   
6-19.416    DEH.
   
6-19.417   Director of Environmental Health.
   
6-19.418   Dispersal field.
   
6-19.419   Dispersal system.
   
6-19.420   Division of Environmental Health (DEH).
   
6-19.421   Domestic wastewater.
   
6-19.422    Effective soil.
   
6-19.423   Effluent.
   
6-19.424   Expansion.
   
6-19.425    Failing system.
   
6-19.426    Final approval.
   
6-19.427    Geotechnical report.
   
6-19.428   Graywater.
   
6-19.429    Graywater system.
   
6-19.430   Groundwater.
   
6-19.431    High strength wastewater.
   
6-19.432    Holding tank.
   
6-19.433    Industrial wastewater.
   
6-19.434   Installation permit.
   
6-19.435    Land use project.
   
6-19.436    Large system.
   
6-19.437    Lot.
   
6-19.438   Manual.
   
6-19.439   Minimum useable wastewater dispersal area (MUWDA).
   
6-19.440    Non-discharging wastewater disposal unit.
   
6-19.441    Onsite wastewater treatment system (System).
   
6-19.442   Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Manual (Manual).
   
6-19.443    Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Policy (OWTS Policy).
   
6-19.444    Operating permit.
   
6-19.445   Operation, Maintenance and Monitoring (OM&M) Program.
   
6-19.446    Owner.
   
6-19.447   Percolation test.
   
6-19.448    Person.
   
6-19.449    Portable toilet.
   
6-19.450    Public nuisance.
   
6-19.451    Public sewer system.
   
6-19.452    Public water system.
   
6-19.453    Qualified system designer.
   
6-19.454    Qualified professional.
   
6-19.455   Regional Water Quality Control Board.
   
6-19.456    Replacement area.
   
6-19.457    Seepage pit.
   
6-19.458    Septage.
   
6-19.459    Septage pumper.
   
6-19.460    Septic tank.
   
6-19.461   Service provider.
   
6-19.462    Site evaluation.
   
6-19.463    Site evaluation report.
   
6-19.464    Site map review.
   
6-19.465    Slope.
   
6-19.466    Soil.
   
6-19.467    Soil texture.
   
6-19.468   Standard system.
   
6-19.469   Subdivision.
   
6-19.470    Substandard tank.
   
6-19.471    Supplemental treatment.
   
6-19.472    Supplemental treatment unit.
   
6-19.473    System.
   
6-19.474    System design.
   
6-19.475    Unstable land mass.
   
6-19.476    Vault privy.
   
6-19.477    Vertical separation.
   
6-19.478    Wastewater.
   
6-19.479    Watercourse.
   
6-19.480    Waterless toilet.
Article 5: Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Manual
   
6-19.501   Manual.
   
6-19.502   Wastewater application rates and septic tank size.
Article 6: General Requirements
   
6-19.601   General requirements.
   
6-19.602   System subjected to California Central Valley Regional Water Quality
Control Board waste discharge requirements.
   
6-19.603    Requirements for system contractor.
   
6-19.604    Permits.
   
6-19.605   Requirements for site evaluation.
   
6-19.606    Requirements for siting, design, operation and maintenance.
   
6-19.607    Approved sewage disposal required.
   
6-19.608    General requirements for building permit application using existing
system.
   
6-19.609    General requirements for business license application using
existing system.
   
6-19.610    Prohibitions.
   
6-19.611    Minimum horizontal setbacks.
   
6-19.612    Minimum vertical setbacks.
   
6-19.613    Construction inspections.
   
6-19.614    Unauthorized work.
   
6-19.615    Abatement.
   
6-19.616    Required notification of system failure.
   
6-19.617    Required notification of a system installation.
   
6-19.618    Abandoned system.
   
6-19.619    Refusal to finalize building permit for occupancy.
   
6-19.620    Cesspools; seepage pits, and substandard tanks.
   
6-19.621    Holding tanks; portable toilets; vault privy.
   
6-19.622    Cumulative impacts.
   
6-19.623    Property improvements and system expansion.
   
6-19.624    Replacement of the dispersal field.
Article 7: Alternative System Requirements
   
6-19.701    Use of alternative systems.
   
6-19.702    Installation permit and review requirements for alternative
systems.
   
6-19.703    Operation, maintenance and monitoring (OM&M) requirements.
Article 8: Non-Discharging Wastewater Disposal
   
6-19.801
   
6-19.802
   
6-19.803
   
6-19.804
Article 9: Graywater Systems
   
6-19.901   Graywater systems.
Article 10: Septage Pumping, Inspections and Reporting Requirements
   
6-19.1001    Permitting, inspection and reporting requirements.
Article 11: Land Use Project
   
6-19.1101   Land use project.
Article 12: Connection to Public Sewer System
   
6-19.1201   Connection to public sewer system required.
Article 13: Groundwater Protection
   
6-19.1301   Areas with potential for groundwater pollution.
   
6-19.1302    Areas with impacted groundwater.
Article 14: Reporting to Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board
   
6-19.1401    Report requirements.
   
6-19.1402    Records retention.
   
6-19.1403    Water Quality Assessment Program.
Article 15: Enforcement and Penalties
   
6-19.1501   Enforcement.
   
6-19.1502    Right of entry.
   
6-19.1503    Notice of violation.
   
6-19.1504    Cease and desist orders.
   
6-19.1505    Penalties.
Article 16: Appeals
   
6-19.1601   Appeals procedure.
Article 17: Severability
   
6-19.1701   Severability.
Article 1: Legal Authority
Sec. 6-19.101.   Legal authority.
   Onsite wastewater treatment systems (hereafter, "systems") are regulated by
State law. The State Water Resources Control Board and the Central Valley
Regional Water Quality Control Board have delegated their authority to regulate
systems in the incorporated and unincorporated areas of Yolo County to the Yolo
County Environmental Health Division.
   (a)   Water Code sections 13290 et seq. authorize a local agency to adopt or
retain regulations and standards for systems that are at least equally
protective of the public health or the environment than state laws and
regulations.
   (b)   On June 19, 2012, the State Water Resources Control Board adopted the
Water Quality Control Policy for Siting, Design, Operation, and Maintenance of
Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems (OWTS Policy), effective May 13, 2013. The
OWTS Policy requires a local agency to implement the statewide minimum
standards of the OWTS Policy which provides provisions for low risk OWTS, or
develop a local program by adopting a Local Agency Management Program (LAMP).
The LAMP may allow alternatives to the OWTS Policy; however the LAMP must
demonstrate that the standards achieve the same purpose as the OWTS Policy
which is to protect water quality and public health. This Ordinance and its
partner document, the Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Manual are major
components of Yolo County's LAMP. The Yolo County LAMP was submitted to the
Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board (CVRWQB) prior to the OWTS
Policy deadline of May 13, 2016, and has been determined to meet the minimum
standards of the OWTS Policy by CVRWQB. Any modifications thereto must be
approved by the Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board. All
elements of the LAMP must be implemented prior to May 13, 2018.
   For graywater systems, Yolo County Environmental Health Division has the
authority to enforce standards in the unincorporated area only. The local
building official has jurisdiction in the incorporated cities.
   This addition to the Yolo County Code is being done in conjunction with
amendments to Chapter 5 and 8 of Title 6.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 2: Purposes
Sec. 6-19.201.   Purposes.
   The purposes of this chapter are to:
   (a)   Protect public health and the environment by protecting groundwater
and surface water quality.
   (b)   Establish an administrative framework allowing the adoption of
science-based minimum standards for design, construction, installation,
operation, maintenance, monitoring, replacement, enlargement, repair and
abandonment or modification of systems.
   (c)   Provide for compliance and enforcement of a comprehensive onsite
regulatory program.
   (d)   Ensure compliance with applicable standards, laws, policies and
guidelines as adopted, and/or modified by the State Water Resources Control
Board or the Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board and State
Department of Water Resources.
   (e)   Fulfill and implement the requirements of a Local Agency Management
Program, as required by the State Water Quality Control Board OWTS Policy.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 3: Applicability
Sec. 6-19.301.   Applicability.
   (a)   Except as allowed by Section 6-19.301 (h), the standards contained in
this chapter apply to the siting, design and construction of on-site wastewater
treatment, storage and disposal systems, or their components, whether proposed
as part of a land subdivision, a lot creation, a building permit, a land use
project or special event; and
   (b)   These standards shall apply to replacement, repair and abandonment of
an existing system; and
   (c)   Any system and all work performed on any system after the effective
date of this chapter; and
   (d)   Except for failing systems, and except for systems that are determined
to be a public nuisance, all existing systems installed and approved under
permit from the Yolo County Environmental Health Division (hereafter, "DEH")
prior to the adoption of this chapter, the conditions for the system siting,
design, construction, operation, maintenance, and monitoring, approved at that
time shall apply, until the system fails, requires corrective action, is
replaced, enlarged, significantly altered or is subjected to change or
intensification in use; and
   (e)   These standards shall apply to activities of pumping, cleaning,
hauling and disposing of wastewater as provided in this chapter; and
   (f)   These standards shall apply to non-discharging wastewater disposal
units and graywater systems as defined in this chapter; and
   (g)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent DEH
from requiring compliance with more restrictive standards than those contained
herein in order to protect water quality and public health; and
   (h)   The Director of Environmental Health may grant exceptions from the
provisions of this chapter and/or the Manual for systems which, due to the
physical constraints of the lot, cannot be repaired or reconstructed in
compliance with these provisions provided that such exceptions are the minimum
necessary. In such as case, the system shall be brought into compliance with
these provisions to the greatest extent feasible; and
   (i)   These standards shall not apply to public sewer systems; and
   (j)   These standards shall apply to systems with a design flow less than
10,000 gallons per day.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 4: Definitions
   The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms expressed in
the singular shall be constructed to incorporate the plural, and vice versa,
unless the context otherwise requires.
Sec. 6-19.401.   Alternative system.
   A type of wastewater disposal or system component(s) that utilizes either a
method of wastewater treatment other than a standard septic tank and/or a
method of wastewater dispersal other than a standard dispersal field in native
soil.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.402.   Appeal.
   The administrative process that allows the Appeal Board to consider relief
from any provision or requirement of the Yolo County Onsite Wastewater
Treatment System Ordinance and Manual.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.403.   Appeal Board.
   The Appeal Board shall be the Yolo County Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.404.   Applicant.
   A property owner or the property owner's authorized representative.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.405.   As-built drawing.
   A scaled drawing of the features on the lot where the system is installed,
identifying the location of the installed system and components in relation to
structures on the property. The as-built drawing is completed after the system
is installed or repaired.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.406.   Authorized representative.
   Person or persons authorized by the property owner to act on the property
owner's behalf on matters pertaining to application for permits and services,
or holder of an easement sufficient to authorize the work on the land on which
the system is to be installed, in order to represent the owner's or easement
holder's interests.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.407.   Bedroom or potential sleeping room.
   For purposes of system sizing, a bedroom or potential sleeping room shall
mean a habitable room with a floor area equal or greater than seventy (70)
square feet with direct or indirect access to a bathroom and designed to
provide privacy to the occupant(s), regardless of whether or not it contains a
closet. Such rooms include, but are not limited to, rooms labeled on plans as
bedrooms, lofts, sewing rooms, dens, offices and game rooms. Kitchens,
bathrooms, laundry rooms, or rooms with large entryways lacking doors and
designed such that the installation of a door would require a building permit
may not be considered bedrooms or potential sleeping rooms. Additionally, rooms
that are not considered bedrooms or potential sleeping rooms are rooms that
open to a living room, dining room, family room, kitchen, foyer/entry way, or
another room such as a master suite, and these rooms have an un-obstructive
opening (no doors) with a minimum fifty percent (50%) opening of the total wall
space (minimum six feet [6'] wide) with archways or other uncased doorways or
acceptable features that do not provide privacy to the occupants. The final
determination as to whether a room is a bedroom or potential sleeping room
shall be at the discretion of the Director of Environmental Health.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.408.   Beneficial use.
   Those qualities of waters of the state that may be protected against quality
degradation that include, but are not necessarily limited to, domestic,
municipal, agricultural and industrial supply; power generation, recreation;
esthetic enjoyment; navigation; and preservation and enhancement of fish,
wildlife and other aquatic resources or preserves.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.409.   Building permit.
   An official document or certificate issued by the authority having
jurisdiction which authorizes performance of a specified activity.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.410.   Cesspool.
   An excavation in the ground receiving wastewater, designed to retain the
organic matter and solids, while allowing the liquids to seep into the soil.
Cesspools differ from seepage pits because a cesspool does not have a septic
tank.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.411.   Cluster system.
   An onsite wastewater treatment system serving at least two (2) but not more
than four (4) dwellings or other buildings that are sources of wastewater
discharge on the same lot and under the same ownership.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.412.   Community system.
   A system that accepts wastewater discharges from two (2) or more lots, or a
system shared by dwellings under separate ownership whether or not they are on
the same lot. A community system is not a public sewer system.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.413.   Contamination.
   Impairment to the quality of the waters of the state from wastewater to a
degree which creates a hazard to public health through toxicity or through the
spread of disease. Contamination shall include any equivalent effect resulting
from the disposal of wastewater, whether or not waters of the state are
affected.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.414.   Contractor.
   A person who possesses an active license as a General Engineering Contractor
(Class A), a General Building Contractor (Class B), a Sanitation System
Contractor (Class C-42) or a Plumbing Contractor (Class C-36) in accordance
with the provisions of the California Business and Professions Code.
Contractors shall be approved by DEH and shall possess knowledge, and skills of
systems siting, design using given design parameters, and installation.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.415.   Cumulative impacts.
   The persistent and/or increasing effect resulting from the density of system
(s) discharges in relation to the assimilative capacity of the local
environment. Examples include, but not limited to:
   (a)   Nitrogen, salt additions, or other indicator of human excreta to
groundwater or surface water; or
   (b)   Rise in groundwater levels that interfere with the performance of the
system, causing drainage problems or results in other adverse hydrological or
soil conditions affecting public health, water quality or public safety; or
   (c)   Coliform contamination from animal and human waste in surface water,
groundwater, and drinking water wells.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.416.   DEH.
   See Division of Environmental Health
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.417.   Director of Environmental Health.
   The Director of the Yolo County Environmental Health Division, or his/her
designated employee.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.418.   Dispersal field.
   The area occupied by the dispersal system; it may also be referred to as
leach field.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.419.   Dispersal system.
   A subsurface wastewater distribution system and its components which conveys
wastewater from the septic tank, pump tank and or supplemental treatment unit
to the soil for subsurface discharge and final wastewater treatment.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.420.   Division of Environmental Health (DEH).
   The Yolo County Division of Environmental Health, the Director of
Environmental Health and designated employees.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.421.   Domestic wastewater.
   Wastewater with a measured strength less than high strength wastewater and
is the type of wastewater normally discharged from, or similar to, that
discharged from plumbing fixtures, appliances and other household devices
including, but not limited to toilets, bathtubs, showers, laundry facilities,
dishwashing facilities, and garbage disposals. Domestic wastewater may include
wastewater from commercial buildings such as office buildings, retail stores,
and some restaurants or from industrial facilities where the domestic
wastewater is segregated from the industrial wastewater. Domestic wastewater
may include incidental recreational vehicle (RV) holding tank dumping but does
not include wastewater consisting of a significant portion of RV holding tank
wastewater such as at RV dump stations. Domestic wastewater does not include
wastewater from industrial processes.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.422.   Effective soil.
   Permeable, unsaturated soil providing sufficient aeration and retention for
optimal filtration treatment of sewage effluent.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.423.   Effluent.
   Sewage, water, or other liquid, partially or completely treated or in its
natural state, flowing out of a septic tank, aerobic treatment unit, dispersal
system, or other system component.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.424.   Expansion.
   The increase in the size of the dispersal field, usually as a result of a
planned or potential increase in the estimated wastewater flow to the dispersal
field.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.425.   Failing system.
   Any system that is at least one of the following:
   (a)   Is currently or intermittently discharging untreated or inadequately
treated wastewater effluent directly or indirectly onto the ground surface,
into a dwelling or other structure, or into surface or groundwater; or
   (b)   Has a substandard tank or septic tank failure, such as a baffle
failure or tank structural integrity failure such that either wastewater is
exfiltrating or groundwater is infiltrating; or
   (c)   Has a component failure, such as a broken distribution box or broken
piping connection; or
   (d)   The dispersal field is not receiving effluent, such that wastewater is
backing up into the plumbing fixtures, or the septic tank must be pumped
frequently to dispose of the wastewater flow; or
   (e)   A system installed or repaired without required permits; or
   (f)   Is not operated in compliance with permit conditions or requirements
for operation, monitoring and maintenance as specified in this chapter and the
Manual; or
   (g)   Has been retrofitted with unapproved components or been modified from
the original approved design without approval from DEH; or
   (h)   Does not meet effluent quality standards as specified in the approved
system design.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.426.   Final approval.
   The document issued by DEH that certifies the system was installed in
compliance with this chapter and the Manual and all permit conditions have been
met, including issuance of an operating permit, if required.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.427.   Geotechnical report.
   A written document prepared by a California Registered Geotechnical Engineer
and used to communicate soil and geologic site conditions, interpretations,
analysis and recommendations pertinent to the design, installation and
operation of a system in or near areas of steeply sloping terrain, flood
control levees, or unstable land masses.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.428.   Graywater.
   Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12, graywater means
untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge,
and has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily
wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful
processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. Graywater includes but is not
limited to wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes
washing machines, and laundry tubs. Graywater includes "dark graywater," which
means wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.429.   Graywater system.
   A graywater system that is designed to collect graywater and transport it
out of the structure for distribution in shallow soil or mulch. A graywater
system may include tanks, valves, filter, pumps, or other appurtenances along
with piping and receiving landscape.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.430.   Groundwater.
   Water below the ground surface that is at or above atmospheric pressure. For
purpose of this chapter and the Manual, groundwater may also refer to evidence
of the high seasonal groundwater as determined through a site evaluation.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.431.   High strength wastewater.
   Wastewater has a 30-day average concentration of biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD) greater than 300 milligrams-per-liter (mg/L) or of total solid suspended
solids (TSS) greater than 330 mg/L or of fats, oil, and grease (FOG) greater
than 100 mg/L prior to the septic tank or other system treatment component.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.432.   Holding tank.
   A watertight receptacle designed to receive and store sewage to facilitate
disposal at another location. A holding tank is a non-discharging wastewater
disposal unit.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.433.   Industrial wastewater.
   Any wastewater generated from any manufacturing, processing institution,
commercial, or agricultural operation, or any operation that discharges other
than domestic wastewater.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.434.   Installation permit.
   A document issued by DEH that conveys approval of and sets forth applicable
conditions for construction, installation, replacement, enlargement, repair,
modification or abandonment of a system, or of system components. The
installation permit may also be referred to as the construction permit.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.435.   Land use project.
   A development project requiring a land use entitlement, including, but not
limited to, tentative maps, use permits, variances, site plan review, and lot
line adjustments, which is implemented through the County of Yolo or city
within Yolo County. Land use projects requiring conditions from this chapter
and the Manual shall be regulated by the Director of Environmental Health.
Other county city requirements have separate processes and requirements.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.436.   Large system.
   A large system is a system with a design flow greater than 1,500 gallons per
day.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.437.   Lot.
   A legally recognized and defined piece of land that can be sold
individually, as described on an instrument or map recorded or filed with the
County Recorder. A lot may also be referred to as parcel. Public road easements
on lots should be excluded from the lot for the purpose of locating a system.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.438.   Manual.
   See Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Manual.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.439.   Minimum useable wastewater dispersal area (MUWDA).
   The amount of useable ground surface, expressed in square feet that is
required when creating new lots or parcels in the tentative or parcel map
process. The amount of land area is based on the site specific information
obtained through site evaluation.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.440.   Non-discharging wastewater disposal unit.
   A self-contained, watertight container designed to hold wastewater until it
is pumped and/or cleaned. A non-discharging wastewater disposal unit includes
but is not limited to a holding tank, vault privy, portable toilet, and
waterless toilet.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.441.   Onsite wastewater treatment system (system).
   A wastewater disposal facility that includes tanks, piping, treatment
devices or other facilities that convey, store, treat or dispose of wastewater
located on the property where it originates or an adjacent or nearby property
under the control of the user which is not connected to a public sewer system.
This definition includes the designated replacement area necessary for system
repairs. Onsite wastewater treatment system does not include graywater systems
pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12, non-discharging wastewater
disposal units, and public sewer system(s).
   An onsite wastewater treatment system may be referred to as system in this
chapter. It may also be referred to as a septic system, wastewater system or
OWTS in references, supporting documents and Manuals.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.442.   Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Manual (Manual).
   The document developed, maintained, and amended by DEH, containing policy,
procedural and technical details for implementation of this chapter, as
prescribed by the Director of Environmental Health, as approved by the Central
Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board and adopted by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors of Yolo County. It is referred to as Manual in this
chapter.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.443.   Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Policy (OWTS Policy).
   The Water Quality Control Policy for Siting, Design, Operation and
Maintenance of Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems (OWTS Policy), adopted by
the State Water Resources Control Board, took effect on May 13, 2013. The OWTS
Policy establishes a statewide, risk-based, tiered approach for regulation and
management of system installations and replacements. The purpose of the policy
is to allow the continued use of systems while protecting water quality and
public health.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.444.   Operating permit.
   The administrative document issued by DEH that authorizes the initial and/or
continued use of an alternative system in conformance with the provisions of
the ordinance and Manual, intended to aid in verification of the adequacy of
the system performance and that may contain both general and specific
conditions of use. An operating permit may also be required for circumstances
other than an alternative system as provided in this chapter or where, in the
opinion of the Director of Environmental Health, the type, size, location,
strength of effluent or other details of a particular system and/or wastewater
activity warrant the additional level of oversight provided by an operating
permit.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.445.   Operation, Maintenance and Monitoring (OM&M) Program.
   A program that encourages or requires regular inspections, monitoring, and/
or service to systems, non-discharging wastewater disposal units, and graywater
systems as delineated in the Manual to ensure long- term performance, and
groundwater and public health protection.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.446.   Owner.
   Any person who alone, or with others:
   (a)   Has legal title to any single lot, dwelling, dwelling unit, or
commercial facility, or an easement, sufficiently to allow installation and
maintenance of the system; or
   (b)   Has care, charge, or control of any real property as applicant,
executor, executrix, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the
holder of legal title.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.447.   Percolation test.
   A method of testing water absorption of the soil. The test is conducted with
clean water and test results can be used to establish a dispersal system
design. Percolation tests shall be conducted as provided in the Manual or as
specified by DEH.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.448.   Person.
   Any individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation,
business trust, company, state agency or department, or unit of local
government who is, or that is, subject to this chapter, the Manual and all the
permit conditions.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.449.   Portable toilet.
   Any self-contained chemical toilet facility that is housed within a portable
toilet shelter. The portable toilet has no direct water connection and is a
non-discharging wastewater disposal unit.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.450.   Public nuisance.
   "Public nuisance" shall include but not be limited to, anything which:
   (a)   Is injurious to public health or is indecent or offensive to the
senses or any obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property; and
   (b)   Affects at the same time the public, a community or neighborhood, or
any number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted
upon individuals may be different or unequal; and
   (c)   Is an attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children or
others, whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an
unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells or shafts, failing system,
abandoned system, cesspool, seepage pit, system installed without an
installation permit; and
   (d)   Is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined
by the Director of Environmental Health; and
   (e)   Inadequate or unsanitary or unapproved sewage or plumbing facilities.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.451.   Public sewer system.
   Any sewer system constructed, installed, maintained, operated and owned by
or for a municipality or public entity established for sewage dispersal
purposes.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.452.   Public water system.
   A system for the provision to the public of water for human consumption
through pipes or other constructed conveyances, if such system has at least
fifteen (15) service connections or regularly serves at least twenty-five (25)
individuals, as defined Part 12, Chapter 4, Section 116275 of the California
Health and Safety Code.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.453.   Qualified system designer.
   A person who possesses knowledge, skills and experience in system design and
who is qualified to perform professional engineering in accordance with Section
6731 of the Business and Professions Code; or who is licensed as a California
Registered Environmental Health Specialist. Notwithstanding Section 6731 of the
Business and Professions Code, a California Registered Geologist that has
experience designing systems in Yolo County prior to the effective date of this
ordinance may continue to design systems with the approval of the Director of
Environmental Health, provided however the California Registered Geologist
bases the system design on specifications found in the Manual and engineering
design specifications provided by manufacturers of system components.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.454.   Qualified professional.
   An individual licensed or certified by the State of California and who has
been approved by DEH to perform site evaluations and to practice as an expert
as allowed under their license or registration and as demonstrated by their
possession of knowledge, and skills of soils; and systems siting, design and
installation. Depending on the work to be performed and various licensing and
registration requirements within the provisions of the California Business and
Professions Code, this shall include an individual with one (1) or more of the
following credentials:
   (a)   California Certified Engineering Geologist
   (b)   California Registered Professional Engineer
   (c)   California Registered Environmental Health Specialist
   (d)   California Registered Geologist
   For the purpose of performing site evaluations, soil scientists certified by
the Soil Science Society of America are considered as qualified professionals.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.455.   Regional Water Quality Control Board.
   The California Regional Water Quality Control Boards (RWQCB) designated by
Water Code Section 13200, which have authority for adopting, implementing and
enforcing water quality control plans (also called basin plans) which set forth
the state's water quality standards and the objectives or criteria necessary to
protect those beneficial uses. The Central Valley RWQCB has jurisdiction over
Yolo County.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.456.   Replacement area.
   An area of land dedicated for replacement of an entire system upon its
failure.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.457.   Seepage pit.
   A drilled or dug excavation, three (3) to six (6) feet in diameter, and
typically fifteen (15) to thirty-five (35) feet in depth either lined or gravel
filled, that receives the effluent discharge from a septic tank or other system
treatment unit for disposal of effluent.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.458.   Septage.
   Materials accumulated in septic tanks, cesspools, vault privies, portable
toilets, holding tanks, waterless toilets, or any other sewage holding
apparatus that receives bodily waste or wastewater from plumbing fixtures.
Septage does not include sewage sludge from public sewer system.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.459.   Septage pumper.
   A person with an active approved septage pumper permit issued by the
Director of Environmental Health pursuant to California Health and Safety Code
section 117400 et seq., who is qualified to pump and haul waste from septic
tanks, chemical toilets, cesspools, sewage seepage pits, chemical toilets,
waterless toilets, or other sewage containments.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.460.   Septic tank.
   A watertight receptacle which receives sewage from a building or structure,
that functions to separate solids from liquids, retains and digests organic
matter and discharges the resulting effluent to a second treatment unit or to a
soil disposal area.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.461.   Service provider.
   An individual approved by DEH to perform or conduct oversight of
inspections, maintenance and monitoring of systems operating under the
Operation, Monitoring and Maintenance (OM & M) Program. Service providers shall
be approved by DEH and possess knowledge and skills of systems and possess one
(1) or more of the credentials required of a qualified professional or
contractor as defined in this chapter. In addition, demonstration of proper
training from equipment manufacturers/distributors and/or certification from an
appropriate professional organization may be required.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.462.   Site evaluation.
   An assessment of the characteristics of a lot sufficient to determine its
suitability for the installation and sustainability of a system meeting the
requirements of this chapter and the Manual. The site evaluation shall be in
accordance with procedure and criteria contained in this chapter. The site
evaluation shall take into consideration the public and environmental health
aspects relating to the installation and operation of a system, including but
not limited to, soil texture, soil percolation rate (if a percolation test is
performed), depth to groundwater, distance from natural land features and
structures, site topography, and usable space for the installation and repair
of the system.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.463.   Site evaluation report.
   A report prepared by a qualified professional that includes all information
obtained from a site evaluation.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.464.   Site map review.
   An assessment of the surface features and/or soil characteristics as
referenced in USDA soil maps which approved a lot as suitable for a system
installation prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.465.   Slope.
   The rise or fall in feet per one hundred (100) feet of horizontal distance.
Slope is expressed as a percent of grade. For example: a land surface at a
forty-five (45) degree angle has a slope of one hundred percent (100%).
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.466.   Soil.
   The naturally occurring body of porous mineral and organic materials on the
land surface, which is composed of unconsolidated materials, including sand-
sized, silt-sized, and clay-sized particles mixed with varying amounts of
larger fragments and organic material. The various combinations of particles
differentiate specific soil textures identified in the soil textural triangle
developed by the United States Department of Agricultural (USDA). For the
purposes of this ordinance, soil shall contain earthen material of particles
smaller than eight one-hundredths (0.08) inch (two [2] mm) in size.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.467.   Soil texture.
   The relative proportions of soil separates in a soil as described by the
twelve (12) classes of soil texture as defined by the United States Department
of Agriculture.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.468.   Standard system.
   A system comprised of a septic tank and a gravity-fed dispersal system which
includes trenches installed in approved undisturbed native soil. Effluent will
flow to the trenches by gravity, or may be pumped to the first distribution box
of the dispersal field.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.469.   Subdivision.
   "Subdivision" shall mean a subdivision as defined by the Subdivision Map Act
of the State (Government Code Section 66410 et seq).
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.470.   Substandard tank.
   Any tank constructed of wood or brick, or any tank which is deteriorated to
an extent that it cannot effectively hold and or treat wastewater, or because
of its condition poses a threat to health or safety.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.471.   Supplemental treatment.
   A supplemental treatment unit or engineered system used to perform
additional wastewater treatment functions, beyond that provided by a standard
system, and capable of reliably producing wastewater effluent of secondary
quality or better, prior to discharge to the dispersal system. For purposes of
this chapter, secondary quality is defined as effluent meeting thirty (30) day
average concentration limits of thirty (30) mg/L for biological oxygen demand
and thirty (30) mg/L for total suspended solids. If the supplemental treatment
is for the purpose of nitrogen reduction, the supplemental treatment is defined
as meeting a fifty (50) percent reduction in total nitrogen when comparing the
thirty (30) day average influent to the thirty (30) day average effluent.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.472.   Supplemental treatment unit.
   Alternative system listed by National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) and
certified by NSF as meeting NSF Standard 40, NSF Standard 245 or equivalent, is
designed to provide enhanced treatment over that which would be provided by a
standard system, and that produces effluent meeting a predetermined performance
requirement as specified in this chapter and in the Manual, prior to dispersal
into the dispersal field. An independent third party testing and listing agency
which provides equivalent services as compared to NSF for testing and
continuous quality control and consumer complaint response may be used in lieu
of NSF upon the approval of the Director of Environmental Health.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.473.   System.
   See Onsite Wastewater Treatment System
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.474.   System design.
   A system installation/construction plan prepared by a qualified system
designer or contractor based on the site evaluation report.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.475.   Unstable land mass.
   Land prone to subsidence, erosion, or mass land movement as indicated by
historical landslide events, published maps or reports, or evidence of
characteristics such as surface rupture, scarps, creep or other irregularities
in ground slope conditions.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.476.   Vault privy.
   A vault privy is a structure used for disposal of human waste without the
aid of water. It consists of a shelter built above a subsurface vault into
which human waste falls. The vault privy has no water connection. A vault privy
is a non-discharging wastewater disposal unit.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.477.   Vertical separation.
   The depth of effective soil for effluent filtration that exists between the
bottom of a dispersal field and the restrictive or limiting layer or feature
including, but not limited to:
   (a)   Permanent or seasonal groundwater level; or
   (b)   Consolidated soil with insufficient permeability or porosity to
provide wastewater treatment; or
   (c)   Fractured rock with excessive permeability that would not provide
effective wastewater treatment; or
   (d)   Soils determined to be limiting as defined in the Manual.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.478.   Wastewater.
   Wastewater includes "blackwater" or "graywater".
   (a)   Blackwater means wastewater contaminated with human or kitchen wastes,
generally originating from toilets and kitchen sinks. It includes, but is not
limited to, wastewater discharges from kitchen sinks, garbage grinders, water
closets, toilets, urinals or similar fixtures alone or in combination with
other wastewater.
   (b)   Graywater: Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12,
graywater means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any
toilet discharge, and has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or
unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by
unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. Graywater includes
but is not limited to wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins,
clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs. Graywater includes "dark
graywater," which means wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.479.   Watercourse.
   A definite channel with bed and banks within which water flows perennially,
including overflow channels contiguous to the main channel. A watercourse may
be either a natural or man-made channel. For purposes of this chapter,
watercourse also includes water bodies such as ponds, lakes, marshes, seasonal
wetlands and tidal waters.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.480.   Waterless toilet.
   A composting toilet, incinerating toilet or similar device for the holding
and processing of wastewater from a toilet. A waterless toilet is a non-
discharging wastewater disposal unit.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 5: Onsite Wastewater Treatment System Manual
Sec. 6-19.501.   Manual.
   The Manual shall govern the siting, design, installation, component quality,
operation, monitoring, and maintenance of systems, graywater systems, and non-
discharging wastewater disposal units in Yolo County, and provide
administrative procedures for the implementation of this chapter. The Manual
shall be adopted by resolution of the Yolo County Board of Supervisors. When
changes are proposed to the Manual, DEH shall provide a reasonable process for
seeking input from the affected public, and the changes shall be presented to
the Yolo County Board of Supervisors as an amending resolution.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.502.   Wastewater application rates and septic tank size.
   Requirements for maximum wastewater application rates and minimum septic
tank size shall be as is provided in the Manual.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 6: General Requirements
Sec. 6-19.601.   General requirements.
   (a)   Every residence, place of business, or other building, or place where
persons congregate, reside, or are employed, and which cannot be connected to a
public sewer system, must be provided with a means of disposal of human
excreta, either by water flush toilet connected to an onsite wastewater
treatment system that meets the requirements of this chapter, or in special
circumstances, and when in the opinion of the Director of Environmental Health
it is advisable, a non-discharging wastewater disposal unit that meets the
requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   Every building, structure, or appurtenance that contains one or more
waste producing fixtures such as toilets, sinks, showers or baths, clothes
washing machines, dish washing machines, animal wash pads, floor drains or
other fixture or fitting intended to drain organic or inorganic waste material
must be connected to a public sewer system or an approved means of wastewater
disposal that meets the requirements of this chapter.
   (c)   Design, application, construction, operation, maintenance and
monitoring of any system shall meet the requirements prescribed by this chapter
and the rules, regulations and guidelines contained in the Manual.
   (d)   No building permit, grading permit or entitlement for other work shall
be issued where the proposed work might impact an existing, proposed system and
future replacement area without first obtaining approval from DEH.
   (e)   Fees for installation permits, operating permits, site evaluations,
and other entitlements or service requests related to requirements of this
chapter shall be an amount established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors and are due and payable at time of application.
   (f)   Subject to local zoning restrictions and Planning Division approval,
multiple buildings on the same or separate lots may be served by a common
system, termed either a cluster system or community system, provided the system
meets the minimum requirements contained in this chapter and the Manual.
   (g)   The Director of Environmental Health shall have the authority to issue
variances to provisions set forth in the Manual in addition to where explicitly
allowed in this ordinance.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.602.   System subjected to California Central Valley Regional Water
Quality Control Board waste discharge requirements.
   Review and approval by the California Central Valley Regional Water Quality
Control Board (CVRWQCB) is required for a system in cases where the system:
   (a)   Has an estimated flow of more than ten thousand (10,000) gallons per
day; or
   (b)   Receives high strength wastewater, unless the waste stream is from a
commercial food service building; or
   (c)   Receives high strength wastewater from a commercial food service
building with a biological oxygen demand of higher than nine hundred (900) mg/
L, or that does not have a properly sized and functioning oil/grease
interceptor; or
   (d)   Receives a significant portion of recreational vehicle (RV) holding
tank wastewater such as RV dump stations; or
   (e)   Is a public sewer system, or
   (f)   Is otherwise determined by the Director of Environmental Health to
require review by the CVRWQCB.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.603.   Requirements for system contractor.
   (a)   No person may install, construct, enlarge, replace, repair, modify or
abandon a system pursuant to this chapter unless the person is a contractor as
defined in this chapter, except as provided in Section 6-19.603(b).
   (b)   In the case of a standard system, the property owner may construct or
repair the system on his/her own property, provided:
      (1)   For new construction or major repair, the design plans must be
prepared and stamped by a qualified system designer; and
      (2)   An installation permit is obtained and persons hired by the owner
to do the work must comply with Section 6-19.603(a); or persons hired by the
owner must be hired as employees of the owner and the owner must provide
worker's compensation insurance, as required by law.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.604.   Permits.
   (a)   Installation permit.
      (1)   No person may install, construct, enlarge, replace, repair, modify
or abandon any system without first submitting plans to the Director of
Environmental Health for approval and obtaining an installation permit pursuant
to the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Installation permits shall remain valid for a period of twelve (12)
months from the date initially issued if all original site conditions exist.
      (3)   The issued installation permit may be renewed one (1) time if
additional time is required to complete the construction. The fee to renew the
permit shall be one-half (1/2) of the current amount required for a new permit
for such work. The renewal request must be made prior to the expiration of the
permit. The permit considered for renewal may require review to ensure that
there have not been significant changes in technology, knowledge or regulation
that may affect the design of the system and require design modifications.
Permit renewal procedures shall be followed per the Manual.
      (4)   The installation permit shall expire and be non-renewable twenty-
four (24) months after the date of original issuance.
      (5)   The permit may be transferred to a new property owner or contractor
provided all other information on the application remains the same. The
original fee-payer must approve the transfer of any paid fees to the new permit
holder in writing.
      (6)   The Director of Environmental Health may revoke a permit or
approval issued by DEH pursuant to this chapter in case of any false statement,
omission, or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans on
which the permit or approval was based; or the lot has been substantially
affected by natural or man-made alterations which could affect the system
design or installation.
      (7)   The Director of Environmental Health may deny a permit renewal or
request additional information if in the opinion of the Director the site map
review or site evaluation did not adequately assess the site conditions and
suitability of system design or installation.
   (b)   Operating permits.
      (1)   In addition to an installation permit, an operating permit may be
required for an alternative system and non-discharging wastewater disposal unit
or where, in the opinion of the Director of Environmental Health, the type,
size, location or other aspects of a particular system warrant the additional
level of oversight provided by an operating permit.
      (2)   Owners of systems or units that require an operating permit shall
record the following information on the property deed for the benefit of future
owners and successors:
         i.   Notice of the requirement for an operating permit, including all
operating permit conditions; and
         ii.   Reissuance of operating permit to new owners; and
         iii.   Notices of withdrawal of any operating permit.
   (c)   Exceptions.
      (1)   A permit is not required to clear stoppages in pipes, provided the
system is undisturbed;
      (2)   A permit is not required for cleaning of septic tank, dosing tank,
interceptor, holding tank, or other sewage receptacle that is pumped or cleaned
by a septage pumper that has a valid septage pumper permit in Yolo County;
      (3)   A permit is not required to expose portion of the system for
purpose of evaluating its performance or operation, provided the system is not
damaged, altered, modified, or repaired as part of the evaluation;
      (4)   A permit is not required to add or replace the following components
to a system, provided the property owner or contractor notified DEH in writing
that the modification was made:
         i.   Risers and/or lids to a septic tank if the septic tank is not
located in an area that is subject to vehicular traffic;
         ii.   Effluent filter;
      (5)   A permit is not required to replace the following components to a
system, provided the property owner or contractor notified DEH in writing that
the modification was made:
         i.   Sanitary tees, joints, and solid (non-perforated) pipe located
upstream to the leach trench;
         ii.    Distribution boxes.
         iii.   Mechanical components that are like-for-like, such as float
switches, electrical boxes, pumps and blowers.
   Nothing in Section 6-19.604 (c) shall provide an exemption from the
material, structural, installation and performance requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.605.   Requirements for site evaluation.
   (a)   A site evaluation shall be required on every existing or proposed lot
prior to obtaining a system installation permit unless waived by the Director
of Environmental Health. The site evaluation shall be conducted as described in
the Manual.
   (b)   The site evaluation will examine several factors for approval of a
system including, but not limited to, ground slope, soil textural
characteristics, effective soil depth, percolation rate, horizontal setbacks,
and available area for one hundred percent (100%) system replacement.
   (c)   The site evaluation shall be conducted by the applicant's qualified
professional in coordination with DEH so that DEH personnel may be present for
any facet of testing in the evaluation process.
   (d)   DEH may require that the site evaluation be conducted during high
rainfall period of the year as described in the Manual in order to determine
the maximum fluctuation of depth to groundwater below the surface of the ground
prior to approving a site for feasibility or construction of the system.
   (e)   DEH may require a new site evaluation or other soil testing if it
determines that prior site evaluation approvals were based on testing and/or
reporting that was incomplete, insufficient, or incompatible with known
information of a given area, or for a site where subsequent excavation or other
activities may have altered the suitability of the lot for accommodating the
system.
   (f)   An approved site map review for installation of a system completed
prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall expire on May 12, 2018 and
shall be unacceptable for purposes of issuing a system installation permit
after that date unless the review included a site specific evaluation
substantially equivalent to a site evaluation as defined and described in this
chapter and the Manual; and the submitted system design meets the currently
adopted standards of this chapter and the Manual. For site map reviews which
were completed prior to the effective date of this chapter, the Director of
Environmental Health may require a resubmittal of system design that meets the
purpose and intent of this chapter to protect water quality and public health,
including but not limited to requirements for a site evaluation, supplemental
treatment and an operating permit, where warranted.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.606.   Requirements for siting, design, operation and maintenance.
   (a)   The system must be installed in accordance with the approved system
installation permit, approved system design and any permit conditions. Any
changes in the installation plans must be reviewed and approved by DEH prior to
installation. An as-built drawing shall be submitted prior to final approval to
record the final installation location of the system. The as-built drawing
shall meet the requirements described in the Manual.
   (b)   Every system approved after the effective date of this chapter shall
be subject to the operation, maintenance, and monitoring program as specified
in the Manual.
   (c)   Except where a two-hundred (200) percent replacement area is required,
a replacement area of one-hundred (100) percent of the system shall be reserved
for the system repair and/or replacement as described in the Manual. The
replacement area shall be indicated on the site map and as-built drawing and
shall remain undeveloped, protected from compaction, protected from vehicular
traffic, and shall otherwise remain free of conditions that would make it
unsuitable as a future replacement area.
   (d)   The system and system components must be located to be easily
accessible for maintenance and repairs.
   (e)   New and replacement system septic tanks shall be limited to those
approved by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials
(IAPMO) or stamped and certified by a California Registered Civil Engineer as
meeting the industry standards, and their installation shall be according to
the manufacturer's instructions.
   (f)   For purposes of system sizing, any room that could be used as a
bedroom or potential sleeping room may be assumed to be a bedroom regardless of
if it contains a closet or is labeled otherwise.
   (g)   Except for community systems, the system shall be located on the same
lot as the building(s) being served is located. The Director of Environmental
Health has the authority to make an exception to this requirement in special
situations where due to necessary system repair or replacement an existing
dwelling lacks available space on the lot to accommodate a system. In this case
a legal easement may be obtained on an adjoining property for purposes of
accommodating the replacement system.
   (h)   The system contractor and/or qualified professional shall provide the
system owner with informational materials to inform the system owner about how
to locate, operate and maintain the system. The informational material shall
also include procedures for the owner in the event of a needed repair,
replacement of a component of the system, or system failure. If the system is
on a lot with a water well, the informational material shall also include
information on testing the well water for indications of system failure.
      (1)   Any informational material specific to a system shall be provided
to the owner by the qualified professional and/or the contractor, with a copy
provided to DEH.
      (2)   Final approval of the system installation shall be contingent upon
confirmation by DEH that required informational materials have been provided.
   (i)   All cluster systems are subject to the operating permit requirements
as provided in the Manual. A cluster system may require a dual dispersal field
according to the system designer's specifications. Cluster systems shall be
required to reserve two (2) replacement areas. If the cluster system is a large
system as defined in this chapter, additional requirements for siting, design,
operation and maintenance of large systems as specified in the Manual shall
also apply.
   (j)   All community systems shall demonstrate financial viability and
assurance to operate, maintain and replace the system at any and all times.
Community systems may be required to install dual dispersal fields according to
the system designer's specifications. Community systems shall be required to
reserve a replacement area that equals at least two-hundred (200) percent of
the size of the installed system. The system shall be owned and managed by a
homeowner's association or similar. The owner may be required to bond or
deposit restricted funds for purposes of demonstrating financial viability for
system maintenance, repair or replacement. Prior to final approval,
documentation to the satisfaction of the Director of Environmental Health shall
be provided that demonstrate legally recorded easements, agreements,
established and funded common interest development (e.g. homeowners
association), service provider agreements, operating permit and proof of
financial assurances. All community systems shall obtain an operating permit
and be required to perform regular monitoring, maintenance, and reporting of
system performance. If the community system is a large system as defined in
this chapter, additional requirements for siting, design, operation and
maintenance of large systems as specified in the Manual shall also apply.
   (k)   Owners of systems shall maintain their system in good working
condition including conducting regular inspections, and pumping or cleaning of
solids as necessary to maintain proper function and assure adequate wastewater
treatment.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.607.   Approved sewage disposal required.
   No building permit may be issued for any building containing wastewater
producing fixtures that is not to be connected to an approved public sewer
system without written approval to install a system by DEH.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.608.   General requirements for building permit application using
existing system.
   No building permit shall be issued for an addition, alteration, replacement,
repair or destruction of any building or structure served by a system, without
review and approval of DEH.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.609.   General requirements for business license application using
existing system.
   Unless waived by the Director of Environmental Health, no business license
shall be issued for a business served by a system, without review and approval
of DEH.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.610.   Prohibitions.
   (a)   No person shall construct, operate or maintain a system that does not
comply with the applicable requirements specified in this chapter, the
installation permit, the operating permit or the Manual.
   (b)   No person shall connect any structure, vehicle or mobile home to the
system without prior approval of DEH.
   (c)   No person shall treat or discharge anything other than what is
specifically described as domestic wastewater in this chapter, into any system.
   (d)   No person shall operate a system constructed after the effective date
of this chapter that was not installed in accordance with this chapter and the
Manual; and any other conditions placed on the installation permit.
   (e)   No person shall maintain or operate the system for which DEH has
issued an order to abandon the system.
   (f)   No person shall operate or use a failing system.
   (g)   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter and in the Manual, no
person shall maintain or operate a holding tank, or vault privy, except for
non-residential and non-commercial limited-use applications, such as primitive-
type picnic grounds, campsites, and recreation areas where a system is not
feasible, as determined by DEH. Portable toilets may be used on a temporary
basis for the events of a short duration, for agricultural purposes, and at
constructions sites according to the provisions specified in the Manual.
   (i)   No system shall be constructed with the intent to connect it to five
(5) or more dwelling units constructed on a single lot of real property.
   (j)   Areas of filled or imported soil or unstable soil formations shall not
be used for a system dispersal field or replacement area. The dispersal field
shall be located and installed in natural, undisturbed, and unobstructed ground
or earth. This limitation does not apply to engineered fill as provided in the
Manual.
   (k)   No system shall be approved that utilizes any form of effluent
disposal that discharges on or above the post installation ground surface such
as sprinklers, exposed drip lines, free-surface wetlands, or a pond.
      (1)   No system shall be installed in slopes greater than thirty percent
(30%) without a geotechnical report prepared by a California Registered
Geotechnical Engineer.
   (m)   No system utilizing supplemental treatment shall be allowed after the
effective date of this ordinance which does not maintain an operating permit
requiring periodic monitoring and inspections.
   (n)   No system shall be allowed which is dedicated to receiving significant
amounts of wastes dumped from RV holding tanks.
   (o)   No system shall be approved where the separation of the bottom of the
dispersal field to the high seasonal groundwater is less than two (2) feet.
   (p)   No dispersal field or replacement area(s) shall be covered by an
impermeable surface, such as paving, concrete, asphalt, building foundation
slabs, plastic sheeting, or any other material that prevents oxygen transfer to
the soil.
   (q)   No dispersal system shall be subject to activities that result in
compaction, or potential damage such as vehicular traffic, large animal
enclosure, grading, and placement of paving or building structures.
   (r)   No system shall be approved within the minimum setbacks to a flood
control levee without approval from the agency having jurisdiction to allow
installation within the setback.
   (s)    No system shall be installed in areas subject to flooding unless it
is designed per provisions described in the Manual.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.611.   Minimum horizontal setbacks.
   The minimum horizontal separation between the components of the system,
including the replacement area and site features, shall meet the minimum
horizontal setbacks as provided in the Manual. In certain situations the
Director of Environmental Health may grant a reduction for a minimum setback
under the variance provisions found in the Manual. In cases of allowances for
reduced setbacks, the minimum horizontal setback distance shall be met to the
greatest extent possible and where required to protect the water quality.
Supplemental treatment and/or other mitigation may be required to allow
reduction of setback distances.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.612.   Minimum vertical setbacks.
   The vertical setback is the distance measured from the bottom of dispersal
trench to the seasonal high groundwater level, fractured rock, or other
limiting layer. Soil textural classification should be considered the primary
data source for system sizing. Percolation tests may be allowed or required to
supplement soil textural classification. When determining soil textural
classification, the least permeable layer below the point of dispersal shall be
used in determining the vertical setback. Minimum vertical setback distances
are provided in the Manual.
Where supplemental system is utilized, minimum vertical setback may be reduced
from the requirements that apply to standard systems as provided in the Manual.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.613.   Construction inspections.
   (a)   The applicant shall grant DEH access to the property for purposes of
inspecting a system in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the
Manual, and/or with any conditions specified on the installation permit or
operating permit.
   (b)   A stamped copy of the approved system installation permit must be kept
available at the jobsite during the system installation and until the system
passes final inspection.
   (c)   In the case of an owner installed system, additional inspections may
be required to assure proper installation of the system.
   (d)   In the case of a system subject to an operating permit, the service
provider may be required to attend the final inspection.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.614.   Unauthorized work.
   Upon notice from the Director of Environmental Health, any work on a system
that is being conducted in violation of this chapter, or in an unsafe or
dangerous manner, must stop immediately.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.615.   Abatement.
   A failing system shall be immediately abated. To every extent possible, a
failing system must be brought into compliance with this Code. In case of any
failure, malfunction, or breakdown of any system, if not corrected within a
time designated by the Director of Environmental Health, the Director of
Environmental Health may order or cause corrections to be made and bill the
property owner for the costs and may place a lien on the property for the
abatement costs. The Director of Environmental Health may condemn the property
and order the premises to be vacated if no safe manner of abatement is
possible.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.616.   Required notification of system failure.
   Where a failing system may affect or possibly did affect a drinking water
well, the owners of possibly affected water wells will be notified of such at
the expense of the owner of the failing system. DEH shall notify the owner of
any public water system or public water source intake, and the Central Valley
Regional Water Quality Control Board as soon as practicable, but no later than
seventy-two (72) hours, upon the discovery of a failing system as defined and
within the following setbacks:
   (a)   One-hundred fifty (150) feet from a public water system; or
   (b)   Four-hundred (400) feet from the high water mark of a watercourse
where a public water system intake is within one thousand two hundred (1,200)
feet downstream of the system; or
   (c)   Two-hundred (200) feet from the high water mark of a watercourse where
a public water system intake is with one thousand two hundred (1,200) to two
thousand five hundred (2,500) feet downstream of the system, or two-hundred
(200) feet upstream of the failed system; or
   (d)   Any situation where in the opinion of the Director of Environmental
Health the system failure could impact drinking water quality of a public water
system.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.617.   Required notification of a system installation.
   DEH shall provide a copy of the system permit application to the owner of a
public water system if the proposed system is one (1) of the following:
   (a)   The proposed system installation is within one thousand two hundred
(1,200) feet of an intake point for a surface water treatment plant for
drinking water; or
   (b)   The proposed system is in the drainage catchment in which the intake
point is located; or
   (c)   The proposed system location is such that it may impact water quality
at the intake point such as being upstream of the intake point for a flowing
water body.
   If the owner of the public water system cannot be identified, DEH will
notify Division of Drinking Water of the State Water Resources Control Board.
   The public water system shall have fifteen (15) days from receipt of the
permit application to provide recommendations and comments to the DEH regarding
the proposed system.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.618.   Abandoned system.
   Every system that has been abandoned or has been discontinued from further
use or to which no waste or waste discharge pipe from a plumbing fixture is
connected must be destroyed under permit and as specified in the Manual.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.619.   Refusal to finalize building permit for occupancy.
   (a)   No building permit shall be finalized for occupancy, nor shall any
Certificate of Occupancy be issued for any building that is not connected to an
approved public sewer system or a system as defined in this chapter without
written approval of the Director of Environmental Health.
   (b)   No person may occupy or otherwise use any premises or building that
has not been connected to an approved public sewer system or system as defined
in this chapter, unless DEH has approved the method of sewage dispersal.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.620.   Cesspools, seepage pits, and substandard tanks.
   No person shall construct, install, use, or continue to allow in existence
any cesspool, seepage pit, or substandard tank intended to hold or treat
sewage.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.621.   Holding tanks; portable toilets; vault privy.
   Holding tanks, portable toilets and vault privies are subject to specific
siting criteria as specified in the Manual.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.622.   Cumulative impacts.
   Where systems may have cumulative impacts on groundwater and/or watershed
conditions due to such factors as the constituent levels (e.g., nitrogen
content) in the wastewater, the volume of wastewater flow, the density of the
system discharges in a given area, and/or the sensitivity and beneficial uses
of water resources in the discharge area, the Director of Environmental Health
may require additional technical studies (termed "Cumulative Impact Assessment
in the Manual") or other information demonstrating to the satisfaction of the
Director of Environmental Health, that use of the proposed system(s) will not
create adverse cumulative effects on water quality, public health or safety. A
cumulative impact assessment shall be required for any proposed subdivision
with an average lot size less than one (1) acre and any proposed large system
as defined. It is also required for proposed multi-unit residential projects
with three (3) or more units on the same parcel and proposed nonresidential
systems where the wastewater design flow is one thousand five hundred (1,500)
gallons per day or more. In all cases, such cumulative impact studies will be
conducted in accordance with the Manual.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.623.   Property improvements and system expansion.
   Unless waived by the Director of Environmental Health, the following shall
be required when work is performed on a lot where an approved system exists on
the lot.
   (a)   Where proposed construction associated with an existing structure will
require system expansion due to an increase in the number of bedrooms or
potential sleeping rooms for a residential property, or increase in estimated
wastewater flow for a non-residential property, as a condition of building
permit approval for the proposed construction, the system must meet the minimum
prevailing requirements of this chapter and the Manual.
   (b)   Where proposed construction associated with an existing or proposed
structure on the lot will not require system expansion, prior to building
permit issuance the work shall be determined to be outside the minimum setbacks
of the system and the system shall be determined to be functioning properly to
the satisfaction of DEH. If repairs or improvements are required for the system
to function properly the work shall be required as a condition of approval of
the associated building permit.
   (c)   Where improvements and/or expansion of the system is required pursuant
to this section, but the required work cannot be made, the Director of
Environmental Health will disallow the application and any associated building
permit shall not be issued.
   (d)   Where the existing system does not meet requirements of this chapter,
but is functioning safely and cannot be improved, construction will be limited
to the remodeling or repair of the existing structure provided the proposed
construction on structures served by the system will not increase the number of
bedrooms or potential sleeping rooms, or increase projected wastewater flows;
or limit the replacement area to less than one hundred percent (100%) of the
required size. For purposes of this section, repair means the reconstruction or
renewal of any part of an existing building for the purposes of its
maintenance. For purposes of this section remodeling means renovating the
existing structure, other than an addition of square footage to the structure.
   (e)   Where conditions are found on the property that require corrective
action, such as an illegally installed system, cesspool, abandoned well,
unpermitted work, etc., these shall require correction as a condition of
building permit approval.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.624.   Replacement of the dispersal field.
   (a)   Where any situation or circumstance requires the replacement of the
dispersal field, the entire replacement system shall meet the minimum
prevailing requirements of this chapter and the Manual.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 7: Alternative System Requirements
Sec. 6-19.701.   Use of alternative systems.
   (a)   Alternative system may be permitted by DEH for the repair or upgrading
of any existing system and for new construction on any legally created lot
where it is determined that wastewater cannot be disposed of in a sanitary
manner by a standard system.
   (b)   Types of alternative systems permitted shall be limited to those
identified in Manual, except as provided in paragraph (d).
   (c)   All supplemental systems shall be installed by a contractor. Where the
installation includes a proprietary treatment system certified and listed by
National Sanitation Foundation, the contractor shall also possess any required
manufacturer certifications, as applicable.
   (d)   Systems that are not included as a system type in the Manual, but that
are proposed or installed as part of an active accredited university research
project or field trial may be allowed with approval from DEH provided the
system monitoring is performed by the university and the system(s) meet the
minimum requirements of the OWTS Policy. Such system installation may require
special contracts or memoranda of understanding to clarify requirements, to
communicate what happens with the system at the end of the study or trial
period, and requirements if the system fails.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.702.   Installation permit and review requirements for alternative
systems.
   (a)   General requirements for site evaluation and for obtaining an
installation permit are prescribed in Article 6 of this chapter and in the
Manual.
   (b)   An alternative system design shall be prepared and signed or stamped
by a qualified system designer. The qualified system designer shall also be
responsible for inspections of the system installation to assure conformation
with approved plans.
   (c)   System design will be reviewed by DEH and, where warranted, such as
due to the complexity of the system, DEH may refer the plans to the California
Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board staff and/or external
third-party expert consultant(s) for additional review, the costs for which
would be the responsibility of the applicant.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.703.   Operation, maintenance and monitoring (OM&M) requirements.
   (a)   An OM&M program will be established by DEH to encourage or require
inspection, monitoring, and/or service to systems, including standard and
alternative systems, as delineated in the Manual to insure long-term
performance, and groundwater and public health protections. The OM&M program
will be in accordance with guidelines in the Manual and may also incorporate
specific recommendations of DEH, system consultant/designer, manufacturer, and/
or qualified professional.
   (b)   Monitoring of alternative systems shall be conducted by or under the
supervision of a qualified service provider unless otherwise provided in the
Manual.
   (c)   The Director of Environmental Health may require third-party or County
monitoring of any supplemental system where deemed necessary because of special
circumstances, such as the complexity of the system or the sensitive nature of
the site. The costs for such additional monitoring are the responsibility of
the owner.
   (d)   Monitoring results shall be submitted to DEH in accordance with
reporting guidelines provided in the Manual. DEH shall be notified immediately
of any system problems observed during the system inspection and monitoring
that could lead to the system failure.
   (e)   In addition to regular inspection and monitoring activities, the
Director of Environmental Health may require inspections after significant
events such as flood, seismic event and localized fire, etc. The Director of
Environmental Health will be responsible for issuing appropriate notices when
such inspections are required; those conducting the inspections shall report
the inspection results to the Director of Environmental Health. The purpose of
such inspections will be to assess and document any damage to the system and to
implement corrective actions, as needed, in a timely manner.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 8: Non-Discharging Wastewater Disposal
Sec. 6-19.801.
   Non-discharging wastewater disposal units may be allowed under limited
circumstances as provided in the Manual.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.802.
   Owners of non-discharging wastewater disposal units approved after the
adoption of this ordinance shall maintain an operating permit, unless
specifically exempted in the Manual.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.803.
   Owners of non-discharging wastewater disposal units shall maintain the unit
(s) in good working condition including conducting regular inspections, and
pumping or cleaning of solids as necessary to maintain proper function and to
prevent a nuisance or threat to public health.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.804.
   Setbacks for non-discharging wastewater disposal units shall be the same as
those specified in the Manual for septic tanks.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 9: Graywater Systems
Sec. 6-19.901.   Graywater systems.
   The provisions for graywater systems specified in the Uniform Plumbing Code,
California, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16A, Part
1 (Graywater Standards), are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated
herein as minimum standards for graywater systems, unless otherwise specified
in the Manual. The Division of Environmental Health shall be the permitting and
enforcing agency for graywater systems in the unincorporated areas of Yolo
County.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 10: Septage Pumping, Inspection, and Reporting Requirements
Sec. 6-19.1001.   Permitting, inspection and reporting requirements.
   This article implements Health and Safety Code, Division 104, Part 13,
Sections 117400-117590.
   (a)   Applicability: The provisions of this article shall not apply to any
city, town, county, sanitary district, sanitation district, sewer maintenance
district, or to any agency or institution of the state or the federal
government by reason of the cleaning of septic tanks, cesspools, chemical
toilets, sewage seepage pits or sewage works which are owned and operated by
any of such government agencies or institutions.
   (b)   Permit required: It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or
institution to do any of the following without a valid pumper truck permit
issued by the Director of Environmental Health:
      (1)   Pump wastewater from septic tanks, cesspools, grease traps, grease
interceptors, seepage pits, wastewater holding tanks, wastewater ponds, or
other wastewater source; or
      (2)   Clean portable toilets in a manner that produces wastewater; or
      (3)   Dispose of wastewater in Yolo County that is collected from
activities described in this section.
Each septage pumper vehicle shall require a separate and individual pumper
truck permit. Each business that provides or services portable toilets requires
a separate and individual pumper truck permit.
   (c)   Permit requirements: Prior to permit issuance the applicant shall fill
out the required application and any other forms as required by the Director of
Environmental Health; the applicant shall pay the required fee; DEH inspection
shall demonstrate that the vehicle(s) are leak proof and meet the requirements
of this article; and the operator and employees shall demonstrate a
satisfactory knowledge of sanitary practices, emergency and cleanup procedures,
proper waste disposal, and general health protections necessary for handling
and disposing of sewage.
   (d)   Permit revocation: Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked
or suspended by the Director of Environmental Health for cause.
   (e)   Permit fee: An application for a permit pursuant to this article shall
be accompanied by that fee established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
   (f)   Permit term: The permits issued pursuant to this article shall be
valid for a period of one (1) year (twelve [12] months) from the date of
issuance.
   (g)   Vehicle identification: The business name and phone number shall be
permanently affixed on both sides of the vehicle in plain, legible letters and
numbers at least four (4) inches high, and shall be visible at all times. The
certified capacity of the tank in gallons shall be permanently affixed on both
sides of the tank in plain, legible numbers a minimum of four (4) inches high
and shall be visible at all times. The capacity as shown shall be that approved
and certified by the sealer of weights and measures of the county, or other
approved sealer of weights and measures.
   (h)   Vehicle equipment: A minimum of fifty (50) feet of pumping hose, a
bucket and detergent shall be carried on each pumping vehicle. All pumping
hoses must be cleaned out into the truck tank or into the septic tank, chemical
toilet, or other receptacle being pumped, and not on the surface of the ground.
The customer's hose shall not be used.
   (i)   Vehicle spill kit: There shall be a spill kit carried on each vehicle
at all times which shall include, but not be limited to a sufficient quantity
of chloride of lime or other chlorine product for disinfection of hose,
absorbent material such as kitty litter, garbage bags, gloves of an impervious
material, and absorbent spill containment barrier.
   (j)   Violation of any of the provisions in this article or any order or
orders of the Director of Environmental Health made pursuant to this article
for the protection of human health and comfort shall constitute a misdemeanor
and shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200) for
each offense or by imprisonment for not less than thirty (30) days or by both
the fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 11: Land Use Project
Sec. 6-19.1101.   Land use project.
   (a)   An applicant initiating a land use project that cannot be served by a
public sewer system shall complete a site evaluation to determine suitability
to meet system requirements for onsite wastewater dispersal as described in
this chapter and the Manual.
   (b)   Unless waived by the Director of Environmental Health, no lot shall be
created, no parcel or subdivision map shall be recorded, nor shall a lot line
adjustment be approved unless all proposed lots or parcels which rely, or will
rely on a system, as defined in this chapter, have an approved site evaluation
report that verifies the existing and/or proposed lots or parcels have the
required minimum usable wastewater dispersal area (MUWDA) in accordance with
the horizontal setback requirements shown on Table 1 for each existing or
proposed residence. Non-residential land use project(s) shall submit a site
evaluation report and proposed system design.
Table 1: MUWDA Requirements per Residence
USDA Soil Texture Percolation Rate  MUWDA (square feet)
Classification    (minutes/inch)    Gravity Distribution Pressure Distribution
USDA Soil Texture   Percolation Rate  MUWDA (square feet)
Classification      (minutes/inch)    Gravity Distribution Pressure
                                                           Distribution
Coarse sand         <1                Not Suitable for Lot Creation
Coarse to medium    1-5               Not Allowed          6,000
sand 1,2
Fine sand and loamy >5-10             9,000                6,000
sand 3
Sandy loam, loam,   >10-24            12,000               8,000
sandy clay loam
Silt loam           >24-60            15,000               10,000
Clay loam, silty
clay loam, sandy    >60-120           Not Allowed          15,000
clay 4
Clay 4, highly      >120              Not Suitable for Lot Creation
compacted soil
Imported soil       Not applicable    Not Suitable for Lot Creation
 
1 Subject to percolation test in addition to using soil texture determination.
2 Must demonstrate adequate filtration capacity
3 Subject to percolation test in addition to soil textural determination if 35%
or more (by volume) coarse fragments (defined as > 2 mm size)
4 Clay shall be non-expansive
   (c)   No lot shall be created, no parcel or subdivision map shall be
recorded, nor shall a lot line adjustment be approved where a non-discharging
wastewater disposal unit is the proposed method of wastewater disposal in lieu
of an onsite wastewater treatment system.
   (d)   No reduction in MUWDA size shall be granted for proposed supplemental
systems.
   (e)   Except for community systems, no new lot or parcels shall be created
where the lot or parcel relies on a system that cannot be sited within the
boundaries of the proposed lot or parcel.
   (f)   The Director of Environmental Health may approve specifications for
MUWDAs for non-residential projects, cluster systems, and community systems
that vary from Table 3 on a case-by-case basis under the requirements of this
ordinance and Manual.
   (g)   The minimum size of a newly created individual lot within the
unincorporated area of the County that is served by a system shall be two (2)
acres. The minimum size of a newly created individual lot within the
jurisdiction of the City of West Sacramento shall be one (1) acre. Minimum lot
sizes within geographic areas will be re-evaluated periodically based on
results of the Water Quality Assessment Program.
   (h)   Within the unincorporated areas of Yolo County, no system shall be
constructed within a residential subdivision of five (5) or more lots, or
parcels in which any one (1) parcel is less than five (5) acres net size, for
which a tentative subdivision map is approved after October 7, 1976.
   (i)   The maximum slope for the designated MUWDA on newly created lots
served by a system shall be no greater than thirty percent (30%).
   (j)   No new lot or parcel shall be created where the vertical separation is
less than two (2) feet.
   (k)   Proposed new lots or parcels shall specify the MUWDA on all maps. The
MUWDA shall be outside of the following:
      (1)   Minimum horizontal setbacks as specified in Table 1.
      (2)   Easements dedicated to surface or underground improvements.
      (3)   Easements for access for roadway purposes.
      (4)   Paved areas
      (5)   Areas with a slope in excess of thirty (30) percent.
      (6)   Areas subject to flooding as determined in the site evaluation
      (7)   Areas within required setbacks to a flood control levee.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 12: Connection to Public Sewer System
Sec. 6-19.1201.   Connection to public sewer system required.
   Where there is public sewer system available for connection, systems shall
be prohibited.
   (a)   The public sewer system is considered available under the following
circumstances:
      (1)   A single lot or parcel being served is located two hundred (200)
feet or less from a suitable connection point to a public sewer system.
      (2)   A lot shown on a proposed parcel map is located five hundred (500)
feet or less from a suitable connection point to a public sewer system.
      (3)   A lot shown on a proposed tentative or final map is located one
thousand (1,000) feet or less from a suitable connection point to a public
sewer system.
      (4)   Connection to the public sewer system is allowed by the public
sewer system governing body and/or other governing bodies, such as Local Agency
Formation Commission
   (b)   For a single lot, these provisions do not apply to a required system
expansion, repair, or replacement where the connection fees associated with
connection to the public sewer system are greater than twice the total cost of
the site evaluation and permitted work to be performed for the expansion,
repair or replacement; and the system can meet the minimum requirements of this
chapter and the Manual.
   Any fees associated with assessments of potential connection to public sewer
system shall be the responsibility of the property owner or developer.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 13: Groundwater Protection
Sec. 6-19.1301.   Areas with potential for groundwater pollution.
   New systems located within areas that are determined to have a potential for
nitrogen contamination in the groundwater due to dense development greater than
one (1) dwelling unit (or equivalent) per gross acre on average, and soils with
a percolation rate five (5) minutes per inch or faster (coarse to medium sand)
and groundwater levels less than 8 (eight) feet below the bottom of the
proposed dispersal field and where individual water wells are the source of
water supply, the Director of Environmental Health shall require nitrogen
reducing supplemental treatment unless cumulative impact studies determine that
the groundwater will not be affected.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.1302.   Areas with impacted groundwater.
   In areas with known elevated nitrogen levels in the groundwater due to
septic system effluent and where individual water wells are the source of water
supply, the Director of Environmental Health may require nitrogen reducing
supplemental treatment for new or replacement systems.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 14: Reporting to Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board
Sec. 6-19.1401.   Report requirements.
   Pursuant to Item 3.3 of the OWTS Policy, an annual report shall be submitted
to the Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board and include the
required elements as described therein. DEH shall collect any and all such data
and perform any required studies so as to fulfill this requirement. The
Director of Environmental Health shall be responsible for data collection and
reporting.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.1402.   Records retention.
   Records of permitting, complaint response and enforcement actions created
pursuant to the implementation of this chapter shall be permanent and retained
by the County of Yolo in perpetuity. Paper records may be scanned and stored
electronically; and the paper version destroyed.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.1403.   Water quality assessment program.
   On or before May 2018 the Director of Environmental Health shall develop and
implement a water quality assessment program pursuant to OWTS Policy Section
9.3.2.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 15: Enforcement and Penalties
Sec. 6-19.1501.   Enforcement.
   (a)   DEH shall perform enforcement of the standards of this chapter and the
Manual.
   (b)   All violations of this chapter and the Manual are determined to be
unlawful and declared to be detrimental to the public health, safety and
welfare, and are declared to be public nuisances.
   (c)   Failure to maintain an active system operating (OM&M) permit and/or
failure to comply with a condition of approval is a violation of this Code and
will result in enforcement action.
   (d)   DEH may condemn any residence or other establishment that is
accumulating or disposing of wastewater in a manner contrary to the
requirements of this chapter and the Manual.
   (e)   The Director of Environmental Health has the authority to immediately
abate a violation that constitutes an imminent threat to public health and
safety. This could include, but not be limited to, untreated sewage onto the
ground or into surface waters; open cesspools, septic tanks, or other
entrapment hazards; etc.
   (f)   In addition to the use of other remedy, DEH may seek legal or
equitable relief in Yolo County Superior Court to enjoin any act or practice
and to abate any conditions that constitute or will constitute a violation of
this chapter or the Manual.
   (g)   No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with DEH in the
performance of code enforcement and nuisance abatement duties pursuant to this
chapter and the Manual.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.1502.   Right of Entry.
   DEH is hereby authorized to enter at any reasonable hour any premises as may
be necessary in the enforcement of this chapter and the Manual.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.1503.   Notice of violation.
   The Director of Environmental Health may issue a Notice of Violation to any
person found to be in violation of a provision of this chapter, including but
not limited to, any regulation, information request, order, variance,
condition, or other requirement that the Director of Environmental Health and/
or his or her designee is authorized to enforce or implement pursuant to this
chapter.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.1504.   Cease and desist orders.
   (a)   The Director of Environmental Health may issue a cease and desist
order requiring any person responsible for any violation of this chapter to
take any of the following actions:
      (1)   Immediately discontinue any prohibited discharge of wastewater
      (2)   Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter
      (3)   Satisfactorily remediate the area affected by the violation.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-19.1505.   Penalties.
   (a)   Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than one thousand and no hundredths ($1,000.00)
dollars, or imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than six (6) months,
or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such person shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation
of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person.
    (b)   In addition to the penalties set forth in this article, any person
guilty of a violation of these standards shall be liable for such costs,
expenses and disbursements paid or incurred by the County in abatement and
prosecution of the violation. The Director of Environmental Health may place a
lien on the property for recovery of any associated costs and unpaid fees.
   (c)   Any person conducting work without necessary permits shall pay double
the permit fee as a penalty in addition to the reimbursement of cost and other
penalties as described above.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 16: Appeals
Sec. 6-19.1601.   Appeals procedure.
   Any appeals from all orders, decisions, and determinations of the
Enforcement Officer shall be made in writing, and shall specify and set forth
the grounds for the appeal; and shall be filed by the appellant with the Clerk
of the Board according to procedures set forth in the Yolo County Code of
Ordinances, Title 1, Chapter 4.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Article 17: Severability
Sec. 6-19.1701.   Severability.
   If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the
remaining portions of this ordinance, including any other section, subsection,
sentence, clause, or phrase therein.
(Ord. 1469, eff. July 14, 2016)
Chapter 20
PROMOTION OF SAFE AND OPEN PUBLIC SPACES
Sections:
   
6-20.01   Findings.
   
6-20.02   Definitions.
   
6-20.03   Prohibition.
   
6-20.04   Offer of housing, shelter and services.
   
6-20.05   Enforcement.
   
6-20.06   Notices.
   
6-20.07   Personal property.
   
6-20.08   Other laws and orders.
   
6-20.09   Undertaking for the general welfare.
   
6-20.10   Severability.
Sec. 6-20.01.   Findings.
   (a)   Homeless encampments such as tents and other habitable structures
persist and have become a major problem on County property. Such encampments
are unsafe and unhealthy for the people living in them, and they make our
public spaces and the adjoining neighborhoods intimidating, less safe, and less
healthy for families, residents, and visitors to County facilities. The County
already prohibits camping on public and private property in the unincorporated
areas of the County without permission, and the unregulated placement of tents
and other habitable structures on County properties—including parking lots,
areas of ingress and egress, patios, and similar spaces—is not a traditional or
customary use of these important public spaces.
   (b)   The County of Yolo is a compassionate county and must do everything
reasonably possible to transition people experiencing homelessness to stable
and successful permanent housing by providing services and low-barrier-to-entry
shelters. But maintaining accessible and safe access to County facilities for
everyone is an important public safety objective. Tents and other habitable
structures erected for temporary shelter often exhibit the following public
safety hazards, all of which present public health risks and can become vectors
for disease, illness, and rodents:
      (1)   solid waste from discarded food and other garbage, which can be an
attractant to vermin and create conditions for vermin infestation;
      (2)   the presence of syringes;
      (3)   untreated human waste, which can lead to the transmission of
diseases;
      (4)   food storage is not sanitary;
      (5)   no potable running water for personal hygiene, such as hand
washing, the lack of which is a primary way communicable disease is spread.
   (c)   In addition to the foregoing concerns, tents and other habitable,
temporary shelters provide a shield for criminal activity and expose members of
the public and law enforcement to increased risk of assault and other threats
to personal safety. This risk extends not only to members of the public seeking
to access County facilities for lawful purposes, but also to nearby residents,
business owners, and pedestrians. (Ord. 1514, eff. December 5, 2019)
Sec. 6-20.02.   Definitions.
   For purposes of this Chapter:
   (a)   "County property" shall mean all real property owned or leased by the
County or any agency or department thereof, irrespective of whether such real
property is located within an incorporated area.
   (b)   “Encampment” shall mean a tent or any similar temporary structure
consisting of any material with a top or roof or any other upper covering or
that is otherwise enclosed by sides that is of sufficient size for a person to
fit underneath or inside while sitting or lying down and includes the use of a
tarp or other material tied to a structure or bush to create an enclosed area;
   (c)   “Enforcing employee” shall mean the employee of the County, or the
city in which the County property is located, authorized to enforce this
Chapter.
   (d)   “Housing” shall mean placement in a shelter or another housing option
provided by the County or the incorporated cities located within the County;
   (e)   “Personal Property” shall mean any tangible property, and includes,
but is not limited to, goods, materials, merchandise, tents, tarpaulins,
bedding, blankets, sleeping bags, personal items such as household items,
luggage, backpacks, clothing, food, documents, and medication;
   (f)   “Shelter” shall mean temporary shelter or another shelter option.
(Ord. 1514, eff. December 5, 2019)
Sec. 6-20.03.   Prohibition.
   It is unlawful to place an encampment upon County property. This prohibition
shall not apply to the placement of an encampment on County property pursuant
to and in compliance with a permit or other written authorization signed by the
County Administrator or other County employee with authority to provide such
permits or authorizations. (Ord. 1514, eff. December 5, 2019)
Sec. 6-20.04.   Offer of Housing, Shelter and Services.
   Prior to directing a person to remove an encampment or prior to removing the
encampment, the enforcing employee shall offer information to the occupant(s)
regarding any available housing or shelter and other health and human services
that said employee reasonably believes are relevant to the occupant(s) and
their individual circumstances. (Ord. 1514, eff. December 5, 2019)
Sec. 6-20.05.   Enforcement.
   The prohibition of Section
6-20.03 may be enforced by: (1) the Sheriff’s Office, (2) the Health and Human
Services Agency, (3) the Department of Environmental Health, (4) the Department
of General Services, and (5) on County property within an incorporated city,
the local law enforcement agency. The County Administrator, or a department
designated by the County Administrator, may issue regulations or guidelines
necessary or appropriate to aid in the enforcement and implementation of this
Chapter and may create any additional procedures consistent with this Chapter
necessary or appropriate to protect the property rights of individuals whose
property is taken into custody pursuant to this Chapter.
   All references to enforcement are to the process of implementing the
prohibition of Section
6-20.03, as set forth in this Chapter, and violations of this Chapter do not
constitute infractions, misdemeanors, or felonies. No citation may be issued
for a violation of this Chapter. As set forth in Section
6-20.08, below, nothing in this Chapter is intended or shall be interpreted to
limit or in any way constrain enforcement action (including but not limited to
the issuance of citations) for other violations of federal, state, or local law
occurring in connection with an encampment. (Ord. 1514, eff. December 5, 2019)
Sec. 6-20.06.   Notices.
   The enforcing employee shall provide occupants of an encampment notice of
intent to remove the encampment at least 24 hours in advance of any action to
remove the encampment. Notice shall be in writing and shall be served
personally on the occupant(s) of the encampment present when the enforcing
employee attempts to serve notice. In addition, the enforcing employee shall
post the notice on or near the encampment, so as reasonably to communicate the
notice to persons living at the encampment but not present during the attempt
to serve notice. The notice shall contain the following information:
   (a)   the location of the encampment;
   (b)   the date and time notice was served or posted;
   (c)   a statement that the encampment violates this chapter;
   (d)   an advisement that the County or City will remove the encampment 24
hours after the date and time of the notice;
   (e)   information about any housing or shelter and homeless services
available for occupants of the encampment and the phone number and address to
contact in order to obtain the housing or shelter or other health and human
services;
   (f)   an advisement that any personal property remaining at the encampment
site when the enforcing employee returns to remove the encampment will be
impounded for no fewer than 90 days and will be discarded thereafter if not
claimed; and
   (g)   the address, phone number, and operating hours of the location where
the personal property will be stored and may be retrieved and that the County
or City will charge no fee for storage or retrieval. (Ord. 1514, eff. December
5, 2019)
Sec. 6-20.07.   Personal Property.
   A person occupying an encampment who is present at the time the enforcing
employee is removing the encampment may retain his or her personal property
except that items constituting an immediate threat to the health or safety of
the public or items that constitute evidence of a crime or contraband may be
seized, as permissible by law. Any personal property seized by the County or
City shall be stored for no less than 90 days, with the following exceptions:
   (a)   Items that present a health or safety risk if stored, such as items
soiled by bodily fluids, items that are moldy, items infested by insects or
vermin, and food, need not be stored and may be discarded; and
   (b)   Items that constitute evidence of a crime or contraband may be seized
and discarded, as permissible by law. (Ord. 1514, eff. December 5, 2019)
Sec. 6-20.08.   Other laws and orders.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit any conduct prohibited
by or limit the County’s or City’s authority to enforce any other federal,
state, or local law. (Ord. 1514, eff. December 5, 2019)
Sec. 6-20.09.   Undertaking for the general welfare.
   In enacting and implementing this Chapter, the County is assuming an
undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it
imposing on its officers and employees, an obligation for breach of which it is
liable in money damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately
caused injury. (Ord. 1514, eff. December 5, 2019)
Sec. 6-20.10.   Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is
held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall
not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance. The Board of Supervisors
hereby declares that it would have adopted this Ordinance and each section,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that one or more
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid. (Ord.
1514, eff. December 5, 2019)
Chapter 21
COVID-19 PENALTY
Sections:
   
6-21.01   Citation.
   
6-21.02   Definitions.
   
6-21.03   Adoption of public health orders as County law.
   
6-21.04   Violation and enforcement.
   
6-21.05   Nonexclusivity and election of proceedings.
   
6-21.06   Administrative citations; penalties and fees.
   
6-21.07   Contents of an administrative citation; service.
   
6-21.08   Administrative appeals.
   
6-21.09   Confidentiality of complaints.
   
6-21.10   Real property liens.
Sec. 6-21.01.   Citation.
   This chapter may be referred to as the “COVID-19 Penalty Ordinance.” (§ 3,
Ord. 1523, eff. July 7, 2020)
Sec. 6-21.02.   Definitions.
   (a)   “Board” means the Yolo County Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   “Citation” or “Administrative Citation” means a citation issued
pursuant to this chapter.
   (c)   “County” means the County of Yolo.
   (d)   “Days” means calendar days.
   (e)   “Enforcement Officer” means any peace officer, the County Health
Officer and anyone designated by the Health Officer, the Director of Emergency
Services and anyone designated by the Director, any Code Enforcement Officer
from the Division of Code Enforcement in the Department of Community Services,
the Environmental Health Director and anyone designated by the Director, and
anyone identified by resolution of the Board.
   (f)   “Hearing Officer” means any person appointed to conduct any hearing or
proceeding under the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specified,
including, without limitation, the administration of oaths, the issuance of
subpoenas, the receipt of evidence, and the entry of findings of fact and law.
   (g)   “Public Health Order(s)” shall have the meaning set forth in Sec.
6-21.03, below.
   (h)   “Responsible Party" means an individual or legal entity, or the agent
or legal guardian of such individual or entity, whose action or failure to act
violated a Public Health Order. This term specifically means and includes any
of the following:
      (1)   Any person or entity that causes, maintains, permits, or allows a
violation of this chapter.
      (2)   Any person or entity that owns, possesses, or controls any parcel
of real property in the County upon which a violation of this chapter is
maintained.
      (3)   Any trustee of any trust that holds legal title to any parcel of
real property in the County upon which a violation of this chapter is
maintained.
      (4)   Any person or entity that owns, possesses, operates, manages, or
controls any business within the County that is responsible for causing or
maintaining a violation of this chapter. (§ 4, Ord. 1523, eff. July 7, 2020)
Sec. 6-21.03.   Adoption of public health orders as county law.
   All of the following are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter
and shall constitute “Public Health Orders,” as that term is used herein:
   (1)   County Health Officer orders relating to the COVID-19 pandemic,
including those now in existence and any that later come into existence, and
including all materials expressly incorporated by reference into such orders;
   (2)   All orders of the State Public Health Officer, state guidance
documents issued for businesses and activities that have been adopted or
approved by the County Health Officer, as well as any state guidance and
directives posted on covid19.ca.gov that are described as mandatory, binding,
or otherwise presented as enforceable obligations;
   (3)   Any site-specific protocol (including but not limited to a completed
Social Distancing Protocol Worksheet) completed as required by state and local
requirements. The failure to post such protocol in violation of any of the
foregoing requirements shall also be a violation of his chapter.
   All public health orders are hereby deemed orders and regulations of the
Board of Supervisors pursuant to Government Code § 8634, shall constitute the
law of the County within both unincorporated and incorporated areas, and are
determined to be necessary for the protection of life and property during the
local emergency declared in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic. Any
violation of a public health order shall constitute an immediate danger to
public health and safety pursuant to Government Code § 53069.4 and shall
constitute a public nuisance. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to
make any conduct that does not violate a public health order a violation of
this chapter. (§ 5, Ord. 1523, eff. July 7, 2020)
Sec. 6-21.04.   Violation and enforcement.
   (a)   Citations; each day a separate violation. This chapter may be enforced
at any location within the County by an Enforcement Officer through the
issuance of an administrative citation with penalties, as described more fully
in Sec. 6-21.06, below. Each and every day, or portion thereof, that a
violation of this chapter exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense.
   (b)   Powers of Enforcement Officer. As set forth more fully in Sec. 6-
21.06, below, the Enforcement Officer shall have the authority and powers
necessary to determine whether a violation exists and take appropriate action
to gain compliance with the law and abate any violation. The Enforcement
Officer shall further have authority to issue administrative citations and any
other notices and orders necessary to obtain compliance and cost recovery, as
well as the power to inspect public and private property as provided by law,
impose fines and fees, and use the administrative remedies that are available
under state law, this chapter, and other applicable provisions of the Yolo
County Code
   (c)   Obstruction. In addition, every person who willfully resists, delays,
or obstructs any Enforcement Officer or Hearing Officer in the discharge or
attempt to discharge any duty of their office or employment in connection with
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punished by a fine not exceeding
$1,000, or by imprisonment in a County jail not to exceed one (1) year, or by
both that fine and imprisonment.
   (d)   False statements. Further, every person who willfully states anything
which that person knows to be false in any oral or written statement to an
Enforcement Officer or Hearing Officer regarding the subject of an
investigation, citation, or hearing occurring pursuant to this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or by
imprisonment in a County jail not to exceed one (1) year, or by both that fine
and imprisonment.
   (e)   Litigation authority. The Office of the County Counsel is hereby
authorized to file a civil action on behalf of the County to enjoin any
violation(s) of this chapter and to obtain other appropriate relief needed to
cease and abate such violations, as well as to recover all associated County
costs, attorneys’ fees, and any fines or penalties imposed. No further Board
authority or permission to initiate litigation is required to enforce
violations of this chapter. (§ 6, Ord. 1523, eff. July 7, 2020)
Sec. 6-21.05.   Nonexclusivity and election of proceedings.
   (a)   This chapter provides for enforcement proceedings that are
supplemental to all other enforcement proceedings authorized by local, state or
federal law, whether administrative, civil or criminal in nature. Any election
to proceed under this chapter and shall be without prejudice to the County
choosing to also proceed simultaneously or subsequently by pursuing different
or additional means of enforcing the same violation. Election to issue a
citation or take any other action authorized by this chapter shall be at the
sole discretion of the Enforcement Officer, and nothing in this chapter shall
be interpreted to mandate that an Enforcement Officer take certain steps in
response to potential violations of public health orders or to preclude an
Enforcement Officer from engaging informal oral or written requests to gain
compliance.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter alters or diminishes the authority of the
Sheriff, local police departments, the County Counsel, or the District Attorney
to address any such violations. Further, nothing in this chapter or decisions
made hereunder, including decisions not to take an enforcement action
authorized in this chapter, shall create any liability for the County or the
Enforcement Officer. (§ 7, Ord. 1523, eff. July 7, 2020)
Sec. 6-21.06.   Administrative citations; penalties and fees.
   (a)   Issuance. An Enforcement Officer may issue a citation to any
responsible party violating any provision of this chapter. The Enforcement
Officer may issue a citation for a violation not committed in their presence if
they determine through investigation, including but not limited to credible
input from County staff, that the responsible party did commit or is otherwise
responsible for the violation.
   (b)   Penalties. Penalties (fines) for administrative citations issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   The civil penalty for each non-commercial violation shall be a fine
not to exceed $500. The minimum amount of any such fine shall be $25.
      (2)   The civil penalty for each violation involving a commercial
activity shall be a fine not to exceed $10,000. The minimum amount of any such
fine shall be $250.
   (c)   Factors in setting amount. In determining the amount of a fine
pursuant to subsection (b), above, the Enforcement Officer shall consider:
      (1)   The gravity of the public health risk posed by the violation;
      (2)   Whether the responsible party has been previously counseled
regarding the violation;
      (3)   For a violation arising from commercial activities, whether the
violation is likely to result in increased revenue or avoided costs;
      (4)   Whether the violation is the subject of a prior citation;
      (5)   Whether the responsible party is making good faith efforts to
achieve and maintain compliance with public health orders; and
      (6)   Any other matters relating to the nature, circumstances, extent,
and gravity of the violation.
      For a citation that includes one (1) or more violations arising from
commercial activity, fines imposed for each day of violation shall
automatically double, up to the maximum amounts set forth above.
   (d)   Grace period. If a violation is capable of being cured (i.e., is an
ongoing violation and the responsible party has the apparent ability to effect
a resolution), an administrative citation may include a grace period to cure
the violation(s) and avoid the civil penalty set forth in the citation. The
grace period may range from twenty-four (24) to seventy-two (72) hours from the
date of the citation. In determining whether to provide a grace period and in
determining the length of any grace period included in a citation, the
Enforcement Officer shall consider the same factors provided above in
connection with setting a fine amount. All matters relating to grace periods
are within the sole discretion of the Enforcement Officer and are not
appealable.
   (e)   Compliance reporting following grace period. The responsible party
must cure each cited violation and must report to the Enforcement Officer when
each cited violation is cured prior to expiration of the grace period. Each
such report must include the responsible party’s contact information and
availability information sufficient to ensure the Enforcement Officer can
verify compliance within seventy-two (72) hours of the date of cure.
   (f)   Payment of administrative fines. All fines and fees shall be payable
to the County in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter,
unless otherwise directed in the citation. Fines shall be paid to the County
within thirty (30) days from the date of service of the administrative
citation, unless an appeal is properly requested. If an appeal is properly
requested and the fine is upheld or reduced at that administrative hearing,
then the confirmed fine amount shall be paid to the County within thirty (30)
days from the date of service of the decision. Payment of the fines and fees
shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation or bar further
enforcement action by the County.
   (g)   Administrative fees. The County may adopt one or more administrative
fees to recover the costs associated with the issuance, enforcement,
processing, and collection of administrative citations. The administrative fees
shall be established by resolution of the Board. The administrative fees shall
be assessed on each administrative citation and collected in the same manner
and at the same time as the civil penalty; however, the administrative fees
shall be assessed only once per administrative citation.
   (h)   Late fee; collection costs. Any person who fails to pay any fine or
administrative fee imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable for the payment of a late fee. The late fee shall be in an amount
established by resolution of the Board. In addition to the administrative fee
and late fee, the County is entitled to recover all costs, expenses, fees, and
attorneys’ fees associated with collecting upon any administrative fines, fees,
or costs authorized by this chapter. (§ 8, Ord. 1523, eff. July 7, 2020)
Sec. 6-21.07.   Contents of an administrative citation; service.
   (a)   Contents. Each citation issued under this chapter shall contain:
      (1)   The date of the violation.
      (2)   The name of the responsible party being cited.
      (3)   The address or a description of the location where the violation
occurred.
      (4)   Identification and a brief description of the public health order
(s) requirements violated by the responsible party.
      (5)   The grace period (if any) to cure each cited violation in order to
avoid a fine, along with an order that the responsible party report to the
Enforcement Officer when each cited violation is cured, along with the
responsible party’s contact information, in order for the Officer to verify
compliance promptly after the correction.
      (6)   The amount of the fine for each cited violation that will be
imposed if the cited violation is not cured within the grace period (if any).
If there is no grace period, the fine shall be immediately imposed.
      (7)   A notice that the fine amount will automatically reaccrue (and for
violations arising from commercial activity, double pursuant to Sec.
6-21.06, above) each day beyond the grace period (if any) that the cited
violation persists, up to the maximum amount set forth herein.
      (8)   The amount of all other fees and charges authorized by this
chapter.
      (9)   A brief statement that the violation determination and/or fine
amount may be appealed, as follows:
   To Appeal this Citation: The violations(s) identified in this Citation and
the amount of fine imposed (if $1000 or greater) may be appealed within ten
calendar days of service of the Citation by providing the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors (625 Court Street, Room 205, Woodland, CA) with a request in
writing for an appeal. The request shall be entitled “REQUEST FOR APPEAL OF
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION” and must set forth the factual and/or legal basis for
the appeal in detail sufficient to apprise the County of the nature of the
appeal and general objections and arguments to be raised by the Responsible
Party. All appeal requests shall include a deposit of $750 toward the costs of
a hearing officer unless you include a request for waiver of the deposit
concurrently with filing the appeal. The County Administrator may grant the
waiver request if you provide sufficient evidence of an inability to pay. If
your request is denied, you must provide the deposit within five calendar days
or the appeal shall be deemed withdrawn. Any appeal that does not meet all of
these requirements will be rejected following review by the Office of the
County Counsel.
   If you do not prevail on the appeal, the hearing officer will require you to
reimburse all hearing costs incurred by the County, including the hearing
officer’s fees and charges.
      (10)   A brief description of the fine payment process, including the 30-
day timeframe to pay the fine and other fees and charges, the late fee for
failure to pay on time, and that unpaid amounts may become a lien and special
assessment against the real property where the violation occurred.
      (11)   The name and signature of the citing Enforcement Officer and
appropriate contact information.
   (b)   Service. Service of a citation may occur by any of the following
methods:
      (1)   Personal service upon the owner or other responsible party.
      (2)   First-class or certified mail to a responsible party’s business
address, or last known personal address using data from the last equalized
assessment roll or other reliable information available to the Enforcement
Officer.
      (3)   For violations involving the use of real property owned or leased
by a responsible party, by posting the notice in a conspicuous place at the
property entrance.
      (4)   For any responsible party registered with the Secretary of State,
by certified mail to that party’s agent for service of process at the address
registered with the Secretary of State, or as otherwise permitted by law. For
any such party required to register with the Secretary of State that has not
designated an agent for service of process with the Secretary of State, then a
notice may be served on that party by certified mail to the Secretary of State.
      (5)   By e-mail when an email address is provided by that party.
      (6)   In any other manner reasonably calculated to effectuate notice.
   Service by posting shall be deemed effective at the time of posting. Service
by mail or e-mail shall be deemed effective upon deposit in the mail or
transmission of the e-mail. The failure of any responsible party to receive any
citation served in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity
of the citation nor any subsequent proceeding or action relating to the
citation or the violation(s) identified therein. (§ 9, Ord. 1523, eff. July 7,
2020)
Sec. 6-21.08.   Administrative appeals.
   (a)   To hear appeals of administrative citations issued pursuant to this
chapter, the Board of Supervisors authorizes the use of a hearing officer
appointed pursuant to Yolo County Code Section
1-5.09.
   (b)   Upon receipt of the written appeal, the matter shall be promptly set
for a hearing before the hearing officer. The hearing will be conducted
remotely using video technology, such as WebEx or ZOOM, unless the parties
otherwise mutually agree to an in-person hearing with the concurrence of the
hearing officer.
   (c)   Unless a hearing is waived by the County and the responsible party
(appellant) in favor of a determination based upon written filings, including
arguments and supporting evidence in the form of declaration testimony and
other competent evidence, the hearing officer shall hold a de novo
administrative hearing to determine whether the conditions described in the
citation constitute a violation under this chapter and to review and decide any
other matters properly appealed by the appellant. The hearing may be continued
from time to time for good cause.
   (d)   The appellant shall be given an opportunity at the hearing to present
and elicit testimony (including by cross-examination) and other evidence
regarding matters properly appealed, including the existence of one or more
violations and the administrative penalty amount (if $1000 or greater). Failure
of the appellant(s) to appear and present evidence at the hearing shall be
deemed a withdrawal of the request for hearing and shall constitute a failure
to exhaust administrative remedies.
   (e)   The appellant may choose to be represented by an attorney; however,
formal rules of evidence or procedure shall not apply, including rules relating
to evidence, witnesses and hearsay. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if
it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely
in the conduct of serious affairs regardless of the existence of any common law
or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of the evidence over
objection in civil actions. The hearing officer has discretion to exclude
evidence if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the probability
that its admission will require an undue amount of time.
   (f)   The standard of proof shall be a preponderance of the evidence and the
County bears the burden of proof to establish the existence of the violation,
if placed in dispute by the notice of appeal. The burden of proof on all other
matters shall be borne by the appellant.
   (g)   The hearing shall be conducted in the English language. The proponent
of any testimony by a witness who does not proficiently speak the English
language shall provide an interpreter certified by the state or Yolo County
Superior Court at its sole cost.
   (h)   After the hearing, the hearing officer shall render his or her written
decision affirming, reversing or modifying the determination that one or more
violations occurred. If the violation is affirmed, the decision shall include a
statement that the County is entitled to recover administrative penalties and
any other fees, charges, or costs authorized by this chapter and included in
the citation. The hearing officer may also reduce the amount of the
administrative penalty if warranted, taking into consideration all evidence
provided by the appellant (and any responsive evidence adduced by the County)
in connection with the factors set forth in Sec.
6-21.06, above.
   (i)   A copy of the decision shall be served on the parties and shall be
final and conclusive when signed by the hearing officer and served upon the
County Counsel and the appellant. For service upon the appellant, the hearing
officer shall effect service in the manner requested by the appellant or, if no
manner of service is provided, pursuant to the service methods in Sec.
6-21.07, above, with the assistance of the County if desired.
   (j)   Payment of all fines, fees, charges, and costs specified in the
hearing officer’s decision shall be made to the County within thirty (30)
calendar days of service of the decision, unless timely appealed to the
Superior Court. Any responsible party aggrieved by the decision of a Hearing
Officer may obtain further review by filing appropriate materials with the Yolo
County Superior Court in accordance with the timelines and provisions as set
forth in California Government Code § 53069.4. The Hearing Officer’s decision
shall constitute the final administrative order or decision of the County
pursuant to Section 53069.4.
   (k)   Excepting the $750 deposit required at the time an appeal is filed,
hearing officer fees and costs shall be advanced by the County. If the
violation is affirmed, the hearing officer shall award the County reimbursement
of all hearing expenses borne by the County, including the Hearing Officer’s
compensation. If the Enforcement Action is only partially upheld and/or if the
fine amount is reduced, the Hearing Officer may proportionately reduce the
County’s reimbursement of hearing expenses in his or her sole discretion. If
the enforcement action is dismissed entirely, then the County shall bear the
hearing costs and reimburse any deposit provided by the appellant.
   (l)   The appellant may settle any appeal with the Office of the County
Counsel at any time for good cause, without the need for approval by the Board
of Supervisors. The County Counsel shall consult with the County Administrator
and County Health Officer, or their designees, prior to entering into any
settlement. The terms of all such settlements shall be publicly disclosed upon
request. (§ 10, Ord. 1523, eff. July 7, 2020)
Sec. 6-21.09.   Confidentiality of complaints.
   The County shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that the identity and
personal information of any person making a complaint to the County concerning
a violation of this chapter shall remain confidential. It is declared and found
by the Board that the public interest served by encouraging complaints to the
County without fear of retribution clearly outweighs the public interest served
by disclosure of the complainant’s identity and information. (§ 11, Ord. 1523,
eff. July 7, 2020)
Sec. 6-21.10.   Real property liens.
   All violations of this chapter constitute a public nuisance and associated
enforcement costs are considered costs of abatement. All unpaid abatement costs
may be secured by a nuisance abatement lien recorded on title to the property
where the violation occurred and by special assessment placed on the tax bill
of said property. All steps taken to impose a lien and create a special
assessment shall comply with applicable requirements of state law. (§ 12, Ord.
1523, eff. July 7, 2020)
Chapter 22
LNU COMPLEX FIRE DEBRIS REMOVAL
Sections:
Article 1. Citation.
   
6-22.101   Citation.
Article 2. Debris Removal.
   
6-22.201   Definitions.
   
6-22.202   Effective period.
   
6-22.203   Prohibition on removal of fire debris from private property.
   
6-22.204   Removal of fire debris through the OES program.
   
6-22.205   Removal of fire debris through the alternative program.
   
6-22.206   Hold on building permits.
   
6-22.207   Deadlines and enforcement.
   
6-22.208   Enforcement and abatement.
   
6-22.209   Judicial enforcement action.
   
6-22.210   Remedies not exclusive.
   
6-22.211   Allowed zones.
   
6-22.212   Violations, enforcement, and penalties.
Article 3. Hazard Tree Removal Program.
   
6-22.301   Hazard tree removal program.
   
6-22.302   Effective period.
   
6-22.303   Definitions.
   
6-22.304   Government hazard tree removal program.
   
6-22.305   Public nuisance; violations.
   
6-22.306   Purpose.
   
6-22.307   Private hazard tree removal program.
   
6-22.308   County development permits.
   
6-22.309   Deadlines and enforcement.
   
6-22.310   Enforcement.
   
6-22.311   Abatement costs; administrative costs.
   
6-22.312   Non-exclusive remedy.
   
6-22.313   Summary abatement.
Article 1: Citation
Sec. 6-22.101.   Citation.
   This chapter may be referred to as the "LNU Complex Fire Debris Removal
Ordinance.” (§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Article 2: Debris Removal
Sec. 6-22.201.   Definitions.
   "Alternative Program." For purposes of this article, the term "Alternative
Program" shall mean the requirements for inspections, clean up and disposal
established by the County for property owners that opt out of or are ineligible
for a State Program.
   "Board." The term "Board" means the Board of Supervisors.
   "Director." The term “Director” shall mean the County Director of Community
Services and his/her designee.
   "State Program." For purposes of this article, the term "State Program"
shall mean fire damage debris clearance program operated by State Partnership
for the LNU Complex Fire in conjunction with federal agencies.
   "Phase I." For purposes of this article, the term "Phase I" shall mean the
hazardous waste cleanup performed by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) and/or Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) on certain
properties impacted by the LNU Complex Fire.
   "Phase II." For purposes of this article, the term "Phase II" shall mean the
ash and debris cleanup work performed pursuant to the State Program and/or the
alternative program.
   "Private Action." For the purposes of this article, the term "private
action" shall mean the removal of fire debris from private property damaged by
the LNU Complex Fire by persons not eligible for or opting out of the State
Program and participating in the alternative program.
   "Qualifying structure." For the purposes of this article, the term
"qualifying structure" shall mean a structure of one hundred twenty (120)
square feet and over.
   "Removal of Fire Debris." The term "removal of fire debris" as used in this
article includes all cleanup of fire debris from structures resulting from the
LNU Complex Fire, including removal, transport and disposal of fire debris, but
it does not include the removal of personal property from residential sites
unless such removal of personal property involves cleanup and the removal of
ash from the property.
   "Right of Entry Permit." The term "Right of Entry Permit" means the Debris
Removal Right-of-Entry (ROE) Permit (For Providing Debris Removal on Private
Property) approved by the California Office of Emergency Services for use in
the cleanup after the LNU Complex Fire.
   "Temporary Log Storage Yards (AKA: Log Decks)." For purposes of this
article, a site where piles of logs and other piles of vegetation removed from
the LNU Complex Fire affected area are temporarily stored and processed before
transfer to trucks or rail. The logs and vegetation must be associated with the
LNU Complex Fire recovery effort, i.e., logs and vegetation that are burn-
damaged or otherwise removed due to safety issues associated with the LNU
Complex Fire. Logs and wood waste originating from routine utility line
maintenance shall not be stored at temporary log storage yards. This definition
does not apply to logs and/or vegetation harvested or cleared as part of a
timber harvest plan or exemption under the forest practice rule that are stored
and/or processed on the property on which they were harvested or cleared. This
definition only applies to logs and vegetation transported to another property.
A temporary log storage yard shall not exist beyond the effective period. No
structural fire debris or hazardous materials may be brought onto or stored in
the yard including any that may have been deposited on logs or vegetation.
Temporary log storage yards allow for the processing of logs and vegetation
(e.g., chipping, milling, etc.) but not the burning of logs and vegetation, and
may include associated equipment repair, construction trailers, employee
parking and portable bathroom facilities set up for use by the personnel
assigned to the yard, but not residences other than the transitory use of a
recreational vehicle for a temporary caretaker quarters in conformance with
this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.202.   Effective period.
   This article relating to debris removal shall take effect immediately upon
adoption and shall remain in effect until the removal of fire debris has been
completed on all properties damaged by the LNU Complex Fire. Regardless of when
the removal of fire debris has been completed, provisions herein relating to
temporary log storage yards, as well as any sections within this article that
relate to it, shall remain in effect until February 28, 2021, unless otherwise
specified herein, subject to extension or modification by the Board.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.203.   Prohibition on removal of fire debris from private property.
   No fire debris from structures shall be removed from private property except
pursuant to the requirements below:
 
                                     Non-qualifying
                                     structures           Qualifying structures
                    No structure on  (Structures less     (Structures one
                    burned property  than one hundred     hundred twenty (120)
                                     twenty (120) square  square feet and over
                                     feet only on burned  on burned property)
                                     property)
Prior to completion Owner may remove Debris removal       Debris removal
of Phase I cleanup  debris           prohibited           prohibited
                                     Owner may remove     State Program or
Prior to completion Owner may remove debris with          Alternative Program
of Phase II cleanup debris           certificate from the contractors only may
                                     Environmental Health remove debris
                                     Division
                                                          Owner may remove
                                     Owner may remove     remaining debris not
Following Phase II  Owner may remove debris with          removed during Phase
cleanup             debris           certificate from the II with certificate
                                     Environmental Health from the
                                     Division             Environmental Health
                                                          Division
 
   For the purposes of this article, the requirement to enter into the State
Program or the alternative program shall apply only to properties that
contained a qualifying structure under the State Program. The requirement shall
not apply to properties that only contained non-qualifying structures,
including but not limited to sheds, canopies, carports, well houses,
greenhouses, chicken coops or fencing. Whether fire debris derived from a
qualifying or non-qualifying structure shall be determined by the Director, or
his or her designee, in consultation with State Representative.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.204.   Removal of fire debris through the OES program.
   Effect of the Right of Entry Permit: The right of entry permit shall
function as the sole permit and authorization for participation in the State
Program.
   Notwithstanding any contrary provision in County Code, no County approvals
or permits for fire debris removal are required for properties participating in
the State Program, other than the right of entry agreement.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.205.   Removal of fire debris through the alternative program.
   The County shall administratively adopt and administer the alternative
program in the unincorporated areas of the County under the supervision of the
County Administrator or his or her designee. The County shall utilize the state
and federal standards and cleanup goals of the OES Program as the standards for
the alternative program. Under the Supervision of the County Administrator or
his or her designee, the County may administratively update these standards as
necessary to address ongoing changes in the administration of the OES Program
and the need to efficiently remove hazardous fire debris from the community.
   For those persons who are not eligible for the State Program, or who opt out
of the State Program, private action to remove fire debris from fire-damaged
properties is prohibited unless and until a hazardous materials inspection has
been performed and authorization from the Department of Community Services,
Environmental Health Division has been provided pursuant to the alternative
program.
   The alternative program shall require an application and work plan that
identifies the appropriate licensed contractors who will perform the work and
the submission of plans that demonstrate that the standards established in the
alternative program will be met. Work shall not begin until the County approves
the application and work plan. The County may rely upon the subject matter
expertise of multiple departments in deciding whether to approve the
application and work plan.
   Upon completion of the work described in the approved plans, the alternative
program shall require an application for certification of successful completion
of the work required by the alternative program. The alternative program will
require that: (1) the debris removal and clean-up work on the property meets or
exceeds the standards set by the State of California for debris removal; (2)
remove and dispose of hazardous trees and (3) the owner completely remove and
dispose of the foundation or submit a letter from a licensed civil or
structural engineer certifying that the foundation is acceptable for rebuild.
The letter shall certify structural reasons for the decision and include the
process and procedure used to reach the conclusion.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.206.   Hold on building permits.
   Any issued County of Yolo building permit to repair or reconstruct a fire
damaged structure or private infrastructure shall be held in abeyance and not
acted upon until fire debris cleanup is completed on the affected property and
completion is confirmed to the County Building Official, either through the
State Program or through the alternative program. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, this section shall not apply to permits relating to power, sewer or
other utilities for temporary dwellings as provided for in this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.207.   Deadlines and enforcement.
   The Board may set a deadline for filing an acceptable application for the
alternative program by resolution.
   Properties that have fire ash and debris from the LNU Complex Fire and that
have neither an approved Right of Entry Permit for the State Program nor an
approved application for the alternative program by the deadline set by the
Board are declared a nuisance and health hazard and such properties may be
abated pursuant to this chapter.
   The Board may set deadlines for the completion of work in the alternative
program by resolution. Properties that have fire ash and debris from the LNU
Complex Fire after that deadline may be declared a nuisance and health hazard.
   The Board's intent is to facilitate orderly remediation of a large scale
disaster. Nothing in these deadlines shall limit the authority of the County to
abate hazards more quickly where required by exigent circumstances. Nothing in
this article or in these deadlines shall limit the authority of the Health
Officer to require preventive measures as defined in California Health and
Safety Code Section 101040.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.208.   Enforcement and Abatement.
   General Enforcement action. When the Director determines that an activity is
being performed in violation of this article, the Director may initiate an
enforcement action using any processes set forth in the Yolo County Code and
may seek the imposition of costs and civil penalties pursuant to the County
Code. Nothing in this provision is intended to prevent alternate enforcement
mechanisms, including but not limited to, health officer orders pursuant to
California Health and Safety Code Section 101040.
   Summary Abatement. Pursuant to the authority of Cal. Const., art. XI,
Section 7; California Health and Safety Code Section 101040, California
Government Code Section 25845, and the County Code, if the Director determines
that a violation of this article has created an emergency condition which
seriously endangers the public health or safety, the County may abate the
condition within the unincorporated territory of the County. The costs shall be
charged to the property owners(s) and the County may, at its option, recover
the same in an administrative action as described below or a civil action. Such
charges shall be in addition to any penalty for a violation of this article.
   Pre-Abatement Notice. Unless emergency conditions preclude doing so, the
Director shall issue a summary abatement notice and order with reasonable
notice. The notice and order shall be mailed to the property owner(s) as listed
on the last equalized tax roll. A summary of the notice and order shall be
posted in a conspicuous location on the property to be abated at least ten (10)
calendar days prior to the summary abatement action.
   Appeal and Waiver. The property owner(s) or any person or entity having a
legal interest in the property may submit a written appeal of the Director's
order to the Health Officer or his or her designee no later than ten (10)
calendar days from the date of mailing of the notice and order. The written
appeal shall state the basis for the appeal. The Health Officer or his/her
designee shall review the appeal and shall issue a written decision (the
"decision") no later than ten (10) calendar days after receipt. The decision
shall uphold, rescind or modify the determination of the notice and order. The
Decision on the appeal shall be final. Failure to appeal within the time
prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the summary
abatement.
   Post Abatement Notice. After the summary abatement is completed, the
Director shall serve the property owner(s) with a post abatement notice that
sets forth: (a) the actions taken by the County; (b) the reasons for the
actions; (c) a statement of the costs, expenses and attorney's fees, if any, of
the abatement and notice of the County's intent to collect those costs; and (d)
right to appeal the costs determination within ten (10) calendar days of the
notice. If the property owner is responsible for any costs, expenses or
attorney's fees, such costs shall become a lien against the property and a
notice of abatement lien may be recorded.
   Post Abatement Costs Appeal. If the property owner(s) or anyone with a legal
interest in the property submits a timely costs appeal, the County shall
schedule an administrative hearing on the matter and provide the appeal party
with reasonable notice of the hearing. The hearing conducted shall be held
before a Hearing Officer designated pursuant to the protocol set forth in that
document entitled the "Yolo County Administrative Hearing Officer Program." The
program is based upon an alphabetical rotation through attorneys currently
under contract through the program. The hearing officer shall conduct an
administrative hearing where each party shall have the opportunity to present
evidence and the County shall have the obligation to establish that the costs,
including expenses and attorney's fees, if any, incurred for the summary
abatement were necessary by a preponderance of the evidence. After the hearing,
the hearing officer shall issue a written decision and order that shall be
served upon the appealing party within thirty (30) calendar days of the hearing
unless extended by agreement of the parties.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.209.   Judicial enforcement action.
   The County Counsel is authorized to initiate judicial enforcement as to a
violation of any provision of this article without further Board approval.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.210.   Remedies not exclusive.
   The remedies identified are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any
and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided in this
article shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.211.   Allowed Zones.
   Natural Resource Zones. Timber processing, as defined by the County Zoning
Ordinance, is allowed by-right in the Timber Mountain (TM) and Timber
Production (TPZ) zones. The provisions of this section do not apply to log
storage yards in these zones.
   Industrial Zones. Timber processing, as defined by the County Zoning
Ordinance is allowed by-right in the Heavy Industrial (HI) zone, and with a
conditional use permit in the General Industrial (GI) zone. The provisions of
this section do not apply to log storage yards in these zones.
   Zones Requiring an Administrative Permit. Temporary log storage yards are
allowed subject to approval of a temporary administrative permit and compliance
with the standards set forth below in the following zones:
   Agriculture (AG) Zones, limited to those Agricultural zones classified as
Grazing or Other lands by the California Department of Conservation's Farmland
Mapping Program. Parcels shall be located near state highways or truck haul
routes that access the LNU Complex Fire area and outside of urban or congested
areas.
   Standards. All temporary log storage yards shall meet the following
standards:
   Application for Temporary Administrative Permit. The property owner or the
property owner's authorized agent shall obtain a temporary administrative
permit for the effective period. Written consent of the property owner is
required in all cases.
   Site Plan Required. A detailed site plan meeting general architectural or
engineering standards, legible and drawn to scale that shows all the proposed
activities that will occur on-site, as well as the approximate location of each
activity, shall be provided with the application for a temporary administrative
permit. Partial site plans for a portion of a property may be submitted as long
as a vicinity map for the entire property showing frontage streets, other uses
and a cross reference of the area of the partial site plan is provided. All
site plans shall show and label contours at maximum vertical intervals of five
(5) feet; areas of proposed grading and fill; the width of access roads to and
around parking, log piles and other piles, and buildings; and turnaround areas
for fire and emergency services. Any change in the type of activity that will
occur on-site or the location of any activity requires the owner or operator to
apply for a new temporary administrative permit.
   Siting Criteria. To the extent practicable, temporary log storage yards
shall be located on flat areas of the site that are already disturbed and in
such a manner to decrease impacts to uses on surrounding properties.
   Approved Access. Temporary log storage yards shall have access onto a public
road. If the public road is a county road, the approach shall be made with an
encroachment permit approved by the Division of Public Works. If the public
road is a state highway, the approach shall be made with an approved
encroachment permit issued by the California Department of Transportation
(CalTrans) District Office. If the public road is accessed by a private road,
there shall be an approved encroachment permit as required in the prior two
sentences where the private road connects to the public road, and there shall
be an approved road maintenance agreement that allows for the proposed use
along the private road.
   On-site Roads, Driveways and Aisles. Temporary log storage yards shall have
on-site roads, driveways and aisles. On-site roads, driveways and aisles shall
have a 6-inch Class 2 aggregate base, a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet,
and shall be capable of supporting a forty thousand (40,000) lb. load that will
allow for ingress and egress of fire apparatus to within one hundred fifty
(150) feet of all piles and structures, and shall have a vertical clearance of
no less than fifteen (15) feet.
   Property Line Setbacks and Defensible Space. All log piles and other piles
shall be setback a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from all outside
property lines and any permanent structures. There shall be an area of
defensible space that is a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet wide around
the perimeter of the temporary log storage area that shall not be graded but
shall be kept clear of grass and vegetation to support fire protection by
clearing, disking, grubbing, and/or scraping. CAL-FIRE shall have discretion to
address unique circumstances.
   Biological Resources. Temporary log storage yards shall not be located on
lands containing wetlands, and/or endangered and protected plants and animal
species. A biological report shall be furnished to the Department of
Development Services demonstrating that the site does not contain wetlands and/
or endangered or protected plants and animal species. A temporary log storage
yard shall not expand without providing a site plan and a biological report to
cover the expanded area.
   Fire Department/CAL-Fire Standards. Temporary log storage yards and the
associated activities performed with them pose the risk of fire if fire
suppression measures are not taken. The activities include working with and
storing flammable materials in areas that have little to no water on-site and
that are subject to fire. The County is setting the fire standards it believes
are appropriate, but there are also state standards set out in California Fire
Code Chapter 28 with respect to all log storage yards and incidental wood
products stored there. Fire officials shall enforce the most stringent
standards. Per California Public Resource Code, Section 4428, each site shall
have a sealed box of tools that shall be located, within the operating area, at
a point accessible in the event of fire. This fire toolbox shall contain: one
(1) backpack pump-type fire extinguisher filled with water, two (2) axes, two
(2) McLeod fire tools, and a sufficient number of shovels so that each employee
at the operation can be equipped to fight fire. In addition, one (1) or more
serviceable chainsaws of three and one-half (3½) or more horsepower with a
cutting bar twenty (20) inches in length or longer shall be immediately
available within the operating area.
   When a fire starts, a telephone call must be made to 911 immediately to
inform that there is a fire. The facility operator shall develop a plan for
monitoring, controlling, and extinguishing fires. The plan shall be submitted
with the application for the temporary administrative permit for review and
approval by fire officials.
   Smoking may only occur in designated locations shown on the site plan.
   Log piles shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height, three hundred (300)
feet in width. and five hundred (500) feet in length. Log piles shall be
stabilized by a means approved by the fire marshal.
   Other piles made of incidental log related materials shall not exceed twenty
(20) feet in height, one hundred fifty (150) feet in width, and two hundred
fifty (250) feet in length.
   All piles shall be separated from all other piles by one hundred (100) feet
and shall include on-site roads, driveways, and aisles as discussed above.
   All piles shall be monitored by a means approved by the fire marshal to
measure temperatures. Internal pile temperatures shall be monitored and
recorded weekly. A plan by the permittee for restricting and mitigating
excessive temperatures shall be submitted with the application for the
temporary administrative permit for review and approval by fire officials.
   Regular inspections of the temporary log storage yard by trained fire
personnel shall be allowed and facilitated by the facility operator.
   Cutting activities shall comply with California Fire Code Chapter 35.
   Yolo County, Environmental Health Division Standards.
   Depending on the activities performed on-site, the temporary log storage
yard may be determined to be a solid waste facility. The facility operator must
provide access to the facility and provide for review of the activities
occurring at the facility to the Local Enforcement Agency, County Environmental
Health, to determine if there exists a requirement to register for a permit
status as a solid waste facility in accordance with Title 14 of the California
Code of Regulations.
   For sanitation purposes there shall be a minimum of one (1) portable toilet
and one (1) handwash station at the facility for employee use. The portable
toilet shall be routinely serviced by a licensed service provider.
   For water that is provided for human consumption, either from an on-site
well or transported to the facility and held in a storage tank, the facility
operator must meet the following requirements: if there are twenty-five (25) or
more people/day consuming the water, the facility operator shall contact the
County Environmental Health Division for public water system permitting
requirements and must operate in accordance with those requirements; if there
are fewer than twenty-five (25) people/day consuming the water, the facility
shall have the water tested for and be in compliance with minimum
bacteriological standards as required by the County Environmental Health
Division. If bottled water is provided, there are no requirements for testing.
   The storage of any hazardous material at or above state-defined thresholds
shall require the approval of a Hazardous Material Business Plan by the
Environmental Health Division of the Department of Community Services.
   Yolo County Public Works Division Standards.
   Perimeter stormwater control — When the temporary log storage yard is
prepared for operations or the soil is disturbed, improvements shall be
designed and implemented such that water accumulating within the project will
be carried away from the project without injury to any adjacent improvements,
residential sites, or adjoining areas. The design shall be prepared by a
Qualified Stormwater Developer who holds the certification required by the CA
Water Quality Control Board's Construction General Permit 2009-009-DWQ. All
natural drainage that enters the project area must leave the project area at
its original horizontal and vertical alignment and with the same pre-
improvement quantity. Implementation of erosion control within the project area
and sediment control basins at drainage outlets shall conform with California
Stormwater Quality Association (CASQA) design criteria. Sites that meet EPA's
criteria for a Rainfall Erosivity Waiver
(https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-10/documents/fact3-1.pdf) or
are fully stabilized with erosion control measures are not required to install
sediment control basins.
   Water quality and erosion control — When submitting an application for a
temporary log storage yard, any surface disturbance over one (1) acre in size
shall require a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) by a certified
Qualified SWPPP Developer and the submittal of a Notice of Intent to obtain
coverage under the General Permit for Discharges of Storm Water Associated with
Construction Activity (Construction General Permit Order 2009-0009-DWQ as
amended). If the area of disturbance is one (1) acre or less, then along with
an application for a temporary log storage yard, an Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan (ESCP) shall be developed by the facility operator, submitted for
approval, and adhered to for erosion and sediment control. The ESCP shall
contain a description detailing which Best Management Practices (BMP) will be
used, how they will be used, and where they will be used in conformance with
the California Stormwater Quality Association (CASQA) BMP Municipal Handbook.
The ESCP shall contain a description of temporary and permanent measures and
include ingress/egress control measures and street sweeping. Plans shall be
prepared by a Qualified Stormwater Developer who holds the certification
required by the CA Water Quality Control Board's Construction General Permit
2009-009-DWQ. Upon completion of the project, all temporary sediment control
measures shall be removed from the site. All permanent sediment control
measures must be maintained by the parcel owner.
   Air Quality and Dust Control. All best practice measures to reduce impacts
to air quality shall be incorporated by the project applicant, subject property
owners, or third-party contractors during activities on the project site. A
plan shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Director of Development
Services to address:
   Mobile and stationary toxic air contaminants; and
   Fugitive dust and ash. Best practice measures shall comply with the County
Air Quality Management District's Rule 205 — Fugitive Dust Requirements and
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   Reduce the amount of the disturbed area where possible. Stabilize disturbed
area soils during use and at project completion.
   Apply water or a stabilizing agent in sufficient quantities to prevent the
generation of visible dust plumes.
   Limit vehicle speeds to fifteen (15) miles per hour on any unpaved surfaces
at the project site.
   Clean visible track-out onto adjacent paved roadways daily. Track-out shall
not extend more than twenty-five (25) feet in cumulative length from the active
project site.
   Post a sign in a prominent location visible to the public with the telephone
numbers of the contractor and Air District for any questions or concerns about
dust from the project.
   Storage or Processing of Debris Prohibited. The storage or processing of
debris from the County Debris Removal Program at any temporary log storage
yard, including the storage of trucks or equipment loaded with debris, is
expressly prohibited.
   Noise. Quiet hours shall be maintained from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. seven (7)
days a week. During quiet hours, generators and heavy equipment shall not be
operated and noise levels shall conform to County Code. Outside of quiet hours,
noise sources associated with temporary log storage yards shall be exempt from
the requirements of County Code.
   Outdoor Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be located, adequately
shielded, and directed such that no direct light falls outside the property
line, or into the public right-of-way in accordance with the County Zoning
Ordinance.
   Reclamation Required. The application for a temporary administrative permit
for a temporary log storage yard shall be accompanied by a detailed plan for
the restoration or reclamation of the subject property to the satisfaction of
the Director of Development Services. There shall be no grading of the site
without the prior approval of the Director of Development Services, but if
grading is allowed, topsoil shall be conserved to be used for reclamation. At
minimum, a plan for restoration or reclamation shall include:
   Clearance of the site of all vehicles, equipment and materials utilized as
part of the temporary log storage yard; and
   Stabilization of the site, implementation of erosion control measures, and
successful revegetation to the satisfaction of the Director of Development
Services in order to render the site suitable for the use for which it was
zoned, for example:
   Continued agricultural production in the case of lands zoned Agriculture
(AG).
   Performance Guarantee. In approving a temporary administrative permit for a
temporary log storage yard, the Director of Development Services shall require
a performance guarantee in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per
acre of land disturbed in order to guarantee the proper completion of any
approved work and to ensure that site reclamation is completed to the
satisfaction of the Director of Development Services. Lands shall be restored
or reclaimed to the satisfaction of the Director of Development Services prior
to release of the performance guarantee.
   Electricity and Electrical Equipment. If new electricity connections are
brought to the site, a building permit is required. Electrical wiring and
equipment shall comply with the California Electrical Code.
   Additional Requirements. The temporary administrative permit may be subject
to additional requirements from the appropriate Fire Agency, County Public
Works, County Air Quality Management District, the California Department of
Transportation, the County Health and Human Services Agency, and the State
Regional Water Quality Control Board.
   Notice. At least ten (10) days prior to issuance of a temporary
administrative permit, pursuant to this section, the County Department of
Development Services shall provide a mailed notice to property owners within
one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the property line of the subject
parcel(s). The notice shall include all applicable standards and limitations
placed upon the temporary log storage yard, the County administrative permit
number, as well as the name, phone number and email of a designated contact for
concerns regarding the yard's operation. The temporary administrative permit
shall be issued without a formal hearing, unless one is requested by either the
applicant or other affected persons. If a hearing is requested, it shall be
scheduled for the next available Planning Commission meeting and the Planning
Commission shall hear the request. The Planning Commission may impose
conditions and requirements in addition to the standards set forth above, or
may deny the administrative permit, to mitigate impacts to uses on surrounding
properties. Unless otherwise appealed, the decision of the Planning Commission
shall be final.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.212.   Violations, Enforcement, and Penalties.
   A temporary log storage yard that is operating in violation of this section
poses a health and safety hazard and is found to be a public nuisance.
   The Director of Development Services may initiate enforcement using any
process set forth in the County Code. Nothing in this provision is intended to
prevent alternative enforcement mechanisms. (§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15,
2020)
Article 3. Hazard Tree Removal Program
Sec. 6-22.301.   Hazard tree removal program.
   Any tree that was fire damaged in the LNU Complex Fire and that is in
immediate danger of falling onto an eligible road or parcel is a hazardous tree
that must be removed to eliminate the immediate threat to the public at large.
This article establishes a hazardous tree removal program that is mandatory and
sets forth the manner in which hazardous trees will be identified and removed.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.302.   Effective period.
   The Hazard Tree Removal Program shall take effect immediately upon adoption
of this article and shall remain in effect until the removal of hazard trees
has been completed. (§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.303.   Definitions.
   "Arborist." The term "Arborist" shall be defined as an ISA Certified
Arborist with a Tree Risk Assessment Qualification (TRAQ).
   "Arborist's/Forester's Certification." The term "Arborist's/Forester's
Certification" shall be defined as a written certification verifying that all
hazard trees have been removed from a parcel participating in the Private Tree
Program. The certification shall be made and executed by an Arborist and/or
Forester as defined in this section. The Arborist or Forester shall provide
evidence of the required qualifications of this section.
   "Board." The term "Board" shall be defined as the Board of Supervisors.
   "County." The term "County" shall be defined as the County of Yolo.
   "Enforcement Officer." The term "Enforcement Officer" shall be defined as
the County Administrative Officer of the County or his/her designee(s). Such
designee(s) may be a County employee(s) or third-party provider(s).
   "Eligible Road(s) or Parcel(s)." The term "eligible road(s) or parcel(s)"
shall be defined as a road, right-of-way or parcel falling into one of the
following categories:
   I.   A public road or right-of-way;
   II.   An improved public property; or
   Ill.   A private road or right-of-way when the private road:
      a.   Connects two public roads;
      b.   Is primarily used as a right-of-way to a public property; or
      c.   Is used for waste collection services.
   "Forester." The term "Forester" shall be defined as a Registered
Professional Forester, qualified pursuant to California Public Resources Code
Section 752, "Professional forester."
   "Government Hazard Tree Removal Program." The term "Government Hazard Tree
Removal Program" shall be defined as the hazard tree removal program operated
by the California Office of Emergency Services (CalOES) for the LNU Complex
Fire area in conjunction with other state and federal agencies.
   "Government Hazard Tree Removal Program ROE." The term "Government Hazard
Tree Removal Program ROE" shall be defined as the permit for providing hazard
tree removal on private property approved by CalOES for use in the cleanup
after the LNU Complex Fire.
   "Hazard Tree." The term "hazard tree" shall be defined as:
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.304.   Government hazard tree removal program.
   The Government Hazard Tree Removal Program will remove all hazard trees at
no out-of-pocket cost to the owner. If an owner does not participate in the
Government Hazard Tree Removal Program, and there are hazard trees on their
property, the owners are required to identify and remove such trees at their
own cost.
   To participate in the Government Hazard Tree Removal Program, owners must
complete and submit a Government Hazard Tree Removal Program ROE. The
Government Hazard Tree Removal Program ROE shall function as the sole permit
and authorization for participation in the Government Hazard Tree Removal
Program. Notwithstanding any contrary provision in the County Code, no County
approvals or permits for hazard tree removal are required for properties
participating in the Government Hazard Tree Removal Program, other than the
Government Hazard Tree Removal Program ROE.
   If owners whose property contains hazard trees do not participate in the
Government Hazard Tree Removal Program (at no out-of-pocket cost to owner) or
the Private Tree Program (all costs paid by owner), the County will enforce
this and charge the owners with any administrative and abatement costs related
to such enforcement as described below.
   In implementing this program, property owners who have submitted an
application for a development permit shall be given priority in the Government
Hazard Tree Removal Program.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.305.   Public nuisance; violations.
   Maintaining a hazard tree is prohibited and a public nuisance subject to
this article. A violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed to
be a public nuisance and subject to any enforcement process available at law.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.306.   Purpose.
   It is the intent of the board of supervisors that this article shall apply
to the abatement of hazard trees threatening eligible roads or parcels in the
unincorporated areas of the LNU Complex Fire area.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.307.   Private hazard tree removal program.
   As an alternative to the Government Hazard Tree Removal Program, the Private
Tree Program provides the owner with the option of identifying and removing
hazard tree(s) on their property at their own cost. To participate in the
Private Tree Program, owners shall submit either of (1) an inspection access
form or (2) an Arborist's/ Forester's Certification for their property.
Following the owner's identification and removal of hazard trees and submittal
of an inspection access form, the Private Tree Program shall require the
Enforcement Officer to make a visual confirmation of the removal of hazard
trees on the subject property. This visual inspection of compliance with the
Private Tree Program shall be sufficient for meeting the requirements of this
Section. Whether the hazard tree removal is adequate shall be in the sole
discretion of the Enforcement Officer. In the alternative, a submittal of an
Arborist's/Forester's Certification shall be sufficient for meeting the
requirements of this section.
   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, in the Private Tree
Program, owners may choose to temporarily retain and promptly utilize felled
hazard trees which were standing on their property. This temporary retention
and utilization by the owner shall be permitted only to the extent felled
hazard trees and incidental foliage, slash, tree branches or limbs and chipped
or mulched vegetation do not constitute a fire hazard as prohibited by
applicable law, including, but not limited to, California Public Resources Code
Section 4291 et seq., Title 19 of the California Code of Regulations and
Chapter 38A of the Butte County Code. Such requirements include but are not
limited to the following:
   In storing such hazard trees prior to utilization, an owner shall be
required to:
   I.   Maintain a setback of no less than one hundred (100) feet from any
inhabited building or structure;
   II.   Maintain a setback of no less than thirty (30) feet from any
uninhabited building or structure; and
   Ill.   Maintain a setback around the parcel's property lines of no less than
thirty (30) feet wide.
   If an owner utilizes felled hazard trees for wood chips, the owner shall be
required to spread the wood chips to a depth of no greater than three (3)
inches while maintaining a setback of no less than five (5) feet from any
building or structure.
   If any temporary retention and utilization of hazard trees constitutes a
fire hazard, it is a public nuisance and may be abated using any available
legal remedy. If the owner chooses to temporarily retain and utilize felled
hazard trees, the owner is required to utilize such hazard trees prior to the
Enforcing Officer's visit to the property to confirm compliance with the
Private Tree Program.
   For the purposes of this Section, any temporary retention and utilization of
felled hazard trees by the property owner is not a Temporary Log Storage Yard
(AKA: Log Deck) as described above. Owners may not receive felled trees from
other properties.
   The County shall utilize the state and federal standards and cleanup goals
of the Government Hazard Tree Removal Program as the standards for the Private
Tree Program, including, but not limited to, the criteria for determining
whether a tree is a hazard tree. Under the supervision of the Enforcement
Officer, the County may administratively update these standards as necessary to
address ongoing changes in the administration of the Government Hazard Tree
Removal Program and the need to efficiently remove hazard trees from the
community.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.308.   County development permits.
   No application for a County Development permit in the LNU Complex Fire area
for a parcel containing hazard trees shall be considered complete until the
applicant has entered into the Government Hazard Tree Removal Program or the
Private Tree Program. This section shall not apply to permits relating to
power, sewer or other utilities for temporary dwellings and the installation of
temporary dwellings.
   This section shall not apply to permits for wells or septic systems with the
environmental health division of community services.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.309.   Deadlines and enforcement.
   Properties that contain hazard trees and that do not have (1) an approved
Government Hazard Tree Removal Program ROE, (2) an approved inspection access
form for the Private Tree Program or (3) an approved Arborist's/Forester's
Certification by the deadline set by the Board, are declared a public nuisance
and health hazard and such properties may be abated pursuant to this article.
   The Board may set a deadline for the completion of hazard tree removal by
resolution. Properties that have hazard trees from the LNU Complex Fire after
that deadline are declared a public nuisance and health hazard and such
properties may be abated pursuant to this article.
   The Board's intent is to facilitate orderly remediation of a large scale
disaster. Nothing in these deadlines shall limit the authority of the County to
abate hazards more quickly where required by exigent circumstances.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.310.   Enforcement.
   Whenever the Enforcement Officer determines that a public nuisance (as
specified in this article) exists, he or she shall use any legal remedies
available under California law to address and abate the public nuisance.
   The County may, in its discretion, abate a violation of this article by the
prosecution of a civil action, including an action for injunctive relief. The
remedy of injunctive relief may take the form of a court order, enforceable
through civil contempt proceedings, prohibiting the maintenance of a violation
of this article, or requiring compliance with other terms.
   The County may also abate a violation of this article through the abatement
process established by Government Code Section 25845.
   If a public nuisance is found to be present on the property in violation of
this article, the Enforcement Officer shall pursue payment for Abatement and
Administrative Costs from the owner and the owner of the property shall be
responsible for paying all of the County's Abatement Costs and Administrative
Costs.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.311.   Abatement costs; administrative costs.
   The term "Abatement Costs" means any costs or expenses reasonably related to
the abatement of conditions which violate this article of the County Code, and
shall include, but not be limited to enforcement, investigation, collection and
administrative costs, and the costs associated with the removal or correction
of the violation.
   The term "Administrative Costs," shall include the cost of County staff time
reasonably related to enforcement, for items including, but not limited to,
site inspections, travel time, investigations, telephone contacts and time
spent preparing summaries, reports, notices, correspondence, warrants and
hearing packets. The time expended by the Enforcement Officer and Auditor-
Controller staff, to calculate the above costs and prepare itemized invoices,
may also be recovered.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.312.   Non-exclusive remedy.
   This article is cumulative to all other remedies now or hereafter available
to abate or otherwise regulate or prevent public nuisances. The County Counsel
is authorized to initiate judicial enforcement as to a violation of any
provision of this article without further Board approval.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Sec. 6-22.313.   Summary abatement.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, when any hazard tree
constitutes an immediate threat to the public health or safety, and where
alternative procedures would not result in abatement of that public nuisance
within a short enough time period to avoid that threat, the Enforcement Officer
may direct any officer or employee of the County or third-party provider to
summarily abate the public nuisance. The Enforcement Officer shall make
reasonable efforts to notify the owner. No summary abatement shall occur prior
to consultation with the Office of County Counsel. The County may nevertheless
recover its costs for abating that public nuisance in the manner set forth in
this article.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. December 15, 2020)
Title 7
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapters:
1.   California Codes and Local Amendments Thereto
2.   Manufactured Homes
3.   Property Maintenance
4.   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations
Chapter 1
CALIFORNIA CODES AND LOCAL AMENDMENTS THERETO*
*   Sections 7-1.01 through 7-1.18, codified from Ordinance No. 611, as amended
by Ordinance Nos. 640, effective December 9, 1970, 699, effective February 13,
1974, and 745, effective February 25, 1976, amended in their entirety by
Ordinance No. 800, effective June 22, 1978. Sections 7-1.01 through 7-1.20, as
added by said Ordinance No. 800, as amended by Ordinance Nos. 826, effective
March 8, 1979, and 956, effective September 8, 1983, repealed by Ordinance No.
998, effective February 1, 1985. Chapter 1, codified from Ordinance No. 998
amended in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1164, effective November 4, 1993.
Chapter 1, consisting of Sections 7-1.01 through 7-1.07, codified from
Ordinance No. 1164, amended in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1185, effective
January 1, 1996. Chapter 1 repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 1442,
effective June 26, 2014. Chapter 1 repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 1521,
effective June 18, 2020.
Sections:
   
7-1.00   Purpose, Authority, and Definitions.
   
7-1.01   Conflicts with other rules, laws, etc.
   
7-1.02   Adoption of Codes.
   
7-1.03   Administrative organization and enforcement.
   
7-1.04   Amendments to the California Building Code.
   
7-1.05   Amendments to the California Residential Code.
   
7-1.06   Amendments to the California Electrical Code.
   
7-1.07   Amendments to the California Mechanical Code.
   
7-1.08   Amendments to the California Plumbing Code.
   
7-1.09   Amendments to the California Energy Code.
   
7-1.10   Amendments to the California Historical Building Code.
   
7-1.11   Amendments to the California Fire Code.
   
7-1.12   Amendments to the California Existing Building Code.
   
7-1.13   Amendments to the California Green Building Code.
Sec. 7-1.00.   Purpose, Authority, and Definitions.
   The purpose of this chapter is to adopt by reference the various published
codes listed in section
7-1.02 below, subject to the definitions, clarifications, and the amendments
set forth herein. This Title of the Yolo County Code shall be the exclusive
source of regulations for all new construction and any alterations, repairs,
relocations, demolitions, or reconstruction of any building or any portion
thereof including any electrical, mechanical, gas, plumbing or fire protection
equipment installed on any property or used on or within any building.
   Whenever any of the following names and terms are used in this chapter or in
any of the codes adopted by reference in this chapter, unless the context
directs otherwise, such names or terms so used shall have the meaning ascribed
thereto by this section.
   (a)   Bedroom: A habitable room with a floor area equal or greater than
seventy (70) square feet with direct or indirect access to a bathroom and
designed to provide privacy to the occupant(s).
   (b)   Chief Building Official or Building Official: The Chief Building
Official of the county of Yolo; provided, however, that where such terms are
used in connection with those duties imposed by statute or ordinance upon the
county health officer said terms shall include the county health officer.
   (c)   Fire Code Official: The chief of the local fire protection district or
local fire department having jurisdiction over the property, or other designee
as appointed by the local fire protection district or local fire department; or
the Chief Building Official upon written agreement between the county and the
fire protection district or local fire department.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-1.01.   Conflicts with other rules, laws, etc.
   In the event of any conflict between this code and any law, rule or
regulation of the State, that requirement which establishes the higher standard
of safety shall govern. Failure to comply with such standards of safety shall
be a violation of this code.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-1.02.   Adoption of Codes.
   The following publications including the specified appendices thereto, are
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this Code, including the
amendments made thereto in this chapter.
   (a)   The 2019 California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2, including Appendix
Chapters: C-Group U Agricultural Buildings, H-Signs, I-Patio Covers, J-Grading,
N-Replicable Buildings, and O-Emergency Housing as published in Title 24, Part
2 of the California Code of Regulations and amended in Section
7-1.04.
   (b)   The 2019 California Residential Code including Appendix Chapters:
H–Patio Covers, Q-Tiny Houses, S-Strawbale Construction, V-Swimming Pool Safety
Act, and X-Emergency Housing, as published in Title 24, Part 2.5 of the
California Code of Regulations and amended in Section
7-1.05.
   (c)   The 2019 California Electrical Code including Annex Chapters: A-
Product Safety Standards, B-Application Information for Ampacity Calculation,
C-Conduit and Tubing Fill Tables for Conductors and Fixture Wires of the Same
Size, D-Examples, F-Availability and Reliability for Critical Operations Power
Systems; and Development and Implementation of Functional Performance Tests
(FPTs) for Critical Operations Power Systems, and G-Supervisory Control and
Data Acquisition (SCADA), as published in Title 24, Part 3 of the California
Code of Regulations as amended in Section
7-1.06.
   (d)   The 2019 California Mechanical Code, excluding Appendix Chapters, as
published in Title 24, Part 4 of the California Code of Regulations and amended
in Section
7-1.07.
   (e)   The 2019 California Plumbing Code including Appendix Chapters: A-
Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System, C-Alternate Plumbing
Systems, D-Sizing Storm Water Drainage Systems, H- Private Sewage Disposal
Systems, and I-Installation Standard for PEX Tubing Systems for Hot- and Cold-
Water Distribution, as published in Title 24, Part 5 of the California Code of
Regulations and amended in Section
7-1.08. 
   (f)   The 2019 California Energy Code, including Appendix Chapter 1-A-
Standards and Documents Referenced in the Energy Efficiency Regulations, as
published in Title 24, Part 6 of the California Code of Regulations and amended
in Section
7-1.09.
   (g)   The 2019 California Historical Building Code including Appendix
Chapter A, as published in Title 24, Part 8 of the California Code of
Regulations and amended in Section
7-1.10.
   (h)   The 2019 California Fire Code including Appendix Chapters: B-Fire-flow
Requirements for Buildings, C-Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution, D-Fire
Apparatus Access Roads, E-Hazard Categories, F-Hazard Ranking, G-Cryogenic
Fluids-Weight and Volume Equivalents, and H-Hazardous Materials Management
Plans and Hazardous Materials Inventory Statements, as published in Title 24,
Part 9 of the California Code of Regulations and amended in Section
7-1.11.
   (i)   The 2019 California Existing Building Code as published in Title 24,
Part 10 of the California Code of Regulations and amended in Section
7-1.12.
   (j)   The 2019 California Green Building Code, including Appendix Chapters
A4-Residential Voluntary Measures and A5-Nonresidential Voluntary Measures, as
published in Title 24, Part 11 of the California Code of Regulations and
amended in Section
7-1.13.
   (k)   The 2019 California Reference Standards, as published in Title 24,
Part 12 of the California Code of Regulations without amendment.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-1.03.   Administrative Organization and Enforcement.
   Chapter 1, Division I and II of the 2019 California Building Code is adopted
in its entirety except as amended herein as the administrative provisions of
Title 7, Chapter 1 of Yolo County Code and is applicable to all codes enlisted
in
Title 7, Chapter 1, unless specifically modified and amended elsewhere in this
ordinance.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-1.04.   Amendments to the California Building Code.
   The 2019 California Building Code (CBC), Volume 1 and 2, are amended by the
changes, additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter. Section numbers
used below are those of the 2019 California Building Code.
   (a)   CBC Volume 1, Chapter 1 – Scope and Administration, Division II-
Administration, is amended as follows:
   (1)   Section 101.1 Title is amended in its entirety to read as follows:
   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code
of Yolo County, herein after referred to as “this code.”
   (2)   Section 104.8 Liability is amended to add subsection 104.8.2-Liability
of County:
   Section 104.8.2 Liability of County. This title shall not be construed to
impose on the County any liability or responsibility for damage resulting from
defective building, plumbing, mechanical or electrical work; nor shall the
County, or any official or employee of the county, be held to assume this
liability or responsibility because of the inspection authorized under this
title. The issuance of a building permit under this title shall not be
construed as a determination by the County that the permittee has legally
sufficient proprietary rights to perform the work on the property for which the
permit has been issued nor shall it be construed as permission or license to
enter on, occupy or otherwise utilize private or non-County property without
the express consent of the owner or agent in possession thereof.
   (3)   Section 105.2-Work exempt from permit is amended to include
subsections 105.2(14)- and 105.2(15)-Permit Exempt Agricultural Buildings.
   Section 105.2(14). Residential Decks, Decks for Group R-3 occupancies and
Group U occupancies accessory to R-3 occupancies, not exceeding 200 square feet
(18.58 m2) in area, that are not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at
any point, are not attached to a dwelling and do not serve the exit door
required by California Residential Code (CRC) section R311.2–Egress door.
   Section 105.2(15). Permit Exempt Agricultural Buildings. An agricultural
building that the Chief Building Official determines satisfies the conditions
set forth in Appendix C-Group U Agricultural Buildings subsection C105-Permit
Exempt Agricultural Buildings as provided in YCC Section
7-1.04(b). An application for exemption shall be filed in accordance with
subsection C105.1-Application for exemption.
   (4)   Section 105.5-Expiration is amended in its entirety to read as
follows:
   Section 105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Chief Building Official
under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null
and void if the building, structure, equipment or work authorized by such
permit is not commenced within 12 months from the date of such permit, or if
the building, structure, equipment or work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of
180 days. Once a permit expires, before such work can be recommenced, a new
permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one-
half the amount required for a new permit for such work as set forth in the
current fee schedule as adopted by the Board of Supervisors, provided no
changes have been made or will be made to the original plans or specifications
for such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not
exceeded one year.
   Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the
time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is
unable to commence work within the time frame required by this section for good
and satisfactory reasons. The Chief Building Official is authorized to grant,
in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days
each. The extension shall be requested in writing with justifiable cause
demonstrated and accompanied by an extension request review fee, as required by
the current fee schedule as adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
   (5)   Section 109.2-Schedule of permit fees is amended in its entirety to
read as follows:
   Section 109.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical,
gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee
for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the current fee
schedule as adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
   The Yolo County Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to set and amend
all fees prescribed by this Code. Said fees may be adjusted periodically by the
Board of Supervisors to ensure the full recovery of County costs relating to
building permits and inspections.
   Permit fees and any required plan checks are based upon the value of the
project. Electrical, plumbing and mechanical fees are based on a percentage of
the building permit fee. The determination of value or valuation shall be made
by the Chief Building Official. The Chief Building Official shall maintain the
current fee schedule, and shall make it available for public review upon
request.
   (6)   Section 109.4-Work commencing before permit issuance is amended to
include subsection 109.4.1-Investigation, investigation fees, work without a
permit:
   Section 109.4.1 Investigation, investigation fees, and work without a
permit. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been
commenced without first obtaining said permit, an investigation shall be made
before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee shall be
collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by
this code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum fee
set forth in the current fee schedule as adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from
compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty
prescribed by law.
   (7)   Section 109.6-Refunds is amended in its entirety to read as follows:
   Section 109.6 Refunds. The Building Official may authorize the refunding of
not more than 80% of the permit fees paid when no work has commenced under a
permit in accordance with this code or when an application for a permit for
which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan
review effort has been expended.
   (8)   Section 109-Fees is amended to include Subsection 109.7-Re-inspections
and Section 109.8-Plan review fees:
   Section 109.7 Re-inspections. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each
inspection or re-inspection when such portion of work for which inspection is
scheduled and is not complete or when corrections called for previously are not
complete.
   This section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the
first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of
this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before
the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection.
   To obtain a re-inspection, the applicant shall call and schedule a re-
inspection and pay the re-inspection fee set forth in the current fee schedule
as adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
   In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no additional
inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been
paid.
   Section 109.8 Plan review fees. When submittal documents are required, a
plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submittal for plan review. Said
plan review fee shall be a percent of the building permit fee as shown in the
current fee schedule as adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
   The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the
permit fees specified in the current fee schedule as adopted by the Board of
Supervisors and are in addition to the permit fees.
   When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require
additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as
defined in Section 107.3.4.1 – Deferred submittals, an additional plan review
fee shall be charged at the rate shown in the current fee schedule as adopted
by the Board of Supervisors.
   (9)   Section 111-Certificate of occupancy is amended to include subsection
111.5-Occupancy violations:
   Section 111.5 Occupancy violations. Whenever any building or residential
dwelling or structure or equipment therein regulated by this code is being used
contrary to the provisions of this code, the building official may order such
use discontinued and the structure, building or equipment, or portion thereof
vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such
person shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the Chief
Building Official after receipt of such notice to make the structure, building
or equipment, or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of this code.
   (10)   Section 113-Board of appeals is amended for existing sections 113.1-
General, 113.2-Limitations on authority and 113.3-Qualifications; and to
include the following new sections: Section 113.4-Right to Appeal, Section
113.4.1-Appeal Hearing, Section 113.4.2-Appeal, Section 113.4.3-Extension of
time to perform work, and Section 113.4.4-Alternative enforcement:
   Section 113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions or determinations made by the Chief Building Official relative to the
application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby
created a board of appeals known as the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall be appointed by the applicable governing authority and shall
hold office at its pleasure. The Planning Commission shall adopt rules of
procedure for conducting its business.
   Section 113.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be
based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do
not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed.
The Planning Commission shall have no authority to waive requirements of this
code.
   Section 113.3 Qualifications. The Planning Commission shall consist of
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters
pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction.
   Section 113.4 Right to appeal. Statements advising;
   (1)   That any person having any record title or legal interest in the
building, structure or real property, may appeal orders, decisions or
determinations made by the Chief Building Official or Fire Code Official
relative to the application and interpretation of the regulations adopted in
this chapter to the Planning Commission, provided the appeal is made in writing
and filed with the Chief Building Official within 30 days from the date of
service of such notice and order or any action, and;
   (2)   That failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an
administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
   Section 113.4.1 Appeal hearing. Upon receipt of a request for appeal, as set
forth in Section 113.4-Right to appeal, the Chief Building Official shall set a
time and date for the hearing and notify the person requesting the hearing of
the time, date and place.
   (1)   The hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission.
   (2)   At the time of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall receive
testimony and evidence.
   (3)   The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded as a part of the
Planning Commission meeting;
   (4)   The Planning Commission or designated representative may inspect the
premises involved in the hearing prior to, during or after the hearing,
provided that;
   (a)   If required by state or federal law, the hearing officer obtains the
appropriate inspection warrant pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section
1822.51, et seq. or obtains the consent of the owner or occupant of the
premises;
   (b)   The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the
inspection; and
   (c)   The Planning Commission or designated representative shall state for
the record during hearing, or file a written statement after the hearing for
inclusion in the hearing record, upon completion of the inspection, the
material facts observed and the conclusion drawn therefrom.
   (5)   After the hearing, the Planning Commission shall render a decision, in
writing, upholding or denying the determination of an appeal; the written
decision shall contain a deadline for any abatement, compliance or correction
required by the decision. The notice of decision shall be served on the person
requesting the hearing by certified mail.
   Section 113.4.2 Appeal. Any person entitled to a hearing under Section
113.4.1-Appeal hearing or the Director of the Department of Community Services,
may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission to the Board of Supervisors.
   (a)   A failure to appeal shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal.
   (b)   Notice of appeal must be in writing and filed with the Clerk of the
Board within 15 days after the decision is rendered by the Planning Commission.
   (c)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, a hearing will be set before the
Board of Supervisors and the appellant notified in writing of the time and date
for hearing. This notice shall be sent to the appellant by certified mail, to
the address given in the notice of appeal and the address of record if
different.
   (d)   The Director of the Department of Community Services or designated
agent shall be notified of the appeal and shall then transmit the records on
the matter to the Board of Supervisors.
   (e)   The Board of Supervisors may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of
the Planning Commission. If the decision is affirmed or affirmed and modified,
the period for said repair, rehabilitation, abatement, correction or
demolition, as set forth in the decision of the Planning Commission, shall
start as of the date of the board action.
   (f)   Any owner or occupier of premises having objection to the decision of
the Board must bring an action, in a court of competent jurisdiction, within 30
days after the action by the Board, otherwise, all objections will be deemed
waived.
   (g)   Any appeal to the Board of Supervisors shall be accompanied by a
filing fee in the amount which is necessary to recover the costs of processing
the appeal. Such fee shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
   Section 113.4.3 Extension of time to perform work. Upon receipt of an
application from the person required to conform to the order and by agreement
of such person to comply with the order if allowed additional time, not to
exceed an additional 120 days, within which to complete said repair,
rehabilitation, abatement, demolition or correction, if the Chief Building
Official determines that such an extension of time will not create or
perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The Chief
Building Official’s authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or correction of the premises and will not in any
way affect the time to appeal the notice and order.
   Section 113.4.4 Alternative enforcement. Nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed to prevent the County Counsel or District Attorney from commencing with
any other available civil or criminal proceedings to abate a real property
condition, building, structure under applicable provision of state law as an
alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter.
   (11)   Section 115.3-Unlawful continuance is amended as follows:
   Section 115.3-Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall
be subject to a fine of not more than what is prescribed in Yolo County Code
Title 1, Chapter 2 – Penalty Provisions Section 1-2.01. – Violations a
misdemeanor.
   (b)   CBC Volume 2, Appendix C - Group U – Agricultural Buildings is amended
to include subsection C105-Permit Exempt Agricultural Building, and subsection
C105.1- Application for Permit Exempt Agricultural Building:
   Section C105 Permit Exempt Agricultural Buildings. A building permit shall
not be required for an agricultural building that satisfies all of the
following conditions:
   (1)   The proposed building is an agricultural building as defined in the
California Building Code Section 202-Definitions, which provides as follows:
   Agricultural Building – a structure designed and constructed to house farm
implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural products.
This structure shall not be a place of human habitation or a place of
employment where agricultural products are processed, treated or packaged, nor
shall it be a place used by the public.
   (2)   The Director of the Department of Community Services or designee
determines that the proposed building is located in an A-N or A-X Zone and its
use and location comply with all the regulations of
Chapter 2 Title 8 of the Yolo County Code-Zoning including but not limited to,
the provisions for setbacks, site plan approvals, and also comply with all
other applicable state and federal laws.
   (3)   The proposed building is designed and constructed in accordance with
the standards of
Title 7 of the Yolo County Code-Building Regulations. Maximum building areas
and heights shall be in accordance with California Building Code Appendix C,
Section C102. The building shall be designed and constructed to meet the
structural requirements for conventional light-frame construction, or be
constructed in accordance with plans that are designed and stamped by a
California licensed engineer or architect.
   In the event that the Chief Building Official determines that a change of
occupancy has occurred, then the owner must obtain a building permit for the
new occupancy.
   (4)   All plumbing and/or electrical work will be under a separate permit.
No water or electricity shall be provided to the interior of the proposed
building other than electricity for lighting and ventilation, water for
livestock, and such other limited purposes as are reasonably necessary for the
permitted uses of the building.
   (5)   No mechanical permit shall be allowed within an exempt agricultural
building.
   (6)   The Fire Code Official has determined in writing that the proposed
building complies with the provisions of the California Fire Code (CFC), as
adopted by the County, including but not limited to, those concerning fire
department access and water supply, and that the location of the proposed
building as set forth in the site plan complies with any reasonable conditions
required to attain compliance, including, but not limited to, reasonable
conditions imposed because of limitations in water supply. Determinations by
the fire code official or designee shall be subject to review by the Chief
Building Official and appealable to the Planning Commission as provided by CBC
Section 113-Board of Appeals, as adopted by the Board.
   (7)   In flood zones A, AE, AH, and AO, the Director of the Department of
Community Services or designee determines that the building does not have two
or more rigid walls, does not require an elevation certificate, and the
proposed building complies with the provisions of
Chapter 4 of Title 8 of this Code – Flood Protection.
   (8)   The Director of Department of Community Services or designee has
determined that the proposed building complies with all laws enforced by the
Department including but not limited to, the provisions of Title 6 of this
Code-Sanitation and Health, which concern sanitation, health and water quality.
   (9)   The proposed building shall be no closer than 60 feet from the
boundary of a parcel of land that is not zoned for agricultural uses. Fire
separation distance shall be provided so that no fire-resistance rated
construction is required by California Building Code Section 602.
   Section C105.1 Application for Permit Exempt Agricultural Building. In order
to document code compliance of a Permit Exempt Agricultural Building meeting
the requirements of Section C105, the property owner must comply with the
following:
   (1)   The property owner or authorized agent files a written application
with the Chief Building Official;
   (2)   The application is accompanied by a scaled plot plan indicating the
proposed building(s) and all existing buildings on the subject parcel showing
the size and location of each on the property, and also showing all property
lines, wells, septic systems, easements; power and telephone equipment, fuel
storage tanks, drainage, private drives, access to public roads, and any
features contributing to the risk or spread of fire; and
   (3)   The application shall be accompanied by the written agreement of the
owner,
   (A)   Agreeing to use the building only as an agricultural building as
defined in Section C105-Permit Exempt Agricultural Building,
   (B)   Agreeing to construct the building in accordance with the standards
prescribed by
Chapter 1 of Title 7-Building Codes of the Yolo County Code,
   (C)   Acknowledging that the exemption from the building permit requirement
exists only so long as the proposed building is used as an agricultural
building,
   (D)   Agreeing that a full fee building permit application, plan check,
review and inspection process conducted by the County will be required if the
proposed building is used for any purpose not included within the definition of
an agricultural building as set forth above,
   (E)   Agreeing to indemnify the County and its officers, employees, and
agents from any loss arising from granting the exemption from the building
permit requirement, and
   (F)   Agreeing to bind successors in interest.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-1.05.   Amendments to the California Residential Code.
   The 2019 California Residential Code (CRC) is amended by the changes,
additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter. Section numbers used below
are those of the 2019 California Residential Code.
   (a)   CRC Part 1-Administrative, Chapter 1 – Scope and Application, Division
II - Administration, is amended as follows:
   (1)   Section R100-General subsection R101.1-Title is amended in its
entirety to read as follows:
   Section R101.1-Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential
Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings of Yolo County, and shall be cited as
such and will be referred to herein as “this code.”
   (2)   Section R102- Applicability subsection R102.4.1-Conflicts is amended
in its entirety to read as follows:
   Section R102.4.1-Conflicts. When conflicts occur between the administrative
provisions of this code and the adopted provisions of CBC Chapter 1-Scope and
Administration, Division II-Administration, the provisions which have greater
specificity shall apply.
   Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes
and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
   (3)   Section R105-Application for permit subsection R105.3.1.1-
Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing
buildings in flood hazard areas is amended to add section R105.3.1.1.1 Yolo
County Flood Protection Ordinance:
   Section R105.3.1.1.1-Yolo County Flood Protection Ordinance. Applications
determined by the appointed Floodplain Administrator to constitute substantial
improvement or substantial damage shall require all existing portions of the
entire building or structure to meet the floodplain design requirements as
outlined in
Chapter 4 - Flood Protection of Yolo County Code Title 8 - Land Development and
Zoning.
   Determinations by the Floodplain Administrator or designee shall be
appealable to the Planning Commission as provided by CBC Section 113-Board of
Appeals, as amended by Section
7-1.04(a)(11) of this code and adopted by the Board.
   (b)   CRC Part III – Building Planning and Construction, Division II –
Administration, Chapter 3 – Building Planning, is amended as follows:
   (1)   Section R313.3.7-Instructions and signs is amended to include
subsection R313.3.7.1- Notification devices, to read as follows:
   Section R313.3.7.1- Notification devices. One exterior approved audible and
visual device, located on the exterior of the building in a location, visible
at the front of the residence shall be connected to each automatic sprinkler
system. Such sprinkler alarm devices shall be activated by water flow
equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size
installed in the system. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of
the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-1.06.   Amendments to the California Electrical Code.
   The 2019 California Electrical Code (CEC) is amended to add the
administrative provisions in the Building Code of Yolo County Section
7-1.03.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-1.07.   Amendments to the California Mechanical Code.
   The 2019 California Mechanical Code (CMC) is amended by the changes,
additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter. Section numbers used below
are those of the 2019 California Mechanical Code.
   (a)   CMC Chapter 1 – Administration, Division II - Administration, Part 1-
General, is amended as follows:
   (1)   Replace Table 104.5 with the current fee schedule as adopted by the
Board of Supervisors.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-1.08.   Amendments to the California Plumbing Code.
   The 2019 California Plumbing Code (CPC) is amended by the changes,
additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter. Section numbers used below
are those of the 2019 California Plumbing Code.
   (a)   CPC Chapter 1 – Administration, Division II - Administration, is
amended as follows:
   (1)   Replace Table 104.5 with the current fee schedule as adopted by the
Board of Supervisors.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-1.09.   Amendments to the California Energy Code.
   The 2019 California Energy Code (CEC) is adopted without amendment.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-1.10.   Amendments to the California Historical Building Code.
   The 2019 California Historical Building Code (CHBC) is adopted without
amendment.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-1.11.   Amendments to the California Fire Code.
   The 2019 California Fire Code (CFC) is amended by the changes, additions,
and deletions set forth in this chapter. Section numbers used below are those
of the 2019 California Fire Code.
   (a)   CFC Chapter 1 – Scope and Application, Division II - Administration,
Part 1-General Provisions is amended as follows:
   (1)   Section 101-General subsection 101.1-Title is amended in its entirety
to read as follows:
   Section 101.1-Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of
Yolo County, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
   (2)   Section 102-Applicabilty subsection 102.7.1-Conflicts is amended in
its entirety to read as follows:
   Section 102.7.1-Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this
code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall
apply.
   When conflicts occur between the administrative provisions of this code and
the adopted provisions of CBC Chapter 1-Scope and Administration, Division II-
Administration, the provisions which have greater specificity shall apply.
   Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes
and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
   (b)   CFC Chapter 1 – Scope and Application, Division II - Administration,
Part II-Administrative Provisions is amended as follows:
   (1)   The commission of any local fire protection district may enter into an
agreement with the county to facilitate plan review and inspection related to
fire and panic safety under the authority of the Chief Building Official.
   (2)   Section 108-Board of appeals is amended for Section 108.1-Board of
appeals established, Section 108.2-Limitations on authority, and Section 108.3-
Qualifications; and to include the following subsections: Section 108.4-Right
to Appeal, Section 108.4.1-Appeal Hearing, Section 108.4.2-Appeal, Section
108.4.3-Extension of time to perform work and Section 108.4.4-Alternative
enforcement.
   Section 108.1 Board of appeals established. In order to hear and decide
appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official
relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and
is hereby created a board of appeals known as the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission shall be appointed by the applicable governing authority
and shall hold office at its pleasure. The Planning Commission shall adopt
rules of procedure for conducting its business.
   Section 108.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be
based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do
not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed.
The Planning Commission shall have no authority to waive requirements of this
code.
   Section 108.3 Qualifications. The Planning Commission shall consist of
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters
pertaining to hazards of fire, explosions, hazardous conditions or fire
protection systems, and are not employees of the jurisdiction. The Planning
Commission may obtain the services of a qualified consultant to advise on such
matters of hazards of fire, explosions, hazardous conditions or fire protection
systems at the expense of the applicant.
   Section 108.4 Right to appeal. Statements advising;
   (1)   That any person having any record title or legal interest in the real
property, building or structure, may appeal orders, decisions or determinations
made by the building official or Fire Code Official relative to the application
and interpretation of the regulations adopted in this chapter to the Planning
Commission, provided the appeal is made in writing and filed with the building
official within 30 days from the date of service of such notice and order or
any action, and;
   (2)   That failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an
administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
   (3)   When a request for an alternative means of protection has been denied
by the enforcing agency, the applicant may file a written appeal to the
Planning Commission, pursuant to CFC 1.11.2.5.
   Section 108.4.1 Appeal hearing. Upon receipt of a request for appeal, as set
forth in Section 108.4-Right to appeal, the Chief Building Official shall set a
time and date for the hearing and notify the person requesting the hearing of
the time, date and place.
   (1)   The hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission.
   (2)   At the time of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall receive
testimony and evidence.
   (3)   The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded as a part of the
Planning Commission meeting;
   (4)   The Planning Commission or designated representative may inspect the
premises involved in the hearing prior to, during or after the hearing,
provided that;
   (a)   If required by state or federal law, the hearing officer obtains the
appropriate inspection warrant pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section
1822.51, et seq. or obtains the consent of the owner or occupant of the
premises;
   (b)   The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the
inspection; and
   (c)   The Planning Commission or designated representative shall state for
the record during hearing, or file a written statement after the hearing for
inclusion in the hearing record, upon completion of the inspection, the
material facts observed and the conclusion drawn therefrom.
   (5)   After the hearing, the Planning Commission shall render a decision, in
writing, upholding or denying the determination of an appeal; the written
decision shall contain a deadline for any abatement, compliance or correction
required by the decision. The notice of decision shall be served on the person
requesting the hearing by certified mail.
   Section 108.4.2 Appeal. Any person entitled to a hearing under Section
113.4.1-Appeal hearing or the Director of the Department of Community Services,
may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission to the Board of Supervisors.
   (a)   A failure to appeal shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal.
   (b)   Notice of appeal must be in writing and filed with the Clerk of the
Board within 15 days after the decision is rendered by the Planning Commission.
   (c)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, a hearing will be set before the
Board of Supervisors and the appellant notified in writing of the time and date
for hearing. This notice shall be sent to the appellant by certified mail, to
the address given in the notice of appeal and the address of record if
different.
   (d)   The Director of the Department of Community Services or designated
agent shall be notified of the appeal and shall then transmit the records on
the matter to the Board of Supervisors.
   (e)   The Board of Supervisors may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of
the Planning Commission. If the decision is affirmed or affirmed and modified,
the period for said repair, rehabilitation, abatement, correction or
demolition, as set forth in the decision of the Planning Commission, shall
start as of the date of the board action.
   (f)   Any owner or occupier of premises having objection to the decision of
the Board must bring an action, in a court of competent jurisdiction, within 30
days after the action by the Board, otherwise, all objections will be deemed
waived.
   (g)   Any appeal to the Board of Supervisors shall be accompanied by a
filing fee in the amount which is necessary to recover the costs of processing
the appeal. Such fee shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
   Section 108.4.3 Extension of time to perform work. Upon receipt of an
application from the person required to conform to the order and by agreement
of such person to comply with the order if allowed additional time, not to
exceed an additional 120 days, within which to complete said repair,
rehabilitation, abatement, demolition or correction, if the Chief Building
Official determines that such an extension of time will not create or
perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The Chief
Building Official’s authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or correction of the premises and will not in any
way affect the time to appeal the notice and order.
   Section 108.4.4 Alternative enforcement. Nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed to prevent the County Counsel or District Attorney from commencing with
any other available civil or criminal proceedings to abate a real property
condition, building, structure under applicable provision of state law as an
alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter.
   (1)   Section 113-Fees subsection is amended to include subsection 113.6-
Plan check fees and subsection 113.6.1-Re-inspections to read as follows:
   Section 113.6-Plan check fees. Authorization to collect fees for plan
checking, inspection and permits. The County Board of Supervisors may, by
resolution, establish a schedule of fees to be charged and collected for plan
checking, inspection services performed and for required permits issued. A copy
of the current fee schedule shall be made available for public review in the
offices of the Department of Community Services, the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors and the fire protection district with jurisdiction over the subject
property.
   Section 113.6.1-Re-inspections. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each
inspection or re-inspection when such portion of work for which inspection is
scheduled and is not complete or when corrections called for previously are not
complete.
   This section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the
first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of
this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before
the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection.
   To obtain a re-inspection, the applicant shall call and schedule a re-
inspection and pay the re-inspection fee set forth in the current fee schedule
as adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
   In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no additional
inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been
paid.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-1.12.   Amendments to the California Existing Building Code.
   The 2019 California Existing Building Code (CEBC) is adopted as published by
the California Building Standards Commission. Administrative provisions, as
amended and adopted by Yolo County, prescribed in the Building Code of Yolo
County, shall be used for the administration of this code.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-1.13.   Amendments to the California Green Building Code.
   The 2019 California Green Building Code (CGBC) is adopted as published by
the California Building Standards Commission without amendment.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Chapter 2
MANUFACTURED HOMES*
*   Sections 7-2.01 through 7-2.21, codified from Ordinance No. 606, as amended
by Ordinance Nos. 643, effective December 9, 1970, 668, effective June 21,
1972, and 700 effective February 13, 1974, and Section 7-2.04.1, as added by
said Ordinance No. 668, as amended by said Ordinance No. 700, repealed by
Section 1, Ordinance No. 747, effective February 25, 1976. Sections 7-2.01
through 7-2.16, as added by said Ordinance No. 747, amended in their entirety
by Ordinance No. 801, effective June 22, 1978. Chapter 2, codified from
Ordinance No. 801, repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1164, effective
November 4, 1993, redesignated as Chapter 2, Manufactured Homes § 2, Ord. 1366,
eff. January 10, 2008). Chapter 2 repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 1442,
effective June 26, 2014. Chapter 2 repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 1521,
effective June 18, 2020.
Sections:
   
7-2.01   Adoption and purpose.
   
7-2.02   Enforcement authority.
   
7-2.03   Applications for permits: Fees for permits.
   
7-2.04   Permits for installations of mobile homes.
   
7-2.05   Re-inspections.
   
7-2.06   Certificates of occupancy.
   
7-2.07   Violations: penalties.
Sec. 7-2.01.   Adoption and Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to appoint and designate the Department of
Community Services as the enforcement authority to enforce the provisions of
Sections 18300, 18613 and 18614 of the California Health and Safety Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-2.02.   Enforcement Authority.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 18300, 18613 and 18614 of the
California Health and Safety Code, as amended, the Department of Community
Services is designated as the enforcement authority to administer all the laws
and regulations of the State and the County applicable to or regulating the
location, installation, placement, or setting up of all manufactured housing or
mobile homes and any connection of such structures to any utility service or
device on any site or location, except within a mobile home park.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-2.03.   Applications for permits: Fees for permits.
   No person shall locate, install, place, set up, or connect to any utility
service or device any manufactured housing or mobile home on any site or
location, except within a mobile home park, without first applying for and
obtaining a permit to do so from the Department of Community Services and
paying all the fees for such permit according to the current fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Board.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-2.04.   Permits for installations of mobile homes.
   The Department of Community Services shall issue the permit described in
Section
7-2.03-Applications for permits: Fees for permits of this chapter upon an
application therefor which is accompanied by the plans, specifications, and
data required by the laws and regulations of the State and this chapter upon
the full payment of all fees required by this chapter and state laws and upon
making the findings set forth in this section. In the event an applicant for
such a permit does not submit adequate, correct, or complete data plans, and
specifications the Department of Community Services shall so notify the
applicant.
   Such permit shall be issued if the Department of Community Services make all
the following findings:
   (a)   That plans and specifications for the manufactured housing or mobile
home to be installed has received approval from the California Department of
Housing and Community Development and the approval is valid and current at the
time of application.
   (b)   That, if the manufactured housing or mobile home to be installed will
be installed on a foundation, that the foundation system complies with the
plans and specifications required by the regulations of the California
Department of Housing and Community Development.
   (c)   That, if the mobile home is to be installed on a foundation, the
manufacturer, dealer, or purchaser of the mobile home has provided plan and
specifications designed by a state licensed architect or engineer covering the
installation of an individual mobile home or manufactured housing on a
foundation and such additional engineering as required by the Department of
Community Services due to the particular circumstances of the site;
   (d)   Fire sprinklers are required for all new manufactured housing or
mobile homes as defined by California Health and Safety Code sections 18007 and
18009 and multifamily manufactured homes with two dwelling units defined by
California Health and Safety Code section 18008.7, installed within Yolo
County. Fire sprinklers shall be designed by a licensed professional and
installed in accordance with Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations and
subject to California Department of Housing and Community Development approval.
   Exception: Manufactured housing or mobile homes for residential occupancies
previously installed under a permit issued in Yolo County.
   (e)   That the utility connections, site grading, waste treatment
facilities, accessory equipment and/or structures, and all other work to be
done comply with all regulations which are applicable to them, and that a
building permit has been issued for such work if required;
   (f)   That the Director of the Department of Community Services or designee
has approved the site plan pursuant to Yolo County Code
Chapter 10 of Title 8  - Mobile Home Park Conversion Ordinance; and
   (g)   That all conditions of site plan approval have been satisfied.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-2.05.   Re-inspections.
   A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection
when such portion of work for which inspection is scheduled and is not complete
or when corrections called for previously are not complete.
   This section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the
first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of
this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before
the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection.
   To obtain a re-inspection, the applicant shall call and schedule a re-
inspection and pay the reinspection fee set forth in the current fee schedule
as adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
   In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no additional
inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been
paid.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-2.06.   Certificates of occupancy.
   At the time the Department of Community Services issues a certificate of
occupancy for any manufactured home or mobile home placed on a foundation, the
Department of Community Services shall cause to be recorded with the County
Recorder the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD)
form 433A which is a document particularly describing the real property upon
which the mobile home has been installed on a foundation and the fact that the
manufactured housing or mobile home has been affixed to the property. A copy of
such recorded document shall be forwarded to the County Assessor.
   The Department of Community Services shall provide California Department of
Housing and Community Development the following: a copy of the above described
recorded document (form 433A), accompanied by the HCD per section processing
fee made payable to HCD and the titling document.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-2.07.   Violations: Penalties.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in Yolo County Code
Chapter 2 of Title 1.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
CHAPTER 3. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
*   Sections 7-3.01 through 7-3.07, codified from Ordinance No. 583, as amended
by Ordinance Nos. 642, effective December 9, 1970, 697, effective February 13,
1974, and 744, effective February 25, 1976, and Sections 7-3.08 through 7-3.12,
as added by said Ordinance No. 697, as amended by said Ordinance No. 744,
amended in their entirety by Ordinance No. 802, effective June 22, 1978.
Chapter 3, codified from Ordinance No. 802, repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 1164, effective November 4, 1993, **deleted in its entirety by
Ordinance 1366, eff. Jan. 10, 2008. Chapter 3 amended by Ordinance No. 1442,
effective June 26, 2014. Chapter 3 repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 1521,
effective June 18, 2020.
Sections:
   
7-3.00   Purpose and Authority.
   
7-3.01   Conflicts with other rules, laws, etc.
   
7-3.02   Adoption of codes.
   
7-3.03   Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code.
   
7-3.04   Violations: Penalties.
Sec. 7-3.00.    Purpose and Authority.
   The purpose of this chapter is to adopt by reference the various published
codes and standards listed in section
7-3.02-Adoption of codes, below, subject to the definitions, clarifications and
the amendments set forth herein. This title of the Yolo County Code shall be
the source of regulations for property maintenance, as well as the maintenance,
health and safety standards for existing buildings.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-3.01.   Conflicts with other rules, laws, etc.
   In the event of any conflict between this code and any law, rule or
regulation of the State that requirement which establishes the higher standard
of safety shall govern. Failure to comply with such standards of safety shall
be a violation of this code.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-3.02.   Adoption of codes.
   The following publications including the specified appendices thereto, are
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this code, including the
amendments made thereto in this chapter.
   (a)   The 2018 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code,
including Appendix A-Boarding Standard, as published by the International Code
Council.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-3.03.   Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code.
   The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) is amended by the
changes, additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter. Section numbers
used below are those of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code.
   (a)   IPMC Chapter 1 – Scope and Administration, Part 1 – Scope and
Application is amended as follows:
   (1)   Section 101-General is amended to read as follows:
   Section 101 General. These regulations shall be known as the Property
Maintenance Code of Yolo County, California, hereinafter referred to as “this
code.”
   (2)   Section 102.3-Application of other codes is amended to read as
follows:
   Section 102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations
to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the effective California Existing Building Code,
California Building Code, California Residential Code, California Electrical
Code, California Mechanical Code, California Plumbing Code, California Energy
Code, California Historical Building Code, California Fire Code, California
Existing Building Code and the California Reference Standards.
   (b)   IPMC Chapter 1 – Scope and Administration, Part 2 – Administration and
Enforcement is amended as follows:
   (1)   Section 103.1-General is amended to read as follows:
   Section 103.1 General. The Authority for the enforcement of this code shall
rest with the Director of the Department of Community Services.
   (2)   Section 103.2-Appointment is amended to read as follows:
   Section 103.2 Appointment. The code official referenced in this Code shall
be a building official hired, appointed or retained in accordance with the Yolo
County Code.
   (3)   Section 103.4-Liability is amended to read as follows:
   Section 103.4 Liability. The code official, member of the board of appeals
or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the
jurisdiction, in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability
for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act or by
reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit
instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that
officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions
of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction
until the final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any
subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that
is instituted in pursuance of the provision of this code.
   (4)   Section 103.5-Fees is amended to read as follows:
   Section 103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the
department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as
indicated in the most current fee schedule as adopted by the Board of
Supervisors.
   (5)   Section 106.3-Prosecution of violations is amended to read as follows:
   Section 106.3 Prosecution of violations. Any person failing to comply with a
notice of violation or order served in accordance with section 107-Notices and
orders shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor in accordance with Yolo County
Code
Title 1, Chapter 2-Penalty Provisions Section
1-2.01. Violations a misdemeanor as determined by the code official, and the
violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of
violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy
of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or
direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having
jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon
which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
   (6)   Section 111-Means of appeal is amended to repeal Section 111.1-
Application for appeal, Section 111.2-Membership of board, Section 111.3-Notice
of meeting, Section 111.4-Open hearing, Section 111.5-Postponed hearing,
Section 111.6-Board decision, Section 111.7-Court review, and Section 111.8-
Stays of enforcement. Section 111-Means of appeal is RESERVED and a new Section
113-Board of Appeals is added as follows:
   Section 113 Board of appeals is created as follows:
   Section 113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions or determinations made by the code official relative to the
application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby
created a board of appeals known as the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall be appointed by the applicable governing authority and shall
hold office at its pleasure. The Planning Commission shall adopt rules of
procedure for conducting its business.
   Section 113.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be
based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do
not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed.
The Planning Commission shall have no authority to waive requirements of this
code.
   Section 113.3 Qualifications. The Planning Commission shall consist of
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters
pertaining to property maintenance and are not employees of the jurisdiction.
   Section 113.4 Right to appeal. Statements advising;
   (a)   That any person having any record title or legal interest in the
structure or property may appeal from notice and order or any action of the
code official, building official or fire code official to the Planning
Commission, provided the appeal is made in writing and filed with the building
official within 30 days from the date of service of such notice and order, and;
   (b)   That failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an
administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
   Section 113.4.1 Appeal hearing. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, as
set forth in Section 113.4.2-Appeal, the Chief Building Official shall set a
time and date for the hearing and notify the person requesting the hearing of
the time, date and place.
   (1)   The hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission.
   (2)   At the time of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall receive
testimony and evidence.
   (3)   The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded as a part of the
Planning Commission meeting;
   (4)   The Planning Commission or designated representative may inspect the
premises involved in the hearing prior to, during or after the hearing,
provided that;
   (a)   If required by state or federal law, the hearing officer obtains the
appropriate inspection warrant pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section
1822.51, et seq. or obtains the consent of the owner or occupant of the
premises;
   (b)   The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the
inspection; and
   (c)   The Planning Commission or designated representative shall state for
the record during hearing, or file a written statement after the hearing for
inclusion in the hearing record, upon completion of the inspection, the
material facts observed and the conclusion drawn therefrom.
   (5)   After the hearing, the Planning Commission shall render a decision, in
writing, upholding or denying the determination of an appeal; the written
decision shall contain a deadline for abatement. The notice of decision shall
be served on the person requesting the hearing by certified mail.
   Section 113.4.2 Appeal. Any person entitled to a hearing under Section
113.4.1-Appeal hearing or the building official, may appeal the decision of the
Planning Commission to the Board of Supervisors.
   (a)   A failure to appeal shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal.
   (b)   Notice of appeal must be in writing and filed with the Clerk of the
Board within 15 days after the decision is rendered by the Planning Commission.
   (c)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, a hearing will be set before the
Board of Supervisors and the appellant notified in writing of the time and date
for hearing. This notice shall be sent to the appellant by certified mail, to
the address given in the notice of appeal and the address of record if
different.
   (d)   The Chief Building Official or designated agent shall be notified of
the appeal and shall then transmit the records on the matter to the Board of
Supervisors.
   (e)   The Board of Supervisors may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of
the Planning Commission. If the decision is affirmed or affirmed and modified,
the period for abatement as set forth in the decision of the Planning
Commission, shall start as of the date of the board action.
   (f)   Any owner or occupier of premises having objection to the decision of
the Board must bring an action, in a court of competent jurisdiction, within 30
days after the action by the Board, otherwise, all objections will be deemed
waived.
   (g)   Any appeal to the Board of Supervisors shall be accompanied by a fee
in the amount, which is necessary to recover the costs of processing the
appeal. Such fee shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
   Section 113.4.3 Extension of time to perform work. Upon receipt of an
application from the person required to conform to the order and by agreement
of such person to comply with the order if allowed additional time, not to
exceed an additional 120 days, within which to complete said repair,
rehabilitation or demolition, if the code official determines that such an
extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently
dangerous to life or property. The code official’s authority to extend time is
limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the premises
and will not in any way affect the time to appeal the notice and order.
   Section 113.4.4 Summary abatement.
   (a)   If a declared dangerous structure or public nuisance is not completely
abated by the owner of the property within the time prescribed, the Chief
Building Official or authorized agent may request from the Board of Supervisors
the authority and funding to cause the dangerous structure or declared public
nuisance to be abated by county personnel or private contract. In furtherance
of this section, the Chief Building Official or designee is expressly
authorized to enter upon the premises for the purpose of abating the dangerous
structure or declared public nuisance.
   (b)   Where required by state or federal law, a warrant shall be obtained
prior to entry onto the premises for the purpose of abating the nuisance,
unless written consent to enter is received from the owner or occupant of the
premises or warrantless entry is otherwise permissible under state or federal
law. Where a warrant is required, notice shall be given to the owner or
occupant of the issuance of the warrant 24 hours prior to the entry, unless the
warrant provides otherwise.
   Section 113.4.5 Cost of abatement. The Chief Building Official or his
designee shall keep an accounting of the costs and expenses of abating such
dangerous structure or declared public nuisance, and shall render a statement
of such costs to the person or persons receiving the notice and order.
   (a)   Such person or persons receiving the notice and order shall be liable
to the County for any and all costs and expenses to the County involved in
abating the dangerous structure or declared public nuisance.
   (b)   Costs and expenses as referred to in this section shall include but
are not limited to, any and all direct costs related to personnel salaries and
benefits, operational overhead, fees for experts, consultants or contractors,
legal costs or expenses including attorney fees, claims against the county
arising as a consequence of the dangerous structure or declared public nuisance
and procedures associated with collecting moneys due hereunder.
   Section 113.4.6 Assessment of Costs-Lien against property and collection on
tax roll. The total cost of abating a dangerous structure or declared public
nuisance shall, by order of the Board of Supervisors following notice pursuant
to Government Code Section 53069.4, constitute a special assessment against the
premises to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the County
Recorder of a notice of lien, such special assessment shall constitute a lien
on the property for the amount of such assessment. The special assessment may
also be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary county
taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same
procedure and sale in case of delinquency as are provided for ordinary county
taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of county
taxes are applicable to the special assessment.
   (a)   After such recordation, a copy of the lien may be turned over to the
County Auditor, who shall then enter the amount of the lien on the assessment
rolls as a special assessment. Thereafter, said amount shall be collected at
the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected,
and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under
foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal
taxes.
   (b)   After such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or
other sale in the manner and means provided by law.
   Section 113.4.7 Alternative enforcement. Nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed to prevent the County Counsel or District Attorney from commencing with
any other available civil or criminal proceedings to abate a dangerous
structure or declared public nuisance under applicable provision of state law
as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter.
   (7)   Section 202-General Definitions is amended to include the following
definitions to be incorporated in alphabetical order:
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Shall mean anything which;
   (a)   is injurious to health or is indecent or offensive to the senses or
any obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property; and
   (b)   affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any
considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage
inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.
   “Public nuisance” shall include, but not be limited to the following;
   (c)   any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children,
whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied
lot. This includes any abandoned wells or shafts;
   (d)   whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health and
safety as determined by the code official; and
   (e)   inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.
   (8)   Section 302-Exterior property areas subsections 302.4-Weeds, and
304.14-Insect screens are amended as follows:
   Section 302.4-Weeds Insert 18 inches.
   Section 304.14 Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening
required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food
service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food
for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be
supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16
mesh per 25mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a
self-closing device in good working condition.
   Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as
air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
   (9)   Section 602-Heating facilities is amended to repeal the exception
listed for Section 602.2-Residential occupancies, Section 602.3-Heat supply and
Section 602.4-Occupiable work spaces.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-3.04.   Violations: Penalties.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in Yolo County Code
Chapter 2 of Title 1-Penalty provisions.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
CHAPTER 4.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS*
*   Chapter 4 added by Ordinance No. 1521, effective June 18, 2020.
Sections:
   
7-4.101   Purpose.
   
7-4.102   Definitions.
   
7-4.103   Expedited permitting process.
   
7-4.104   Permit application processing.
   
7-4.105   Technical review.
   
7-4.106   Electric vehicle charging station installation requirements.
Sec. 7-4.101.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote and encourage the use of electric
vehicles by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric
vehicle charging stations while promoting public health and safety and
preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use of such
charging stations. This chapter is also purposed to comply with California
Government Code Section 65850.7.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-4.102.   Definitions.
   (a)   “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any
level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built
in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads
on the effective date of this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source
outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.
   (b)   “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct,
and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public
health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date
the application was deemed complete.
   (c)   “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the
following:
   a.   Electronic mail or email.
   b.   The internet.
   c.   Facsimile.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-4.103.   Expedited permitting process.
   Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall
implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle
charging stations, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which
electric vehicle charging stations shall comply in order to be eligible for
expedited review. The expedited, streamlined permitting process and checklist
may refer to the recommendations contained in the most current version of the
“Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-
Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook” as published by
the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. The County’s adopted checklist
shall be published on the County’s website.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-4.104.   Permit application processing.
   (a)   Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall
verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not
have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building
occupants. Verification by the applicant includes but is not limited to:
electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and
overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station
equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and
vehicle parking.
   (b)   A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in
the County’s adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly
processed. Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the permit
application and supporting documents meets the requirements of the County
adopted checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws and health and
safety standards, the Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code
Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such
approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric
vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the County. If the
Building Official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or
she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all
deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be
eligible for expedited permit issuance.
   (c)   Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official
shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by this
chapter and associated supporting documentations. In accepting such permit
applications, the Building Official shall also accept electronic signatures on
all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by
any applicant.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-4.105.   Technical review.
   (a)   It is the intent of this chapter to encourage the installation of
electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting for
charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the Building
Official’s authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. If the
Building Official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the
electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the
public health or safety, as defined in this chapter, the County may require the
applicant to apply for a use permit.
   (b)   In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with
Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall not condition the
approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of
such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section
4080.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Sec. 7-4.106.   Electric vehicle charging station installation requirements.
   (a)   Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the
requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive
Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited
testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public
Utilities Commission or a Municipal Electric Utility Company regarding safety
and reliability.
   (b)   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated
wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall
meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the
California Electrical Code.
   (c)   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be
incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical
services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code.
Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.
   (d)   Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle
charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or
Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the
manufacturer’s installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall
not adversely affect building elements.
(§ 2, Ord. 1521, eff. June 18, 2020)
Title 8
LAND DEVELOPMENT AND ZONING
Chapters:
1.   Subdivision and Related Regulations
2.   Zoning Regulations
3.   Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance
4.   Flood Protection
5.   Development Agreements
6.   Alcoholic Beverage Control Ordinance
7.   Adult Entertainment Uses and Adult-related Establishments
8.   Inclusionary Housing
9.   Reasonable Accommodations
10.   Mobile Home Park Conversion Ordinance
11.   Historic Landmarks
12.   Housing Density Bonuses
13.   Addressing System
14.   Definitions
Chapter 1
SUBDIVISION AND RELATED REGULATIONS
Sections:
Article 1. General Provisions
   
8-1.101   Title and purpose.
   
8-1.102   Application.
   
8-1.103   Exemptions.
   
8-1.104   Advisory Agency.
   
8-1.105   Duties and procedures.
Article 2. Definitions
   
8-1.201   Definitions.
Article 3. Subdivision Map Requirements
   
8-1.301   Subdivision maps creating five or more lots.
   
8-1.302   Parcel maps creating four or fewer lots.
   
8-1.303   Final map or parcel map waivers.
   
8-1.304   Application, processing, and recording of final map or parcel map
waivers.
   
8-1.305   Filing of final maps and parcel maps.
   
8-1.306   Vesting tentative maps.
   
8-1.307   Phased subdivision maps.
   
8-1.308   Form of tentative maps and tentative parcel maps.
   
8-1.309   Determination of application completeness.
   
8-1.310   CEQA requirements and filing date.
   
8-1.311   Procedures for approval.
   
8-1.312   Findings.
   
8-1.313   Expiration and extension.
Article 4. Vesting Subdivision Maps
   
8-1.401   Purpose.
   
8-1.402   Definitions.
   
8-1.403   Application and limitations.
   
8-1.404   Filing.
   
8-1.405   Vesting on approval of vesting tentative maps.
   
8-1.406   Expiration.
   
8-1.407   Application inconsistent with current policies.
Article 5. Final Subdivision Maps and Parcel Maps
   
8-1.501   Preparation.
   
8-1.502   Form.
   
8-1.503   Accompanying items and filing.
   
8-1.504   Approval, recordation and revocation.
   
8-1.505   Final parcel maps.
   
8-1.506   Correction amendment of maps.
   
8-1.507   Resubdivisions.
   
8-1.508   Reversion to acreage.
   
8-1.509   Findings and conditions for reversion.
   
8-1.510   Recordation and effect of reversion.
   
8-1.511   Return of fees and deposits.
Article 6. Lot Line Adjustments and Mergers
   
8-1.601   Purpose.
   
8-1.602   Common ownership.
   
8-1.603   Lot line adjustments and mergers of parcels authorized.
   
8-1.604   Application required.
   
8-1.605   Merger, applicant-initiated.
   
8-1.606   Findings and conditions.
   
8-1.607   Recordation and effect.
   
8-1.608   Appeals and reviews.
   
8-1.609   Mergers of substandard lots.
Article 7. Certificates of Compliance
   
8-1.701   Purpose.
   
8-1.702   Application.
   
8-1.703   Review.
   
8-1.704   Conditional certificate of compliance.
Article 8. Design Requirements
   
8-1.801   Purpose.
   
8-1.802   Streets.
   
8-1.803   Blocks, intersections, and pedestrian ways.
   
8-1.804   Easements.
   
8-1.805   Lots.
   
8-1.806   Other requirements.
   
8-1.807   Soils report.
   
8-1.808   Inspections of construction.
Article 9. Public Improvements
   
8-1.901   Purpose.
   
8-1.902   Improvements required.
   
8-1.903   Improvement plans for subdivisions.
   
8-1.904   Completion of subdivision improvements.
   
8-1.905   Bonds for improvements.
   
8-1.906   Dedications and improvements - parcel maps.
   
8-1.907   Dedications and improvements - building permits.
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 8-1.101.   Title and purpose.
   (a)   This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “Subdivision
and Related Regulations of the County.”
   (b)   The purpose of this chapter shall be the establishment of the
following principles in the interests of protecting the health, safety, and
general welfare of the people of the County:
   (1)   To implement the County’s General Plan and to implement and supplement
the State Subdivision Map Act (Sections 66410 et seq. of Division 2 of Title 7
of the California Government Code and all amendments or additions thereto);
   (2)   To ensure that a proposed subdivision, street plan, or land division
shall be consistent with the General Plan of the County, this chapter, and the
Yolo County Improvement Standards;
   (3)   To ensure the creation of reasonable building sites;
   (4)   To provide for the dedication, construction and installation of
streets, roads, alleys, highways, public utilities, stormwater conveyance
facilities, and other improvements and/or facilities;
   (5)   To ensure adequate street alignment and means of ingress and egress to
property;
   (6)   To control the division of land that is subject to inundation or other
detrimental influences that make land unsuitable for many uses;
   (7)   To provide for planned development subdivisions; and
   (8)   To provide rules and regulations governing the contents of tentative
and final maps, including parcel maps, and the filing thereof, and other
matters related thereto.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.102.   Application.
   Except as otherwise provided in Sec.
8-1.103, below, this chapter shall apply to all divisions and subdivisions,
reversions to acreage, lot line adjustments, mergers, and certificates of
compliance, respecting real property located wholly or partially within the
unincorporated areas of Yolo County. This chapter governs the filing,
processing, approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of tentative, final
and parcel maps, lot line adjustments, certificates of compliance, conditional
certificates of compliance, notices of violation, reversions to acreage,
resubdivisions, mergers, and related public and private improvements. The
provisions of this chapter shall also apply to vesting tentative maps. Except
as specifically otherwise provided by this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act,
all subdivisions shall be subject to the same substantive and procedural
requirements. This chapter also applies to dedications and improvements
associated with certain building permits.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.103.   Exemptions.
   Exemptions from the provisions of this chapter are governed by those
exclusions specifically cited in the State Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.104.   Advisory Agency.
   (a)   The Yolo County Planning Commission is hereby designated as the
“Advisory Agency” pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act for major applications
relating to the subdivision of land involving tentative maps and tentative
parcel maps. In such capacity, the Planning Commission shall make
investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed tentative
maps, recommendations for the imposing of requirements or conditions thereon.
   (b)   The Yolo County Planning Commission is empowered to approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove all tentative parcel maps.
   (c)   The Zoning Administrator is hereby designated as the “Advisory Agency”
pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act for minor applications relating to the
divisions and mergers of real property, including lot line adjustments,
mergers, and certificates of compliance.
   (d)   The Zoning Administrator is empowered to approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove lot line adjustments, mergers, and certificates of
compliance, or defer the request to the Planning Commission, as the Zoning
Administrator deems appropriate.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.105.   Duties and procedures.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the Advisory Agency to review all land
divisions as empowered by this chapter, and take action, or recommend the
appropriate action to the Board of Supervisors, to deny or approve said land
divisions. In making recommendations or granting approval as authorized by this
chapter, the Advisory Agency shall make the findings required by the
Subdivision Map Act for the specific land division and the following minimum
findings:
   (1)   That an environmental review, in accordance with the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was conducted for the proposed map;
   (2)   That the proposed map is consistent with the Yolo County General Plan;
   (3)   That the proposed map is consistent with the Subdivision and Related
Regulations of the County, and zoning requirements and parcel size minimum
standards, as set forth in this title,
Chapter 1 and
Chapter 2, et seq.;
   (4)   That the proposed map complies with the requirements of the State
Subdivision Map Act; and
   (5)   That access to a County road, or suitably maintained private road, is
provided to all affected lots and parcels, and that an improved access street
or driveway is provided or will be constructed, consistent with the Yolo County
Improvement Standards.
   (b)   The Advisory Agency may recommend, or impose reasonable conditions on
the approval of maps that are subject to this article in order to find or
ensure compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter or Federal,
State, or County laws or regulations and standards, or policies of the County
General Plan, and to provide for the necessary improvements and facilities, and
the mitigation of environmental impacts as necessary, and to ensure the public
health, safety and general welfare, and orderly growth. Such conditions shall
be expressly stated in writing by the Advisory Agency.
   (c)   Meetings of the Advisory Agency shall be duly noticed public hearings
and shall give public notices and conduct public hearings, as provided for by
Section
8-2.211 of this title (Article 2 of Chapter 2), with the exception of Zoning
Administrator actions to approve lot line adjustments, mergers, and
certificates of compliance. Such public hearings shall be open to the public,
and any officer, person, applicant or owner interested in any matter before the
Planning Commission, or Board of Supervisors, shall have the privilege of
attending any such meeting and making any presentation which may be
appropriate. Such notices shall state that all persons are invited to attend
such hearings and present evidence regarding the proposed action.
   (d)   Decisions of the Advisory Agency under this article shall take effect,
and appeals thereof made and considered, in the manner provided in Section
8-2.225 of
Chapter 2 of this title. The fee for filing an appeal pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be in the amount established by the Board by
resolution. Such fee shall be paid to the Clerk of the Board or the Planning,
Public Works, and Environmental Services Department at the time the appeal is
filed.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 2. Definitions
Sec. 8-1.201.   Definitions.
   Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined herein,
but are defined in the Subdivision Map Act, such definitions shall be deemed
incorporated herein and shall apply as though set forth in full in this
chapter.
   “Advisory Agency.” A designated individual or official body charged with the
duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of
proposed divisions of real property, or imposing or suggesting requirements or
conditions thereon, or having the authority to approve, conditionally approve
or disapprove maps, certificates of compliance, conditional certificates of
compliance, lot line adjustments, or having the authority to conduct the
hearings relating to notices of violation as specified in this chapter and the
Subdivision Map Act.
   “Alley.” A public or private way, not more than thirty (30) feet wide,
affording only secondary means of access to abutting property.
   “Applicant.” A person or that person’s authorized agent who causes land to
be divided or developed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and/
or a property owner or that person’s authorized agent who applies for a
building or other County permit pursuant to Title 7 of the Yolo County Code
(see also “Subdivider” below).
   “Board.” The Yolo County Board of Supervisors.
   “Building site.” A parcel of land, exclusive of streets or alleys, occupied,
or intended to be occupied, by a main building or group of such buildings and
accessory buildings, together with such open spaces, yards, minimum width, and
area, as are required by the zoning regulations (
Chapter 2 of this title), and having full frontage on an improved street which
meets the standards of widths and improvements specified by the County for the
street in question, or having either partial frontage on such street or access
thereto by a recorded right-of-way or recorded easement, which partial frontage
right-of-way or easement and improvements therein are determined by the
Planning Commission to be adequate. In subdivided areas a building site shall
be any portion of a filed and recorded lot or any combination of contiguous
lands, including more than a lot, which meets the area and width requirements
of the zoning regulations (
Chapter 2 of this title).
   “CEQA.” The California Environmental Quality Act, codified as Division 13
(commencing with Section 21000) of the Public Resources Code and such
amendments and additions thereto as may be made from time to time by the
California Legislature.
   “Chief Building Official.” The Chief Building Official of the County, or
authorized representative.
   “Commission.” The Yolo County Planning Commission.
   “Contiguous.” Lots are “contiguous” when they touch each other at any point
or when they are in close proximity to each other and are so situated as to be
reasonably developable as a single unit. Lots may be contiguous even when
separated by a strip of land over which some person or entity, other than the
owner of the lots, has some property interest, including fee title or some
lesser interest such as a leasehold or easement. Examples of such strips of
land, which normally will not prevent lots from being contiguous, include roads
and streets other than freeways, utility easements, railroad rights-of-way,
canals and drainage channels.
   “County Engineer.” The registered civil engineer acting under the authority
of the Director of Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services for the
County for which an engineering license is required.
   “County Surveyor.” The licensed land surveyor acting under the authority of
the Director of Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services who examines
and signs the County Surveyor’s statement on maps, as required by the
Subdivision Map Act (Section 66450).
   “County’s Transportation Impact Study Guidelines.” The Yolo County
Transportation Impact Study Guidelines adopted in February, 2010, and all
amendments or additions thereto.
   “Department.” The Yolo County Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services Department.
   “Design.” Street alignment, gradient, and width; the alignment and width of
easements; the rights-of-way for drainage sewers and utilities; the size,
shape, and area of lots; the uses of land; and the construction and
installation of all public improvements.
   “Development Review Committee” or “Committee.” The Development Review
Committee of the County comprised of various County and other agencies that
review subdivision applications and other land use/development applications,
and make recommendations to the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission.
   “Director.” Director of the Yolo County Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department.
   “Double frontage.” A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or nearly
parallel streets and having the rights of access to both streets.
   “Final map.” A final map is prepared following approval of a tentative map,
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act.
   “Frontage.” The lot width measured along the property line adjacent to the
street right-of-way. On a corner lot the frontage shall be the lesser of two
(2) street frontages.
   “Future street or alley.” Any real property which the owner thereof has
irrevocably offered for dedication to the County in accordance with the
Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66475) for street or alley
purposes but which has been rejected by the Board, subject to the right of the
Board to rescind its action and accept, by resolution at any later date and
without further action by the owner, all or part of such property as a public
street or alley.
   “General Plan.” The General Plan of Yolo County, or any element, section, or
portion thereof.
   “Improvements.” Improvements include, but are not limited to, streets,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, sanitary sewer facilities, storm drain facilities,
water supply facilities, street lighting, utilities, and landscaping, or any
facility, fixture, or object installed or constructed in accordance with the
Yolo County Improvement Standards for acceptance or maintenance by the County,
other public agencies, County Service Areas, or other appropriate funding
mechanisms.
   “Improvement security.” A cash deposit, a bond by a duly authorized
corporate surety, or an instrument of credit covering faithful performance and
labor and materials, as set forth in the Subdivision Map Act and the County
Improvements Standards.
   “Legislative body.” The Yolo County Board of Supervisors.
   “Lot.” A parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership, lease, or
building development (also see “Building site”).
   “Lot area.” The total horizontal area included within the lot lines but
excluding any portion of such area which has been dedicated or offered for
dedication for a public street, alley, or pedestrian way.
   “Lot, corner.” A lot bounded by streets on two (2) or more adjoining sides
where the angle of intersection between the tangents of the two (2)
intersecting streets is less than 135 degrees.
   “Lot depth.” The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines
measured along the median between the two (2) side lot lines.
   “Lot, interior.” A lot other than a corner lot.
   “Lot lines.” The property lines bounding a lot, as defined above (see
definition of “Lot”) of this article.
   “Lot line adjustment.” An adjustment between four (4) or fewer existing
adjoining parcels where the land from one parcel(s) is added to an adjoining
parcel(s), and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed are
not thereby created.
   “Lot width.” The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at
right angles to the depth of the lot at the front yard setback line. Whenever
such definition cannot be applied due to irregularity in the shape of the lot,
the lot width shall be as determined by the Planning Director, subject to
appeal and review by the Commission.
   “Merger of contiguous parcels.” “Merger of contiguous parcels” (referred to
in this chapter as “merger”) shall mean the elimination of parcel lines between
contiguous parcels under common ownership, without reverting the land in such
parcels to acreage, pursuant to the authority set forth in Section 66499.20-3/
4 of the Subdivision Map Act.
   “Parcel.” Any land, improved or unimproved, which is comprised of any
combination of contiguous lands which are under one ownership according to
records in the office of the County Clerk-Recorder.
   “Parcel map.” A parcel map is prepared following approval of a tentative
parcel map, where the division of land results in four (4) or fewer parcels, in
accordance with the provisions for parcel maps as set forth in Section 66425 et
seq. of the Subdivision Map Act.
   “Pedestrian way.” A way dedicated for public use and designated for use by
pedestrians, equestrians, and cyclists and not intended for use as a way for
motor-driven vehicular traffic.
   “Planning Director.” Director of the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department or his or her designee.
   “Preliminary plan.” A sketch plan of a proposed subdivision prepared prior
to a tentative map and showing existing conditions and the proposed development
thereon.
   “Public Health Director.” The full-time Director of Environmental Health who
shall be responsible for the administration of the Division of Environmental
Health within the Department, in accordance with Section 2-5.1705 of the Yolo
County Code.
   “Public water system.” A system for the provision of water for human
consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances that has fifteen
(15) or more service connections or regularly serves at least twenty-five (25)
individuals daily at least sixty (60) days out of the year.
   “Remainder.” That portion of land which is not divided for the purpose of
sale, lease, or financing, and which is not counted as a parcel for the
purposes of determining whether a parcel or final map is required, in
accordance with Section 66424.6 of the Subdivision Map Act.
   “Street.” A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street,
highway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, court, circle, drive, or way,
which has been dedicated to public use and accepted by the County, or laid out
or constructed as such by the County, or made a public street pursuant to law.
“Street” shall not include a private road or alley.
   “Subdivider.” Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who
proposes to divide real property into a subdivision as defined in Section 66423
of the State Subdivision Map Act.
   “Subdivision.” Any division of land which is a subdivision as currently
defined in the Subdivision Map Act.
   “Subdivision agreement.” A contract between the County and the subdivider,
in a form approved by the Board, requiring the subdivider to complete, install,
or construct improvements as required by the provisions of this chapter and the
County Improvement Standards.
   “Subdivision Map Act.” Sections 66410 et seq. of Division 2 of Title 7 of
the California Government Code and all amendments or additions thereto.
   “Tentative Map.” A map made for the purpose of showing the design and
improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around
it.
   “Tentative Parcel Map.” A map made for the purpose of showing the design and
improvement of a proposed parcel map and the existing conditions in and around
it.
   “Vesting tentative map.” A Tentative Map for a residential subdivision,
obtaining the development rights conferred by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with
Section 66498.1) of the Subdivision Map Act, which shall have printed
conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map” at the time it is
filed.
   “Yolo County Improvement Standards.” The standards and specifications set
forth in the County of Yolo Improvement Standards, adopted by the Board of
Supervisors on August 5, 2008, and all amendments or additions thereto.
   “Yolo County Transportation Impact Guidelines.” The Yolo County
Transportation Impact Guidelines Adopted in February, 2010, and all amendments
or additions thereof.
   “Zoning Administrator.” Director of the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department or his or her designee.
   “Zoning regulations.” The zoning regulations of the County (
Chapters 2 through
12 of this title).
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Article 3. Subdivision Map Requirements
Sec. 8-1.301.   Subdivision maps creating five or more lots.
   A tentative subdivision map (a “tentative map”) and a final subdivision map
(a “final map”) shall be required for all subdivisions which create five (5) or
more lots, create five (5) or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of
the Civil Code, are a community apartment project (as defined in Section 11004
of the Business and Professions Code) containing five (5) or more parcels, or
are a conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five (5) or
more dwelling units, except where:
   (a)   The parent parcel contains less than five (5) acres, each lot created
by the division abuts upon a publicly maintained public road or highway, and no
dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body; or
   (b)   Each lot created by the subdivision has a gross area of twenty (20)
acres or more and has an approved access meeting the requirements of the Yolo
County Improvement Standards to a publicly maintained public road or highway;
or
   (c)   The parent parcel has an approved access meeting the requirements of
the Yolo County Improvement Standards to a public road or highway and is zoned
for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the
legislative body as to road alignment and widths; or
   (d)   Each lot created by the subdivision has a gross area of not less than
forty (40) acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section; or
   (e)   The land being subdivided is solely for the creation of an
environmental subdivision pursuant to Section 66418.2 of the Subdivision Map
Act.
   A tentative map and a parcel map shall be required for those subdivisions
described in subsections (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e). For the purposes of
computing the number of lots created by a subdivision, any remainder parcel and
any lots to be conveyed to a governmental agency, public entity, or public
utility, or to a subsidiary of a public utility for reconveyance to a public
utility for rights-of-way, shall not be counted. For purposes of this section,
any conveyance of land to or from a governmental agency shall include a fee
interest, an easement, or a license.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1468, eff. May 13,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.302.   Parcel maps creating four or fewer lots.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a tentative parcel map
and a parcel map shall be required for all subdivisions creating four or fewer
lots, or four or fewer condominiums, or (in the case of community apartment
projects) containing four or fewer apartments, or (in the case of conversions
to a stock cooperative) involving four or fewer dwelling units.
   (b)   A parcel map occurring within areas zoned R-L or R-M and defined by
the United States Census Bureau as urbanized or an urban cluster shall be
approved ministerially without a tentative parcel map being required if the
following requirements are met:
   (1)   No more than two new parcels of approximately equal lot area (no less
than 40% of the lot area) are created.
   (2)   The applicant for an urban lot split shall sign an affidavit stating
that the applicant intends to occupy one of the housing units as their
principal residence for a minimum of three years from the date of the approval
of the urban lot split unless the applicant is a "community land trust," as
defined in clause (ii) of subparagraph (C) of paragraph (11) of subdivision (a)
of Section 402.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or is a "qualified nonprofit
corporation" as described in Section 214.15 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
   (3)   The lots created from the parcel map shall:
   (i)   have access to, provide access to, or adjoin County maintained public
right-of-way;
   (ii)   provide easements required for the provision of public services and
utilities.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1547, eff. March 10,
2022)
Sec. 8-1.303.   Final map or parcel map waivers.
   As set forth pursuant to Section 66428 of the Subdivision Map Act, a final
map or parcel map shall, upon proper application therefore, be waived in the
following cases:
   (a)   Large Lot Subdivisions - Subdivisions (other than condominium
conversions, community apartment projects and stock cooperative conversions)
which create lots, each of which has a gross area of at least forty (40) acres
or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section are eligible for map waiver
provided that the Advisory Agency has issued written findings that (1) the
subdivision meets all of the requirements of this chapter and the Subdivision
Map Act for a subdivision by parcel map except only those requirements set
forth in Section
8-1.302 of this chapter and in Section 66428 of the Subdivision Map Act and
such other requirements as may be waived by the Advisory Agency pursuant to
this section, and (2) no injury would be done to the public health, safety or
welfare by permitting the subdivision to occur without a field survey;
   (b)   Mobile Home Park Condominium Conversions - Subdivisions which convert
mobile home parks (as defined in Section 50781 of the Health and Safety Code)
into condominiums are eligible for map waiver provided that the Advisory Agency
has issued written findings that none of the conditions listed in subsections
(a) (1) through (a) (4) of Section 66428.1 of the Subdivision Map Act exist.
(§ 2, Ord. 1468, eff. May 13, 2016)
Sec. 8-1.304.   Application, processing, and recording of final map or parcel
map waivers.
   (a)   An application for a map waiver shall be on a form satisfactory to the
Planning Director and shall be accompanied by documents containing all of the
information specified in Sections
8-1.306,
8-1.404,
8-2.502 and
8-2.503, as applicable, provided that the Planning Director may, in individual
cases, permit the omission of items of information deemed by it not to be
necessary for a proper review of the application. The application shall also be
accompanied by a legal description and a sketch, prepared by a person
authorized to practice land surveying, of each of the lots to be created by the
subdivision or merger and, where applicable, each of the affected lots in
existence at the time of application. The sketch shall include a north arrow
and the bearings and distances for all the lot lines including, where
applicable, distances between old and new lot lines. Where, in the opinion of
the Planning Director, a field survey is necessary in order to support a
required finding that one or more of the lots to be created will conform to
applicable zoning requirements, the application shall be accompanied by a field
survey. The application for a mobile home park condominium conversion described
in subsection (b) of Section
8-2.303 shall also be accompanied by a petition in the form specified in
Section 66428.1 of the Subdivision Map Act signed by at least two-thirds of the
owners of mobile homes who are tenants in the mobile home park.
   (b)   An application for a map waiver shall be processed in the same manner
as an application for a tentative parcel map. Prior to expiration of the map
waiver approval, legal descriptions describing the parcels, as approved by the
Advisory Agency, shall be provided by the applicant(s) in a form and content
acceptable to the Planning Director. Also, the applicant shall obtain
certification from the County Tax Collector which states that according to the
records of his/her department there are no liens against the parcels for unpaid
state, county, or municipal or local taxes or special assessments collected as
taxes, except taxes or special assessments not yet payable. The Planning
Director shall prepare and sign a certificate of compliance or conditional
certificate of compliance to indicate compliance with all of the conditions of
the approval of the map waiver.
   (c)   A map waiver shall not become operative unless and until the
certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance is recorded
in the Office of the County Recorder prior to expiration of the approval.
Unless a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance
is recorded the approval shall expire two (2) years from the date of the
approval in the cases described in Sections
8-1.313(a) and
8-1.505(a). After approval of the map waiver, the Planning Director shall
indicate on a separate document all conditions that, according to proof
supplied by the applicant, have been satisfied. If all conditions that are
required to be satisfied prior to the recording of the certificate of
compliance or conditional certificate of compliance have not been satisfied,
the Planning Director shall not sign and record the certificate of compliance
or conditional certificate of compliance. If all conditions that are required
to be satisfied prior to the recording of the certificate of compliance or
conditional certificate of compliance have been satisfied, the Planning
Director shall prepare and sign the certificate of compliance or conditional
certificate of compliance, including applicable legal descriptions and sketches
provided by the applicant, and shall transmit it to the County Recorder. When
recorded, the certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of
compliance shall have the same force and effect as a recorded parcel map.
(§ 2, Ord. 1468, eff. May 13, 2016)
Sec. 8-1.305.   Filing of final maps and parcel maps.
   Prior to the filing of any final map or parcel map for the purpose of sale,
lease, or financing, whether immediate or future, by the execution of any deed
of conveyance, sale, or contract for sale, except where otherwise provided by
this chapter, the subdivider shall file a tentative map with the Planning
Director, for distribution as set forth in Sec.
8-1.311 of this article. The filing shall be accompanied by all information and
supporting materials determined to be necessary by the Planning Director.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1468, eff. May 13,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.306.   Vesting tentative maps.
   A subdivider desiring to obtain the development rights conferred by Chapter
4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of the Subdivision Map Act shall print
the words “Vesting Tentative Map” conspicuously on the face of each copy of the
tentative map prior to submitting the tentative map to the Planning Director,
and shall comply with requirements for a Vesting Tentative Map contained in the
Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1468, eff. May 13,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.307.   Phased subdivision maps.
   A subdivider desiring to file for record multiple final maps or multiple
parcel maps relating to a single tentative map shall so inform the Planning
Director in writing at the time the tentative map is submitted, provided that,
at any time prior to approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, the
Advisory Agency may waive this requirement.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1468, eff. May 13,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.308.   Form of tentative maps and tentative parcel maps.
   (a)   The tentative map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor and shall be drawn to a scale sufficiently large as to
show clearly the details of the plan (generally one (1) inch equals fifty (50)
feet, but not more than one hundred (100) feet, and the essential dimensions
related thereto.
   (b)   The tentative map shall contain the following information, which is
further augmented and described in the application forms prepared by the
Planning and Public Works Department (the Tentative Map application “Required
Materials” checklist):
   (1)   The subdivision number and small vicinity map;
   (2)   The legal and/or other sufficient description of the property to be
subdivided to define the location and boundaries of the proposed tract, with
approximate bearings and distances;
   (3)   The names and addresses of the owner or owners of record, the
subdivider, and the engineer or surveyor;
   (4)   The widths, approximate locations, and identity of all existing or
proposed easements, streets, alleys, reserves, watercourses, irrigation canals,
and drainage ditches on or adjacent to the proposed subdivision, together with
all building and use restrictions applicable thereto;
   (5)   An indication of adjacent tentative or recorded subdivisions, property
lines, or any development which will affect or be affected by the development;
   (6)   Topographic data shown for a sufficient distance beyond the boundary
lines of the subdivision in sufficient detail and contour lines at sufficient
intervals to provide for a proper study of drainage, sewage disposal, lot
design, and road locations; the location of existing buildings on or near the
proposed subdivision and unusual natural features in the area; and a rough
grading plan, together with preliminary soils data, whenever cuts or fills are
five (5) feet or more;
   (7)   The location and general description of proposed public improvements;
   (8)   The location and width of adjacent existing and proposed streets and
highways, as well as possible future street continuations, and an indication of
how such development will fit into the neighborhood street plan and the General
Plan of the County;
   (9)   The proposed street names;
   (10)   The approximate radii of all curves;
   (11)   The approximate location of areas subject to inundation or storm
water overflow, all areas normally covered by water, and all water courses
which are to be preserved and used in the development of the subdivision;
   (12)   The proposed lot layouts, including approximate dimensions, gross lot
area, and buildable area, and provisions for future passive or natural heating
or cooling opportunities as set forth in the Subdivision Map Act;
   (13)   The existing and proposed uses of the property, with a statement of
the respective proportions of the total area and the number of lots represented
by each use;
   (14)   Provisions for the domestic water supply proposed by the subdivider,
including the source, the location of existing, proposed, active, or abandoned
wells and the future disposition of each well, and information concerning the
approximate quantity of water when the source is other than a public water
system;
   (15)   Provisions for sewage disposal and data pertaining to soil
percolation rates for all areas not on public sewers to the satisfaction of the
Public Health Director;
   (16)   Provisions for stormwater drainage including detention, and
stormwater quality features, as applicable;
   (17)   Provisions for all other utilities, including natural gas,
electricity, communication, and cable television systems, and a list of all
firms and/or public districts supplying utility services;
   (18)   The requirement for Energy Star certified appliances;
   (19)   A flow diagram setting forth the manner and direction in which storm
runoff will be carried through and away from the subdivision;
   (20)   Provisions for park and recreation facilities, schools, and other
needed public areas;
   (21)   A statement as to the proposed landscaping and tree planting plan;
   (22)   A statement prohibiting wood-burning fireplaces in new residential
development;
   (23)   The date, north arrow, scale, and gross area of the subdivision;
   (24)   The boundary lines of any cities, counties, school districts, and
other public districts within the area of the map; and
   (25)   Signature blocks on the tentative maps for the approval of the Zoning
Administrator and the County Engineer.
   (c)   Any material required by the provisions of subsection (b) of this
section, above, which cannot be placed legibly and completely on the tentative
map shall be submitted in writing with such map.
   (d)   The following information shall be submitted with the tentative map
application, including and in addition to any other information specified in
the subdivision application forms prepared by the Department of Planning,
Public Works and Environmental Services:
   (1)   A Planned Development (PD) Ordinance (if rezoning to a unique PD
overlay zone) including allowed and permitted uses, building densities and
standards such as height and setbacks, design regulations, and other criteria
which will regulate how development will proceed;
   (2)   Development plans showing the proposed distribution, location, extent,
and intensity of major components of public and private transportation, sewage,
water, drainage, utilities, solid waste disposal, energy, and other essential
facilities proposed to be located within the area covered by the plan and
needed to support the land uses described in the plan and necessary to meet the
infrastructure and other requirements of the County General Plan, any
applicable specific plan, and the County Improvement Standards.
   (3)   Standards and criteria by which development will proceed;
   (4)   A program of implementation measures necessary to carry out the
aforementioned requirements above; and any applicable mitigation programs or
requirements such as agricultural and wildlife habitat mitigation and
affordable housing;
   (5)   A Conceptual Landscape Plan, including a list of trees, plants, shrubs
and groundcover that will be utilized for selecting landscape plan components.
   (6)   Architectural Elevation drawings and other aesthetic details of
proposed buildings, as applicable;
   (7)   A Transportation Impact Study as described in the County’s
Transportation Impact Study Guidelines, if the project meets or exceeds the
triggers requiring an impact study;
   (8)   Final hydrology and hydraulics calculations and reports prepared by a
registered civil engineer per County Improvement Standards;
   (9)   An Onsite Circulation Plan;
   (10)   A Lighting Plan, if applicable;
   (11)   A Master Signage Plan, if applicable; and
   (12)   Any other technical and/or CEQA-related special studies, such as an
archeological or biological study, as required.
   (e)   Every subdivider, at the time of filing a tentative map, shall pay to
the County a filing fee in the amount established by the Board by resolution.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1468, eff. May 13, 2016)
Sec. 8-1.309.   Determination of application completeness.
   (a)   When the required number of copies of a tentative map and accompanying
information and reports have been received by the Department, the application
shall be examined by staff of the Department and other appropriate County
departments, in light of the requirements of this chapter, applicable
requirements of Title 6 of the Yolo County Code, the Subdivision Map Act, and
the Yolo County Improvement Standards, to determine whether the application
contains all of the required information and is complete for the purposes of
Section 65943 of the Government Code.
   (b)   No later than thirty (30) days following the submittal of the
application, the applicant shall be notified in writing whether the application
is complete or incomplete. If the application is determined to be incomplete,
the applicant shall be notified in writing of the reasons therefor and informed
of the information still needed to make the application complete.
   (c)   Upon written notification to the applicant, processing of an
incomplete application may be terminated if no reasonable effort has been made
by the applicant to complete the application for a period of six (6) months
from the date of notification of incompleteness. All unused fees shall be
refunded to the applicant. The Planning Director on written request by the
applicant showing good cause may grant an extension of this six (6) month
period.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1468, eff. May 13, 2016)
Sec. 8-1.310.   CEQA requirements and filing date.
   (a)   The applicant shall provide such information as may be necessary to
comply with CEQA and, when the appropriate environmental document has been
prepared and approved pursuant to Section 66452.1 of the Subdivision Map Act,
the tentative map shall be filed as specified in this section.
   (b)   For the limited purpose of commencing the time periods prescribed by
Section 66452.1 of the Subdivision Map Act and Sec.
8-1.311, below, for the reporting or acting upon tentative maps, a tentative
map for which a complete application has been submitted shall be deemed to be
“filed” with the clerk of the Advisory Agency on the filing date established as
follows:
   (1)   In cases where the subdivision is exempt from the requirements of
CEQA, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare and sign a notice of exemption and
the filing date of the tentative map shall be the date on which such notice is
signed.
   (2)   In cases where a negative declaration or a mitigated negative
declaration is required under CEQA, the Advisory Agency shall approve a
negative declaration or a proposed mitigated negative declaration and the
filing date for the tentative map shall be the date on which the appropriate
Advisory Agency approves the document.
   (3)   In cases where an environmental impact report is required under CEQA,
the filing date for the tentative map shall be the date on which the Advisory
Agency having authority to approve, disapprove or conditionally approve the
tentative map, certifies the environmental impact report.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1468, eff. May 13, 2016)
Sec. 8-1.311.   Procedures for approval.\
   (a)   Within ten (10) working days from the date that the Planning Director
has determined that a filed subdivision map application is deemed “complete”
for processing, copies of the tentative map and associated documents shall be
distributed by the Planning Director to all relevant departments and agencies
for review and reports thereon, including, but not limited to:
   (1)   The Building and Public Works Divisions;
   (2)   The fire district of jurisdiction;
   (3)   Each school district in which the subdivision is located;
   (4)   The Environmental Health Division;
   (5)   Any city within three (3) miles of the proposed subdivision;
   (6)   Any county whose boundary is within one (1) mile of the proposed
subdivision;
   (7)   Caltrans and any other State and Federal agencies that may have
jurisdiction over or be affected by the proposed subdivision;
   (8)   The serving public utility companies; and
   (9)   Other agencies which may be affected.
   (b)   The Development Review Committee (DRC) shall review the tentative map,
the reports received from the reviewing departments and agencies, the
environmental document prepared by staff to comply with CEQA, and all other
relevant documents. Planning staff shall incorporate the recommendations of the
DRC in draft conditions of approval or denial in a staff report that is set for
public hearing before the Commission.
   (c)   With respect to any subdivision for which a tentative map and final
map is required, the Planning Commission (as Advisory Agency authorized to make
recommendations only) shall hold a public hearing on the tentative map,
recommend the content of required findings, recommend approval, conditional
approval or disapproval of the tentative map, and report its actions in writing
to the Board of Supervisors within fifty (50) days after the tentative map is
filed with the clerk of the Advisory Agency, unless the applicant consents to a
longer period of time.
   At the next regular meeting of the Board of Supervisors following receipt of
the Planning Commission’s report, the Board (as the legislative body) shall fix
the meeting date at which the tentative map will be considered at a public
hearing, which date shall be within thirty (30) days thereafter. The Board
shall make all findings required by this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act,
and shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map within
such thirty (30) day period. Provided, however, that if legally sufficient
notice thereof has been given the Board may hold the required public hearing at
any regular meeting within thirty (30) days following filing of the Planning
Commission’s report, in which case the Board shall approve, conditionally
approve or disapprove the tentative map at the conclusion of such hearing. The
Board may continue the public hearing on the tentative map to another date with
the consent of the applicant.
   (d)   With respect to any subdivision for which a tentative map and a parcel
map is required, the Planning Commission (as Advisory Agency) shall hold a
public hearing on the tentative parcel map, make all findings required by this
chapter and the Subdivision Map Act, and shall approve, conditionally approve
or disapprove the tentative map within fifty (50) days after the tentative map
is filed with the clerk of the Advisory Agency, unless the applicant consents
to a longer period of time.
   (e)   The Planning Commission may defer to the Board of Supervisors a
decision on a tentative parcel map for any subdivision described in Subsections
(1) through (5), below. The Board of Supervisors shall then hold the public
hearing and make all required findings and decisions. Decisions on the
following tentative parcel maps may be deferred:
   (1)   Tentative parcel maps which may result in significant adverse
environmental impacts which cannot be mitigated to less than significant
levels;
   (2)   Tentative parcel maps that involve substantial controversy;
   (3)   Tentative parcel maps which are in conflict with County policies;
   (4)   Tentative parcel maps which may be precedent setting;
   (5)   Tentative parcel map that the Planning Commission determines should be
reviewed by the Board of Supervisors in order to best protect the public
welfare.
   (f)   In the event an approved tentative map is revised and subsequently
approved by the Commission, the most recently approved tentative map shall
constitute the only recognized tentative map for further action in the
consideration of the filing of the final map or parcel map.
   (g)   Prior to filing a tentative map application, a subdivider may submit
to the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department, for
consideration by Planning staff and reviewing agencies, a “pre-application” of
preliminary subdivision plans, which shall be processed according to the
provisions of Sec.
8-2.213. The intent of the pre-application process is to give an applicant an
initial understanding of the issues and type of conditions of approval that
could be raised by the project. A pre-application does not result in any formal
approval, but instead is concluded with a letter and meeting with the applicant
outlining the issues raised by the proposed project and the conditions and
mitigation measures that could result if a subsequent formal application were
to be filed with the County.
   (h)   For the purposes of Sections 66452.6, 66457 and 66463.5 of the
Subdivision Map Act, and this section, a final map or parcel map shall be
deemed to be “filed” with the legislative body on the date it is submitted to
the County Surveyor in a form and condition which would permit the County
Surveyor to sign the certificate specified in Sections
8-1.503 and
8-1.505 of this chapter. For the purpose of this section, a final map or parcel
map is “filed” for record when the County Recorder accepts it for filing
pursuant to Section 66466 of the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1468, eff. May 13, 2016)
Sec. 8-1.312.   Findings.
   The Advisory Agency or the Board of Supervisors shall adopt the following
findings in the approval of a tentative parcel or subdivision map. Conversely,
the Advisory Agency or the Board of Supervisors shall deny approval of a
tentative map if it cannot make any of the following findings, based on
information submitted at the public hearing:
   (a)   The proposed map is consistent with applicable general and specific
plans as specified in Section 65451 of the Government Code;
   (b)   The design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is consistent
with applicable general and specific plans;
   (c)   The site is physically suitable for the type of development;
   (d)   The site is physically suitable for the proposed density of
development;
   (e)   The design of the subdivision provides for public improvements in
accordance with Article 9 of this title, and the Yolo County Improvement
Standards;
   (f)   The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements is not
likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably
injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;
   (g)   The design of the subdivision or type of improvements is not likely to
cause serious public health problems;
   (h)   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not
conflict with easements which are of record or are established by judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction and which have been acquired by the public at
large for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision;
provided that the Advisory Agency or Board of Supervisors as appropriate may
approve the tentative map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or
for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to
ones previously acquired by the public;
   (i)   The design of the subdivision shall provide, to the extent feasible,
for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the
subdivision;
   (j)   The discharge of waste from the proposed subdivision into an existing
community sewer system would not result in, or add to, a violation of existing
requirements prescribed by a California Regional Water Quality Control Board
pursuant to Division 7 (commencing with Section 13000) of the Water Code;
   (k)   If the proposed subdivision fronts along a public waterway, public
river or public stream, it provides for a dedication of a public easement along
a portion of the bank of the waterway, river or stream bordering or lying
within the subdivision, which easement is defined so as to provide reasonable
public use and maintenance of the waterway, river or stream consistent with
public safety;
   (l)   If the project is within the 100-year and 200-year floodplain the
project meets FEMA and local flood requirements and is consistent with the
findings required by Government Code 66474.5.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 681.229, eff. October 29,
2015; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24, 2016; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1468, eff. May 13, 2016)
Sec. 8-1.313.   Expiration and extension.
   (a)   An approved or conditionally approved tentative subdivision or parcel
map shall expire twenty-four (24) months from the date it was approved or
conditionally approved. Unless a final map is filed with the Planning, Public
Works and Environmental Services Department prior to expiration of the
corresponding tentative map, all proceedings shall terminate upon such
expiration, and any subdivision of the land shall require the filing and
processing of a new tentative map. Said application shall be identified as a
previously approved, but now expired map. A final map or parcel map may be
filed for record after the expiration date of the tentative map if an
application for said final or parcel map was filed with the Department prior to
the expiration date.
   (b)   At any time prior to the expiration of an approved or conditionally
approved tentative map, the subdivider may submit to the Planning, Public Works
and Environmental Services Department an application for an extension of the
twenty- four (24) month initial time period, pursuant to Section 66452.6I of
the Subdivision Map Act, for the tentative map and, if the application is
timely, the Advisory Agency that approved or conditionally approved the
subdivision may grant the extension. There shall be no other extensions of the
time period for the tentative map except as required by Section 66452.6 or
Section 66463.5 of the Subdivision Map Act.
   (c)   Any tentative subdivision map or vesting subdivision map is eligible
for an extension of time, provided final approval for such extension occurs
prior to the expiration of the original map. The hearing procedures for an
extension of time shall be the same as for resubmittal of the map.
   (d)   Upon filing of a timely application for an extension of time, the map
shall automatically be extended for sixty (60) days or until the application
for the extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied, whichever
occurs first. An extension of time may not be granted for more than a total of
five (5) years, but may be granted for a lesser time at the sole discretion of
the final hearing body. These extensions are exclusive of those tentative maps
approvals that are, or will be, automatically extended by the provisions of the
Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66452.21, 66452.22, 66452.23,
66452.24, 66452.25, or any subsequent similar legislation), or by the
provisions of any other similar section that may from time to time be added to
the Act.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or of the Yolo
County Code, any entitlement, development permit or other approval which would
expire pursuant to this chapter or the Yolo County Code, but which was approved
concurrently with and pertains to any approved tentative subdivision or parcel
map the expiration date of which was automatically extended by the provisions
of the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Sections 66452.21, 66452.22, and
66452.23), or by the provisions of any other similar section that may from time
to time be added to the Act, shall be extended for the same period as that
provided by said section for the approved tentative subdivision or parcel map
to which it pertains.
   (f)   Approval of a minor or major modification of a previously approved or
conditionally approved tentative map shall not affect the expiration date of a
tentative map.
   (g)   A subdivider may apply for a resubmission of the map rather than an
extension of time; in which case, the map may be approved after the expiration
date of the original map.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1468, eff. May 13,
2016; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018)
Article 4. Vesting Subdivision Maps
Sec. 8-1.401.   Purpose.
   (a)   This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter
4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the
Government Code of the State (referred to in this article as the Vesting
Tentative Map Statute) and may be cited as the “Vesting Tentative Map Law”.
   (b)   It is the purpose of this article to establish the procedures
necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute and to
supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. Except
as otherwise set forth in this article, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply to vesting tentative maps.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.402.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Vesting tentative map” shall mean a “tentative map” for a residential
subdivision, as defined in this chapter, which shall have printed conspicuously
on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map” at the time it is filed in
accordance with Section
8-1.303 of this article and is thereafter processed in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
   (b)   All other definitions set forth in this chapter shall be applicable.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.403.   Application and limitations.
   (a)   This article shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a
provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this
chapter, requires the filing of a tentative map for a residential development,
a vesting tentative map may instead be filed in accordance with the provisions
of this article.
   (b)   If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting
Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a
prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for
construction, or work preparatory to construction.
   (c)   No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting
tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the General Plan and
any applicable specific, area, or community plan or not permitted by the zoning
provisions or other applicable provisions of this Code.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (f) of this section, a
vesting map may not be filed concurrently with a general plan amendment nor
during the period a general plan amendment for the area covered by the proposed
map is in process.
   (e)   Applications for projects which require amendments to an adopted
specific, area, or community plan, or the Yolo County Zoning Code, or which
require discretionary approvals pursuant to the Zoning Code, including, but not
limited to, special development permits, use permits, development plan reviews,
exceptions, special review of parking or variances, may not include an
application for a vesting map unless all needed applications for such approvals
for the project are concurrently filed with the vesting map. Vesting maps may
not be approved with the condition that needed plan amendments, zoning and
discretionary approvals be subsequently secured.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, an application for a
vesting map may be filed concurrently with an application to amend the Yolo
County general plan provided that the area covered by the vesting map is
included in the area covered by the application to amend the general plan and
is also included in either a concurrently filed or previously filed and pending
application for a specific plan, area or community plan.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.404.   Filing.
   A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form, and have the same
contents, accompanying data, and reports, and shall be processed in the same
manner as set forth in Article 3 of this chapter for a tentative map, except
the requirements for filing a vesting map shall also include:
   (a)   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed
conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”
   (b)   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, the subdivider shall
also supply the following information in addition to the information required
by Section
8-1.306(d):
   (1)   A preliminary grading plan which shows existing topography at a
contour interval sufficient to show the general slope of the property and shows
the proposed elevations of roads at one hundred (100) foot stations, proposed
building pad elevations, and all lot corners around the periphery of the
project. The preliminary grading plan shall be prepared to a one (1) foot plus
or minus tolerance.
   (2)   A tree preservation plan which shall accurately identify all existing
trees as to species, trunk size and dripline. Trees that are proposed for
removal shall be marked “TO BE REMOVED.” Any provisions for tree preservation,
mitigation, transplanting, or new plantings shall be identified.
   (3)   A preliminary site plan showing building locations and exterior
features on each lot and indicating square footage of the lot areas. For single
family detached and zero lot line projects, the site plan may consist of a
lotting plan with typical building envelopes. Such plan shall indicate all
building setbacks, building heights, number of stories, driveway locations,
landscaped areas, and other improvements as the developer proposes to install.
   (4)   Sewer, water, storm drain, and road details and the proposed
improvements on and off the development site necessary to meet the
infrastructure and other requirements of the County General Plan, any
applicable specific plan, and the County Improvement Standards.
   (5)   In those circumstances where the project requires concurrent
discretionary approval as set forth in Section
8-1.403I and (f), all exhibits necessary for such application shall be
submitted concurrently with the application for a vesting map.
   (6)   Such other exhibits that fully depict features of the development
which the developer desires review for the purpose of approval concurrently
with the vesting map.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.405.   Vesting on approval of vesting tentative maps.
   (a)   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall
confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance
with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Section 66474.2 of
the Subdivision Map Act. However, if said Section 66474.2 is repealed, the
approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a
vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the
ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative
map is approved or conditionally approved.
   (b)   This article does not enlarge, diminish, or alter the power of the
Board of Supervisors to deny approval of the requested project or any part
thereof, or to impose conditions on the approval of a project. Nothing in this
chapter removes, diminishes, or affects the obligation of any subdivider or
local agency to comply with the conditions and requirements of any State or
Federal laws, regulations, or policies.
   (c)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a permit, approval,
extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the
following is determined:
   (1)   A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the
immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or
safety, or both; or
   (2)   The condition or denial is required in order to comply with State or
Federal laws.
   (d)   The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set
forth in Section
8-1.406, below.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.406.   Expiration.
   (a)   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall
expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same
extensions, established by this chapter for the expiration of the approval or
conditional approval of a tentative map.
   (b)   If the final map is approved, such rights shall last for the following
periods of time:
   (1)   An initial time period of one (1) year. Where several final maps are
recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative
map, such initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for
such phase is recorded.
   (2)   The initial time period set forth in subsection (1) of this section
shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a completed
application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review if such
processing exceeds thirty (30) days after the date a complete application is
filed.
   (3)   A subdivider may apply for a one (1) year extension at any time before
the initial time period set forth in subsection (1) of this section expires. If
the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal such denial to the Board
within fifteen (15) days.
   (4)   If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit
during the periods of time specified in subsections (1) through (3) of this
section, the rights referred to in this section shall continue until the
expiration of such permit or any extension of such permit.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.407.   Applications inconsistent with current policies.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this article, a property owner, or
designee, may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from
sections of the ordinances, policies, and standards described in subsection (a)
of Section
8-1.405(a) of this article, and local agencies may grant such approvals or
issue such permits to the extent the departures are authorized under applicable
laws.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 5. Final Subdivision Maps and Parcel Maps
Sec. 8-1.501.   Preparation.
   Within two years after the approval or conditional approval of a tentative
map by the Board, unless such time shall have been extended, the subdivider may
cause the subdivision to be accurately surveyed and a final map prepared and
recorded substantially in conformance with the tentative map, including all
required alterations and changes, and conforming in all particulars to the
provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this article, including the
provisions of Section
8-1.503. Similarly, a final parcel map shall be prepared within one year
following approval by the Commission, unless such time shall have been
extended, recorded substantially in conformance with the tentative map,
including all required alterations and changes, and conforming in all
particulars to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter,
including the provisions of Section
8-1.505.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.502.   Form.
   (a)   The final subdivision map shall be legibly drawn, printed, or
reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing
cloth or polyester base film, including affidavits, certificates, and
acknowledgments; provided, however, such certificates, affidavits, and
acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink
when recommended by the County Clerk-Recorder. If ink is used on polyester base
film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure
permanent legibility.
   (b)   The size of each sheet shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-six
(26) inches. A margin line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving
an entirely blank margin of one (1) inch. The subdivision number and other
designation, all drawings, affidavits, acknowledgments, endorsements,
acceptances of dedication, and seals shall be within such margin line. The
boundary of a subdivision shall be indicated by a border of light blue ink,
approximately one-eighth (1/8) inch in width, applied to the reverse side of
the tracing inside such boundary line and shall not obliterate figures or other
data.
   (c)   The scale of the map shall be one (1) inch equals one hundred (100)
feet on large areas, and one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet or one (1) inch
equals forty (40) feet on small or irregular areas unless otherwise permitted
by the Director of Planning. Variable scales for a single map, or separate
pages of a map, shall not be permitted except to show details. In any event,
the map shall show clearly all details of the subdivision with enough sheets to
accomplish this end. Whenever practicable, all lots and blocks shall be shown
in their entirety on one (1) sheet.
   (d)   Each sheet comprising the map shall contain the following:
   (1)   A title, consisting of a subdivision number assigned by the Zoning
Administrator, conspicuously placed at the top of the sheet. In addition to the
official title, a subdivision name may be shown in smaller letters immediately
below the official title;
   (2)   A subtitle, placed below the title and subdivision name, consisting of
a general description of the property being subdivided, either by reference to
recorded deeds, recorded maps, or plats of a United States survey;
   (3)   The number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the
map;
   (4)   The date of preparation and the name of the licensed surveyor or
registered civil engineer responsible for the preparation of the map;
   (5)   The north arrow, legend, scale, and notes, and the basis of bearing
for survey by reference to recorded deeds or to maps which have been recorded
previously or by a reference to the plat of a United States survey, County
Surveyor’s map, or solar or Polaris observation; and
   (6)   In the event the property included within the subdivision lies wholly
in unincorporated territory, the words “County of Yolo” shall appear in the
subdivision title, and if the property lies partly in unincorporated territory
and partly within an incorporated city, the words “Within and Adjoining the
City of ______” shall appear in the subdivision title.
   (e)   The following certificates shall appear on the final map:
   (1)   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties, with such
exceptions as provided in the Subdivision Map Act, having any recorded title
interest in the land being subdivided, consenting to the preparation and
recordation of the map and offering for dedication all parcels shown and
intended for public use, subject to any reservation contained in such offer;
   (2)   Seals required by the provisions of law and this chapter;
   (3)   As required in the Business and Professions Code of the State, the
certificate and number of either the engineer or the certificate and number of
the surveyor;
   (4)   A certificate concerning monument placements;
   (5)   A certificate for execution by the Director of Planning;
   (6)   A certificate for execution by the County Engineer;
   (7)   A certificate for execution by the County official computing
redemptions indicating that there are no liens against the subdivision for
applicable taxes or assessments;
   (8)   A certificate for execution by the Clerk of the Board indicating
approval of the map and the action concerning offers of dedication;
   (9)   A certificate for execution by the County Recorder; and
   (10)   A certificate for execution by the engineer making the soils report
when such report is required by the County.
   (f)   The final map shall show all survey and mathematical information and
data necessary to locate all monuments and to locate and retrace any and all
interior and exterior boundary lines appearing thereon. Such information and
data shall include the following:
   (1)   Radii and arc length or chord bearings, the length and central angle
for all curves, and such information as may be necessary to determine the
location of the centers of the curves;
   (2)   Reference to the California Coordinate System, Zone 2 and the Final
Map shall be prepared with the basis of bearings being the State Plan
Coordinate System; and
   (3)   Any other pertinent data required by the County Engineer.
   (g)   The final map shall show the following:
   (1)   The names of all streets as approved by the Commission;
   (2)   The number of each lot without repetition of numbers in the
subdivision;
   (3)   The designation by letter of any lot or parcel proposed to be used for
utility or other special purposes or offered for dedication;
   (4)   Easements; and
   (5)   Rights-of-way widths of streets adjoining or adjacent to the
subdivision, rights-of-way widths of streets intersecting adjacent streets, and
the exact ties to the center line or rights-of-way lines of such intersecting
streets with respect to the proposed subdivision.
   (h)   The final map shall show clearly and fully the stakes, monuments, or
other evidence found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the
subdivision. All adjacent lot lines of adjoining subdivisions, or portions
thereof, lot and block numbers, tract numbers and names, the section or grant
line, township, or other required information shall be shown. Pursuant to the
provisions of Article 9 of the Subdivision Map Act, the subdivider’s engineer
shall adequately monument the exterior boundary of the land being subdivided
prior to filing for recording of the final map. Monuments shall be installed in
accordance with the County Improvement Standards, and the location and type of
such monuments shall be shown by symbol on the map.
   (i)   Where any city or county boundary line crosses or adjoins a
subdivision, the location of such boundary line shall be clearly shown in
relation to lot lines.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.503.   Accompanying items and filing.
   (a)   The following items shall accompany the final map when submitted to
the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department for checking:
   (1)   Three (3) contact prints;
   (2)   Traverses of the subdivision boundaries and of each irregular lot and
block therein;
   (3)   A cash deposit or other guarantee, as provided in Section
8-1.905 of this chapter, in an amount estimated by the subdivider’s engineer
and approved by the County Engineer for the cost of public improvements;
   (4)   A subdivision agreement signed by the principals of the property to be
subdivided;
   (5)   A statement, or certified copy thereof, from the fire district in
which the subdivision is located that such district will serve the subdivision
provided subsequent improvements conform to the specifications and requirements
of the district and of its governing laws;
   (6)   A statement, or certified copy thereof, from the agency furnishing the
public water supply providing information as to the source and adequacy of the
supply, including the notification that such agency will serve the subdivision
if subsequent improvements conform to the specifications and requirements of
the agency;
   (7)   A statement, or certified copy thereof, from the district or agency,
if any, furnishing sanitary sewage disposal facilities that such district or
agency will serve the subdivision if the improvements conform to the
specifications and requirements of the district or agency;
   (8)   A bond guaranteeing special district assessments, if any, as provided
in the Subdivision Map Act (Section 66493);
   (9)   A statement from the Public Health Director approving the method of
sewage disposal if individual sewage disposal systems are to be used;
   (10)   Complete plans, profiles, details, and specifications of the proposed
public improvements, together with design calculations as required by the
County Engineer;
   (11)   Drainage fees, if any, and map and plan checking fees;
   (12)   A statement from the Chief Building Official that the preliminary
soils report required by Section
8-1.807 of this article has been submitted or that submission has been waived
in the manner provided by law, whether a soil investigation has been made of
each lot, whether any corrective action was recommended in the course of such
soil investigation, and that any such recommended action has been approved in
the manner required by law; and
   (13)   Any other items required by Federal, State, and County laws.
   (b)   The subdivider shall file the final map, together with the items set
forth in Section
8-1.503(a), above, with the Director of Planning for checking.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.504.   Approval, recordation and revocation.
   (a)   If the Director of Planning and the County Engineer determine that the
final map is in substantial conformity with the approved tentative map and the
provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter, s/he shall so certify
on the final map and, within twenty (20) days of submission or resubmission,
shall file such map, together with any other materials pertinent thereto, with
the Clerk of the Board for presentation to the Board. If the Director of
Planning and the County Engineer determine that substantial conformity to the
provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act or the approved
tentative map has not been made, s/he shall, within twenty (20) days from the
date of submission of the final map for approval, advise the subdivider of the
changes or additions which shall be made for such purposes and shall afford the
subdivider an opportunity to make such changes or additions.
   (b)   At the next subsequent meeting of the Board, or within a period of ten
(10) days after filing the final map with the Clerk of the Board, the Board
shall approve such map if it conforms to all the requirements of the
Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. At the time of approval of the final map,
the Board shall accept or reject any or all offers of dedication.
   (c)   As a condition precedent to the acceptance of any streets or
easements, the subdivider shall be required to improve such streets or
easements or, as an alternative, execute an agreement therefor and comply with
the provisions of this chapter in relation thereto and execute any bonds
required by the provisions of this chapter.
   (d)   Upon compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and
this chapter, the map of the subdivision shall be approved, accepted, and filed
for recording. If, at the time of approval of the final map, any streets are
rejected, the offer of dedication shall be deemed to remain open and shall not
be subject to revocation, and the Board may, by resolution at a later date and
without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and
open such streets for public use, which acceptance shall be recorded in the
office of the County Clerk-Recorder. If a resubdivision map or a map showing
reversion to acreage of a tract is subsequently filed for approval, any offers
of dedication previously rejected shall be deemed to be terminated upon the
approval of the later map by the Board.
   (e)   Prior to the final map being filed for record by the County Clerk-
Recorder, a map filing certificate, issued to or for the benefit of the County
Clerk-Recorder, shall be furnished by a title company operating under the laws
of the State, certifying that, as shown by the public records, the parties
consenting to the recordation of the map are all of the parties having a record
interest in the land subdivided whose signatures are required by the provisions
of the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.505.   Parcel maps.
   (a)   Within two (2) years after the approval or conditional approval of a
tentative parcel map by the Commission, unless such time shall have been
extended, a “final” parcel map may be prepared and recorded after certification
as to conformance to the tentative map and the provisions of the Subdivision
Map Act and this chapter.
   (b)   The parcel map shall be drawn to conform to the Subdivision Map Act
and as provided for final maps in Section
8-1.502 of this article, together with all of the certificates specified in
Section
8-1.502(e).
   (c)   The parcel map shall show clearly and fully the stakes, monuments, or
other evidence found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the division,
including any set to comply with State laws or the provisions of this chapter.
   (d)   The parcel map, together with the necessary fees and supporting data,
shall be filed with the Director of Planning for checking. If the parcel map is
found to be in substantial conformity with the approved tentative parcel map
and the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter, the Planning
Director shall present the parcel map to the Board of Supervisors for approval
and, if approved, present the map to the County Recorder for filing.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.506.   Correction and amendment of maps.
   (a)   After a final map or parcel map is filed in the office of the County
Recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map
for the reasons and in the manner set forth in Sections 66469 through 66472 of
the Subdivision Map Act.
   (b)   After a final map or parcel map is filed in the office of the County
Recorder, the conditions of approval of such filed map may be amended as
provided in this section.
   (c)   The Director of Planning, or any person having a financial interest in
conditions of approval of a filed final map or parcel map, may apply for an
amendment of such conditions. Such application shall be submitted to the
Planning Division in a form satisfactory to the Director of Planning and shall
include such information and documentation as the Director of Planning may
require.
   (d)   Upon receipt of a complete application for an amendment of such
conditions and all applicable processing fees, the Director of Planning shall
give notice in accordance with Section
8-2.211 of this chapter of a public hearing on such application to be held by
the appropriate hearing body.
   (e)   The hearing body shall be the same Advisory Agency and approval body
that approved or conditionally approved the tentative map.
   (f)   The hearing body may approve an application to amend conditions of
approval for a final map or parcel map if, after conducting a public hearing in
accordance with the required notice, it makes all of the following findings:
   (1)   There are changes in circumstances that make such conditions no longer
appropriate or necessary;
   (2)   The amendments do not impose any additional burden on the present fee
owner(s) of the property;
   (3)   The amendments do not alter any right, title or interest in the real
property reflected on the map;
   (4)   The map, as amended, will conform to the provisions of this chapter
and does not alter any previous findings made under the provisions of Section
66474 of the Subdivision Map Act; and
   (5)   The amendment does not alter any previous findings made under the
provisions of CEQA.
   (g)   Otherwise, the hearing body shall deny the application.
   (h)   The hearing and the actions of the hearing body shall be limited to
consideration of and action upon the conditions that are the subject of the
application. The decision of the hearing body shall be in writing.
   (i)   A decision by the hearing body, to approve or disapprove an
application to amend conditions of approval for a parcel map may be appealed by
any interested person to the Planning Commission if the hearing body was the
Zoning Administrator or if the hearing body was the Planning Commission to the
Board of Supervisors. A decision of the Planning Commission action on appeal
may itself be appealed to the Board of Supervisors. An appeal may be commenced
and heard only by filing with the Secretary or Clerk of the appropriate body,
within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the decision being appealed,
according to the procedure set forth in Section
8-2.225 of
Chapter 2 of this title.
   (j)   If, in order to implement an approved amendment of conditions, it is
necessary or desirable also to amend the filed final map or parcel map, the
Planning Director and the County Surveyor shall determine the appropriate
document to be recorded for such purposes and the document shall be recorded as
provided in Section 66472 of the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.507.   Resubdivisions.
   Previously subdivided real property, regardless of whether it was previously
subdivided by maps or by conveyance, may be merged and resubdivided without
first reverting to acreage by following all the procedures and requirements,
including the payment of fees, for subdividing property that are contained in
this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act. Such merger and resubdivision shall
occur automatically upon recordation of the applicable final map, parcel map,
or certificate of compliance.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.508.   Reversion to acreage.
   (a)   Property previously subdivided by final map or parcel map may be
reverted to the acreage of the parent parcel pursuant to this section and
Article I (commencing with Section 66499.11) of Chapter 6 of the Subdivision
Map Act. The reversion shall be by final map if the previous subdivision
created five (5) or more lots exclusive of any remainder parcel or by parcel
map if the previous subdivision created four (4) or less lots exclusive of any
remainder parcel, regardless of whether the previous subdivision was by final
map or parcel map.
   (b)   Proceedings may be initiated by petition of all of the owners of
record of the property or by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. An owner’s
petition shall be in a form prescribed by and shall be submitted to the
Department.
   (c)   The petition in the case of owner-initiated proceedings, or the staff
report of the Department in the case of Board-initiated proceedings, shall
include the following information:
   (1)   Adequate evidence of title to the real property within the
subdivision;
   (2)   Evidence sufficient to permit the Board of Supervisors or the Zoning
Administrator to make all of the findings required by this section;
   (3)   A tentative map in the form prescribed by the Planning Director which
delineates existing dedications which will not be vacated, new dedications
which will be required as a condition of reversion, private roads or rights-of-
way which are to remain in effect after the reversion, and such other
information as the Director may require; and
   (4)   Such other of the documents listed in Section
8-1.306 as may be required by the Director.
   (d)   A reversion to acreage map shall be processed in the same manner set
forth in Article 3 of this chapter; provided, however, the Commission shall
hold a public hearing as set forth in the Subdivision Map Act (commencing with
Section 66499.11 et seq.). After the Commission has acted on the reversion to
acreage map, it shall be processed in the same manner set forth for final maps
in this article.
   (e)   A decision made by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the
Board of Supervisors by any interested person within ten (10) calendar days.
The decision of the Board of Supervisors on appeal shall be final and
conclusive.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.509.   Findings and conditions for reversion.
   (a)   The Planning Commission or the Board of Supervisors may approve a
reversion to acreage only if it finds that:
   (1)   The Board of Supervisors has found that the dedications or offers of
dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are
unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and
   (2)   Either:
   (i)   All owners with an interest in the real property within the
subdivision have consented to the reversion; or
   (ii)   none of the improvements required to be made has been made within two
(2) years from the date the final map or parcel map which created the
subdivision was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for
completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or
   (iii)   no lots shown on the final map or parcel map which created the
subdivision have been sold within five (5) years from the date such map was
filed for record.
   (b)   The Planning Commission or the Board of Supervisors shall require as
conditions of the reversion:
   (1)   That the property owners dedicate or offer to dedicate all of those
lands and easements which the Zoning Administrator or the Board of Supervisors
finds are reasonable and in the best interest of the public health, safety or
welfare;
   (2)   That all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or
improvement securities be retained if the same are necessary to accomplish any
of the purposes of this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.510.   Recordation and effect of reversion.
   (a)   After approval of the reversion, the final map or parcel map for
reversion shall be submitted to the County Surveyor for review and
certification pursuant to Section
8-1.503 and
8-1.505, provided that the final map or parcel map may be considered to be in
substantial compliance with the tentative map even if the parent parcel to
which the subdivision is reverted is smaller than the required minimum lot
size. The final map or parcel map for reversion shall contain a certificate
signed and acknowledged by all parties whose consent would be required by
Sections 66430 and 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act for a subdivision of the
parent parcel, unless the reversion has been initiated by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors. If the County Surveyor certifies the final map or parcel
map for reversion, he or she shall deliver it to the County Recorder for
filing.
   (b)   The filing of the final map or parcel map for reversion shall
constitute a legal reversion to acreage of the land, vacation of all roads,
easements, dedications or offers of dedication not shown on the final map or
parcel map, and a merger of the previously separate lots into one (1) parcel
which shall thereafter be shown as such on the assessment roll.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.511.   Return of fees and deposits.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act,
upon filing of a final map or parcel map for reversion by the County Recorder,
all original fees and deposits designated for refund by the Board of
Supervisors shall be returned to the current owner of the property and all
original improvement securities shall be released, except those retained
pursuant to Section
8-1.905.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 6. Lot Line Adjustments and Mergers
Sec. 8-1.601.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide a simplified procedure to enable
the removal of previously approved parcel lines and lot line adjustments to be
approved by the Director of the Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services Department exercising authority as the Zoning Administrator, subject
to appeal to the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors, pursuant to
Article 2 of
Chapter 2 of this title.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.602.   Common ownership.
   For purposes of this article, “common ownership” shall exist if the title
for all properties proposed for merger is vested in the same individual,
individuals, firm, or partnership, and all persons required by the Subdivision
Map Act to consent to the recordation of a merger instrument have consented to
the merger. The definition of contiguous parcels shall be the same as
contiguous units as set forth in Section 66424 of the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.603.   Lot line adjustments and mergers of parcels authorized.
   (a)   Pursuant to Section 66412(d) of the Subdivision Map Act, the Zoning
Administrator is hereby authorized to approve lot line adjustments, as defined
in Section
8-1.201 of this chapter, upon the findings and utilizing the procedures set
forth in this article.
   (b)   Pursuant to Section 66499.20-3 of the Subdivision Map Act, the Zoning
Administrator is hereby authorized to approve the merger of contiguous parcels
under common ownership as defined in Section 8-1.602 of this article, without a
reversion to acreage, upon the findings and utilizing the procedures set forth
in this article.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.604.   Application required.
   The following materials shall accompany an application for a lot line
adjustment or merger of parcels pursuant to this article:
   (a)   The application shall be made on a form provided by the Planning,
Public Works and Environmental Services Department.
   (b)   No application shall be deemed complete or accepted for filing until
the applicant has paid the application fee. The Board hereby is authorized to
promulgate such fee by resolution, such fee not to exceed the reasonable cost
to process the application.
   (c)   The application shall include a discussion of the purpose for the
proposal, the existing and proposed configurations of the parcels, the existing
and any proposed improvements, and map diagrams and legal descriptions prepared
by a licensed surveyor or civil engineer to illustrate such items with
sufficient detail for recordation and to enable the Zoning Administrator to
determine whether the findings required by this article are satisfied by the
proposal.
   (d)   The application shall include a preliminary title report, or deeds as
necessary, covering all affected parcels.
   (e)   Applications for lot line adjustments involving two (2) or more parcel
owners shall also be accompanied by a deed or deeds as necessary to convey the
land subject to the lot line adjustment and to complete the transaction.
   (f)   All final deeds, diagrams and legal descriptions shall be in a form
suitable for recordation in the office of the County Recorder.
   (g)   All applications pursuant to this article shall include an application
for a certificate of compliance pursuant to Section 66499.35 of the Subdivision
Map Act, with a waiver of any notice or previous opportunity to be heard, such
certificate to be issued and recorded upon the approval of the merger or lot
line adjustment. Incomplete applications shall not be filed. The Zoning
Administrator shall inform the applicant of what is needed to make the
application complete.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.605.   Merger, applicant-initiated.
   Property owner(s) may request and initiate proceedings for the merger of
real property by meeting all of the requirements of this chapter and the
Subdivision Map Act, provided that all references to the proposed merger and
all references to the “subdivider” shall be deemed to be to the applicant for
the merger. Any two (2) or more contiguous lots in common ownership, regardless
of whether they were created by map or by conveyance, may be merged so as to
create one (1) new lot. The Zoning Administrator may impose those conditions,
with respect to any illegal lot(s), which it could require for the issuance of
a conditional certificate of compliance pursuant to Article 7 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.606.   Findings and conditions.
   (a)   The Zoning Administrator shall not approve any merger or lot line
adjustment pursuant to this article unless all the following findings have been
made in the affirmative:
   (1)   That the application is complete and that all record title holders who
are required by the Subdivision Map Act to consent have consented to the
proposed merger or lot line adjustment, and that the proposed merger or lot
line adjustment is in compliance with said Act;
   (2)   That the deeds to be utilized in a transaction, if necessary,
accurately describe the resulting parcels, and that the merger or lot line
adjustment will not result in the abandonment of any street or utility easement
of record;
   (3)   That if the lot line adjustment will result in a transfer of property
from one owner to another owner, that the deed to the subsequent owner
expressly reserves any street or utility easement of record;
   (4)   The adjustment is consistent with applicable building ordinances, and
that either:
   (i)   all of the resulting lots will conform to all applicable zoning
requirements including minimum parcel size, or
   (ii)   no conforming lot will be made nonconforming with applicable zoning
requirements and the adjustment will not increase the aggregate number of all
affected lots which do not meet applicable zoning requirements;
   (iii)   in the case of an antiquated subdivision and/or Certificate of
Compliance that recognizes a series of contiguous small legal lots in an
agricultural zone, the adjustment is necessary to cluster small home site
parcels of 2.5 to 4.0 acres in one area to reduce impacts to agricultural
operations, as set forth in Section
8-2.403 of this chapter;
   (5)   Approval of the lot line adjustment will not create a greater number
of parcels than originally existed;
   (6)   That the merger or lot line adjustment will not result in the
elimination or reduction in size of an access way to any resulting parcel, or
that the application is accompanied by new easements to provide access that
meet all the requirements of this code;
   (7)   That the merger or lot line adjustment is excluded from the
Subdivision Map Act, and has been reviewed pursuant to Section 66412(d) of said
Act;
   (8)   That the merger or lot line adjustment is consistent with the General
Plan;
   (9)   That the merger or lot line adjustment complies with the zoning
regulations and parcel size minimum standards as set forth in Chapter 2 of this
title, except as allowed under subsections (4)(ii) and (iii), above;
   (10)   That the Zoning Administrator is satisfied that the design of the
resulting parcels will comply with the requirements of this title and provides
for water drainage, public road access, water supply sewer system availability,
environmental protection, and all other requirements of State laws and this
code; and
   (11)   That the merger or lot line adjustment will not result in a
significant effect on the environment pursuant to the California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA) (Public Resources Code 21000 et seq.), and/or is
categorically exempt pursuant to CEQA Guidelines Section 15305, as amended.
   (12)   That, as required by the County Recorder, if there are multiple
owners involved, all deeds shall be executed simultaneously with recording the
lot line adjustment.
   (b)   The Zoning Administrator may conditionally approve a merger or lot
line adjustment as provided for in Section 66412(d) of the Subdivision Map Act,
and the conditions shall be set forth in writing and delivered to the applicant
prior to action being taken on the merger or lot line adjustment.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014, as amended by Ord. 1452, eff. January 15,
2015; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24, 2016)
Sec. 8-1.607.   Recordation and effect.
   (a)   If the Zoning Administrator approves a merger or lot line adjustment
pursuant to this article, the Zoning Administrator shall waive any requirement
for filing a parcel map, and cause a certificate of compliance to be recorded
in the office of the County Recorder along with any legal descriptions, map
diagrams, or deeds necessary to complete any transaction.
   (b)   Upon the recordation of the certificate of compliance regarding the
approval of a merger pursuant to this article, all separate parcels shown on
the merger application shall be merged into one (1) parcel for all purposes and
shall thereafter be shown as such on the assessment roll. Upon the recordation
of the certificate of compliance regarding the approval of a lot line
adjustment pursuant to this article, the previous parcels shall be merged, and
the approved resulting parcels shall be created and shall thereafter be shown
as such on the assessment roll.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.608.   Appeals and reviews.
   Prior to any action being taken by the Zoning Administrator on any merger or
lot line adjustment, the applicant shall be entitled to have the Commission
review and take action on the requested merger or lot line adjustment. The
Zoning Administrator may defer action on any merger or lot line adjustment
initiated pursuant to this article to the Commission for consideration.
Decisions of the Zoning Administrator under this article shall take effect and
appeals thereof made and considered in the manner provided for by Section
8-2.225 of
Chapter 2.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.609.   Mergers of substandard lots.
   (a)   Pursuant to the authority set forth in Article 1.5 (Section 66451.11
et seq.) of the Subdivision Map Act, a local agency may provide for the merger
of a parcel or unit with a contiguous parcel or unit held by the same owner if
any one (1) of the contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not
conform to standards for minimum parcel size, under the zoning ordinance of the
local agency applicable to the parcels or units of land and if all of the
following requirements are satisfied:
   (1)   At least one (1) of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any
structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit
was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an
accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single
structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a
contiguous parcel or unit.
   (2)   With respect to any affected parcel described in subsection (1) above,
one or more of the following conditions shall be found to exist:
   (i)   The parcel comprises less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in
area at the time of determination of merger.
   (ii)   The parcel was not created in compliance with applicable laws and
ordinances in effect at the time of its creation.
   (iii)   The parcel does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and
domestic water supply.
   (iv)   The parcel does not meet slope stability standards.
   (v)   The parcel has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and
safety equipment access and maneuverability.
   (vi)   The parcel’s development would create health or safety hazards.
   (vii)   The parcels are inconsistent with the County General Plan and any
applicable area plan or specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density
standards.
   (3)   The owner of the affected parcels has been notified of the merger
proposal pursuant to Section 66451.13, and is afforded the opportunity for a
hearing pursuant to Section 66451.14.
   (b)   A merger of parcels becomes effective when the local agency causes to
be filed for record with the recorder of the County in which the real property
is located, a notice of merger specifying the names of the record owners and
particularly describing the real property.
   (c)   Pursuant to Section 66451.13 of the Subdivision Map Act, prior to
recording a notice of merger, the local agency shall cause to be mailed by
certified mail to the then current record owner of the property a notice of
intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected parcels
may be merged pursuant to standards specified in the merger ordinance, and
advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on determination of
status and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet
the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be
filed for record with the recorder of the County in which the real property is
located on the date that notice is mailed to the property owner.
   (d)   Pursuant to Section 66451.14, at any time within thirty (30) days
after recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of
the affected property may file with the local agency a request for a hearing on
determination of status. Upon receiving a request for a hearing, the local
agency shall schedule and a public hearing, pursuant to Sections 66451.15,
66451.16. At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to
present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the standards for
merger specified in the merger ordinance.
   (e)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local agency shall make a
determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be
merged and shall so notify the owner of its determination. If the merger
ordinance so provides, a determination of nonmerger may be made whether or not
the affected property meets the standards for merger specified in Section
66451.11. A determination of merger shall be recorded within thirty (30) days
after conclusion of the hearing, as provided for in Section 66451.12.
   (f)   Any division, by any subdivider, of any unit of parcels declared
merged by this section for the purposes of sale, lease, or financing shall
constitute a “subdivision” for the purposes of this chapter and the Subdivision
Map Act and shall require compliance with this chapter and the Subdivision Map
Act.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Article 7. Certificates of Compliance
Sec. 8-1.701.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to describe the process by which certificates
of compliance and conditional certificates of compliance are issued under the
provisions of this chapter and Sections 66499.34 and 66499.35 of the
Subdivision Map Act. Any owner of a lot, or any vendee of such owner pursuant
to a contract of sale of the lot, may request a determination whether the real
property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this
chapter, and whether the County determines the lot is a “legal lot.”
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.702.   Application.
   An application for a certificate of compliance shall be on a form that is
satisfactory to the Director of Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services. The application shall be processed as described in Section
8-1.703 of this chapter. The application shall include all of the following
information:
   (a)   A certified full chain of title for the property. The applicant shall
include legible copies of all deeds affecting the property beginning with the
deed that described the property prior to its current configuration, from that
time to the present. The full chain of title must be certified as true,
accurate, and complete by a title company or other authorized entity. A
certified full chain of title is not required if the parcels were created
through a filed final map, parcel map, or official map or unless waived by the
Director of Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services. The applicant
shall include copies of all filed maps where parcels were created using the
maps; and
   (b)   A preliminary title report for the property which is dated within 60
days of the date of submittal; and
   (c)   Any maps or other supporting documents to support and clarify when and
how the parcel was created.
   (d)   Legal descriptions of the parcel(s) for which the certificate of
compliance is requested.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.703.   Review.
   (a)   If the Director of Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
is able to determine from review of the submitted materials that the lot(s) is
clearly in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision
Map Act, s/he shall issue a certificate of compliance for the lot(s) and
deliver the certificate to the applicant for recordation with the County
Recorder.
   (b)   If the Director of Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
is unable to determine from this review that the lot(s) is clearly in such
compliance, s/he shall either deny the request pursuant to authority under the
Subdivision Map Act, or issue a conditional certificate of compliance to the
applicant.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.704.   Conditional certificate of compliance.
   (a)   A conditional certificate of compliance, certifying that a lot(s) is
deemed to be in compliance with this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act,
subject to satisfaction of certain conditions precedent to the issuance of a
building permit or other grant of approval for development of the lot(s), may
be obtained pursuant to those requirements set forth below in subsections (d)
and (e) of this section.
   (b)   Any person may submit an application for a conditional certificate of
compliance for any existing lot or group of contiguous lots which have been
created, legally or illegally, by any conveyance or subdivision map. The
application shall be subject to the same requirements in effect at the time the
applicant acquired interest in the property. If the application pertains to two
(2) or more contiguous lots that were created illegally and are all owned by
the illegal subdivider, the application shall be submitted and processed in the
same manner and subject to the same requirements as an application for a parcel
map, except as otherwise provided in subsection (e). The approved conditional
certificate of compliance shall be recorded in the same manner as other final
maps and parcel maps, and once recorded shall have the same force and effect as
a filed final map or parcel map.
   (c)   An application for a conditional certificate of compliance shall not
be denied on account of the noncompliance of any lot(s) with applicable
requirements respecting:
   (1)   Lot size and configuration;
   (2)   Buildable site;
   (3)   Sewage disposal;
   (4)   Water for domestic or firefighting purposes; or
   (5)   Access.
   (d)   However, the application may be approved subject to the condition that
the lots are brought into compliance with such requirements.
   (e)   Any conditions imposed with respect to a conditional certificate of
compliance shall be limited to those which could have been imposed in
connection with a lawful subdivision of the legal parcel on the date the
present owner acquired interest in the lot(s).
   (f)   Where the present owner was the owner at the time the legal parcel was
subdivided so as to create the lot(s), the conditions shall be limited to those
which could be imposed in connection with a current lawful subdivision of such
parcel.
   (g)   Compliance with such conditions by any lot(s) to which the certificate
pertains shall be required prior to County issuance of a building permit or
other grant of development approval for said lot(s).
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 8. Design Requirements
Sec. 8-1.801.   Purpose.
   To ensure that land development shall reflect the best interests of the
people of the County, all developments pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter and all improvements installed in, over, or under any existing or
proposed right-of-way, easement, or parcel of real property of the County in
satisfaction of a condition of a variance or use permit issued pursuant to the
zoning regulations (
Chapter 2 et seq. of this title), or required by order of the Board made in a
proceeding for amending said zoning regulations by changing the boundaries of
any zone, or required in connection with the issuance of a building permit,
shall conform to the standards of design of this chapter and the County
Improvement Standards as set forth by resolution of the Board.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.802.   Streets.
   (a)   If the circulation element of the General Plan shows any street
located so that any portion thereof lies within the proposed land development,
such portion shall be shown as a street, or part of a street, within such area
in the general location shown on the General Plan unless an exception is
granted pursuant to the provisions of Article 9 of this chapter.
   (b)   The location and alignment of streets shall conform to the General
Plan and be arranged to produce the most advantageous development of the area
in which the development lies. The street pattern shall be designed in
accordance with the following standards:
   (1)   The design and construction of street improvements shall be in
accordance with the County Improvement Standards as set forth by resolution of
the Board.
   (2)   In all subdivisions, as defined in the Subdivision Map Act, except
subdivisions in planned development zones, each parcel of land shall be served
by an improved street.
   (3)   Where the side, front, or rear lines of any lots abut on a freeway,
limited access highway, or arterial, the subdivider may be required to dedicate
to the County all rights of vehicular access to and from such lots across the
lot line abutting such freeway, limited access highway, or arterial.
   (4)   Streets which are extensions of existing streets shall continue the
center lines of the existing streets, as far as practicable, either in the same
direction or by adjustment curves.
   (5)   Streets within a subdivision entering upon opposite sides of any given
street shall have their center lines located directly opposite each other if
practicable, or such center line shall be offset as set forth in the County
Improvement Standards.
   (6)   The center lines of streets shall intersect one another as nearly at
right angles as practicable, shall not be excessively curved, and shall conform
to the County Improvement Standards.
   (7)   Where a subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land, adequate or necessary
streets in the subdivision shall be extended to such adjacent unsubdivided land
to provide access, in the event of its future subdivision, and in a manner to
provide the most advantageous development of the street pattern in the area.
   (8)   In the event certain streets or alleys in a subdivision are to be
reserved for future public use and they have been approved as to location and
width, they shall be indicated on the final map and offered for irrevocable
dedication as future streets or future alleys in accordance with Section 66475
of the Subdivision Map Act. Certificates providing that the County may accept
the offer to dedicate such easements at any time shall be shown on the final
map.
   (9)   Except in unusual circumstances, a cul-de-sac street in a residential
subdivision shall have a circular end with a minimum radius of fifty-three (53)
feet on the property line and shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) feet in
length.
   (10)   Minimum and maximum street grades, minimum radii, sight distances,
and minimum length of tangents shall conform to the County Improvement
Standards.
   (11)   The grid pattern of new streets shall be oriented to align north/
south and east/west, to give a sense of place and direction in new community
areas, as well as to maximize solar access.
   (12)   Access considerations for new private driveways and encroachments
shall include the following: will the proposed use have access characteristics
different from other permitted land uses; does the proposed access have
inadequate design; will emergency vehicle access be impaired; would the
proposed access adversely affect safe operations on the adjoining roadway
system; are site distance, visibility, proximity to parking, drainage, turning
radius, angle of intersection, vertical alignment, and pavement condition
adequate for the proposed use and consistent/ equitable in relation to access
requirements for other permitted uses; proximity to other driveways and
intersections; and other relevant circumstances identified by the County.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1542, eff. October 14, 2021)
Sec. 8-1.803.   Blocks, intersections, and pedestrian ways.
   (a)   Blocks shall be designed in accordance with the County Improvement
Standards.
   (b)   Intersections shall be designed in accordance with the County
Improvement Standards.
   (c)   Pedestrian ways designed in accordance with the County Improvement
Standards may be required:
   (1)   To connect dead-end streets;
   (2)   To provide access to parks, schools, shopping centers, or similar
activities; or
   (3)   At other locations where required by the Director of Planning, Public
Works and Environmental Services.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.804.   Easements.
   (a)   Easements for storm drainage shall be provided as required. Drainage
easements shall be designed in accordance with the County Improvement
Standards. In the event the subdivision is traversed by any water course,
channel, lake, stream, or creek, the subdivider shall provide rights-of-way or
easements for storm drainage purposes, conforming substantially with the lines
of such water course, channel, lake, stream, or creek, and easements to provide
for the necessary maintenance of the channels and incidental structures.
   (b)   Easements for sewers, water, gas, electricity, cable television and
other public utilities shall be provided as required.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.805.   Lots.
   (a)   Minimum lot sizes shall conform to the standards established by the
zoning regulations (
Chapter 2 of this title) and the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   All lots shall be suitable for the purposes for which they are
intended to be sold, leased, rented, or used.
   (c)   Residential lots abutting a limited access way shall normally have
access on a frontage road, collector street, or land service street.
   (d)   Side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to the street upon
which the lot faces, as far as practicable.
   (e)   Lots with double frontage shall be avoided except where further
subdivision is anticipated or where special conditions exist and where the
Commission deems such an arrangement feasible.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.806.   Other requirements.
   (a)   Water systems. Where a public sewerage facility is available to the
subdivision but a public water supply is not, the Commission may, upon the
recommendation of the Director of Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services, require the installation of a public water system as a condition to
the approval of a tentative map.
   (b)   Wells and septic tanks. The construction and maintenance of wells and
septic tanks shall meet the applicable standards or laws of the County and the
State.
   (c)   Access to, and areas for, parks, schools, and other public places.
Where the subdivision is of such a size that the Commission deems it proper,
the Commission may require the subdivider to provide access to, or designate
suitable areas for, parks, playgrounds, schools, and other public building
sites which may be required for the use of the population in the neighborhood
or community.
   (d)   Preservation of natural features. The Commission may require such
measures as will preserve and enhance the scenic values and natural features of
the County and the conditions making for excellence of residential, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, or recreational development, in accordance with the
policies of the General Plan.
   (e)   Trees. Existing trees shall be preserved within any public way
wherever, in the determination of the Commission, such trees are suitably
located, healthy, and of desirable variety and where approved grading permits
the preservation of such trees. Where required, street trees of an approved
type shall be planted in accordance with the County Improvement Standards and
Chapter 3 of this title (the Landscape Irrigation Ordinance).
   (f)   Fire protection facilities. Fire protection facilities, including
water supply, fire hydrants, gated connections, and appurtenances to provide
adequate fire protection, shall be furnished in accordance with the standards
established by the California Fire Code, as adopted in Title 7 of this code,
provided, however, such requirements may be modified by the Commission upon
recommendation of the fire district of jurisdiction.
   (g)   Traffic barriers. Permanent type traffic barriers, in accordance with
the County Improvement Standards, shall be furnished at the dead end of streets
adjacent to undeveloped land until such streets are extended onto the adjacent
land.
   (h)   Street lighting. Street lighting may be required by the Commission
when deemed appropriate, and if required, a funding mechanism shall be provided
so that benefitting parcels fund the continued operation and maintenance of
street lighting.
   (i)   Failure to provide for facilities. The failure of the subdivider to
make provisions for required streets, highways, schools, drainage, and other
planned public facilities, or to conform to the zoning regulations (
Chapter 2 of this title) shall be reason to disapprove the tentative map.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.807.   Soils report.
   (a)   Prior to the submission of the final map, the subdivider shall file a
preliminary soils report with the Chief Building Official.
   (b)   Such report shall be prepared by a civil or geotechnical engineer who
is registered by the State, and it shall be based upon adequate test borings or
excavations in the subdivision.
   (c)   The preliminary soil report may be waived if the Chief Building
Official shall determine that, due to the department’s knowledge as to the soil
qualities of the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary.
   (d)   Such determination shall be in writing and shall be made part of the
data accompanying the final map.
   (e)   If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of critically
expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to
structural defects, a soil investigation of each lot in the subdivision shall
be prepared by a civil or geotechnical engineer who is registered by the State.
   (f)   The soil investigation report shall recommend corrective action which
is likely to prevent structural damage to each building proposed to be
constructed on the expansive soil.
   (g)   The report shall be filed with the Chief Building Official.
   (h)   The Chief Building Official shall approve the soil investigation if he
determines that the recommended corrective action is likely to prevent
structural damage to each building to be constructed on each lot in a
subdivision.
   (i)   Appeals from such determinations shall be to the Board of Appeals
created by the California Building Code (
Chapter 1 of Title 7 of this code) and shall be taken in the manner of other
appeals to that Board.
   (j)   Subsequent building permits shall be conditioned upon the
incorporation of the approved, recommended corrective action in the
construction of each building.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-1.808.   Inspections of construction.
   (a)   No improvement shall be installed in, over, or under any existing or
proposed right-of way, easement, or parcel of real property of the County until
the plans and specifications therefor have been filed, checked, and approved as
set forth in this section.
   (b)   Such plans and specifications shall be filed with the Director of
Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services and shall be accompanied by
the fees as set forth in Article 11 of this chapter.
   (c)   The time of filing, checking, and approving shall be as follows:
   (1)   If the improvements are required as a condition to the recordation of
a parcel map or final map, the time shall be as set forth in this chapter.
   (2)   If the improvements are required as a condition of a variance or use
permit issued pursuant to the zoning regulations (
Chapter 2 of this title), or in connection with the issuance of a building
permit, except as otherwise provided, the time shall be prior to the issuance
of a building permit for any building or structure on the parcel for which the
variance or use permit is granted.
   (3)   If the improvements are required by order of the Board made in a
proceeding for amending the zoning regulations (
Chapter 2 of this title) by changing the boundaries of any zone, the time shall
be prior to the adoption of the ordinance changing the zone boundaries.
   (4)   The construction of all improvements pursuant to such approved plans
and specifications shall be under the inspection of the Director of Planning,
Public Works and Environmental Services; the fees for such inspection shall be
as set forth in Article 11 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 9. Public Improvements
Sec. 8-1.901.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to describe the types of public improvements
that are required for approved subdivisions shown on final maps and parcel
maps, and the types of dedications and public improvements required in
connection with the issuance of building permits.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.902.   Improvements required for subdivisions.
   The subdivider shall agree to make all required dedications and improvements
in accordance with the County Improvement Standards and to the satisfaction of
the County Engineer. Such improvements shall be delivered in good condition and
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   (a)   Street grading, the installation of curbs and gutters where required,
and barriers where required;
   (b)   Drainage facilities and appurtenances sufficient to protect the
development from inundation, flooding, and ponding from storm waters, springs,
underground waters, or other surface waters. All drainage installations shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with the County Improvement
Standards. Improvements shall not include drainage facilities for the removal
of surface and storm waters of local or neighborhood drainage areas for which a
drainage fee is required of an applicant;
   (c)   The paving of all streets, pedestrian ways, and alleys as required;
   (d)   The installation of sidewalks as required;
   (e)   Provisions for a domestic water system in accordance with the
standards of the utility serving the area or the current County Improvement
Standards;
   (f)   Provisions for sufficient fire hydrants, gated connections, and
appurtenances to provide adequate fire protection in accordance with the
standards of the fire district serving utility and the provisions of this
chapter;
   (g)   Provisions for public sanitary sewerage facilities, appurtenances, and
connections for each lot to the sewer system as approved by the County Engineer
and such other agencies as may have jurisdiction or individual sewage disposal
systems as approved by the Public Health Director;
   (h)   Provisions for the installation of underground utilities including
electric, gas, and communication;
   (i)   Provisions for the installation of street lights;
   (j)   Street name signs at all street intersections;
   (k)   Traffic control signs and safety devices as required by the County
Engineer;
   (l)   The planting of trees as required;
   (m)   Fences or walls approved by the County Engineer constructed by the
subdivider along all property lines where the Commission determines a condition
hazardous to persons or property may exist; and
   (n)   The installation of a system of survey monuments as required by the
County Engineer.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.903.   Improvement plans for subdivisions.
   The following improvement plans, prepared under the direction of a
registered civil engineer licensed by the State, shall be submitted by the
subdivider to the County Engineer for approval at the time of submitting the
final map or parcel map pursuant to the provisions of Article 5 of this
chapter:
   (a)   The plans and specifications for all improvements required by this
chapter or by the County Engineer, as well as for other improvements proposed
to be installed by the subdivider in, over, or under any street or right-of-
way, easement, or parcel of land where improvements are required or proposed;
   (b)   A grading plan and soils report showing all earth cuts and/or fills of
five (5) feet or more;
   (c)   A certificate of approval of any of the proposed improvements of
concern to a water and sanitary or sanitation district within which all or part
of the subdivision may lie; and
   (d)   A report, including any data, profiles, contours, design calculations,
and other information which the County Engineer shall require, stating that the
drainage facilities to be installed to serve the proposed subdivision are in
full compliance with the requirements of this chapter and will accomplish
drainage in the manner stated.
   (e)   Plans and profiles and construction details shall be drawn on sheets
twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches in size.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.904.   Completion of subdivision improvements.
   Concurrently with the acceptance of the final map or parcel map, the
subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the Board, agreeing to have the
public improvements completed within the time specified in the agreement. Such
agreement shall provide a clause guaranteeing the workmanship and materials
provided in all improvements for a twelve (12) months period after acceptance
of the improvements by the Board. Such agreement may provide for an extension
of time under specified conditions. The agreement may also provide for the
termination of the agreement upon a reversion to acreage or revocation of all
or part of the subdivision.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.905.   Bonds for improvements.
   (a)   To assure that the improvements required by the provisions of this
article are satisfactorily completed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, adequate improvement security shall be furnished by the subdivider for
the cost of the improvements according to the plans and specifications in a sum
or amount equal to the estimate approved by the County Engineer. Such estimate
shall include an allowance for the administrative and legal cost as provided in
the Subdivision Map Act Section 66499.4. Partial release of such improvement
security will not be considered.
   (b)   The improvement security shall be released by the Board of Supervisors
upon the acceptance of the work or upon the revocation or reversion to acreage
of the subdivision and the abandonment of all roads and easements; provided,
however, such amount as may be determined by the County Engineer to guarantee
workmanship and materials shall remain in full force and effect for one (1)
year after the acceptance of the improvements. Such amount shall be not less
than fifteen (15) percent of the estimated cost of the public improvements.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-1.906.   Dedications and improvements - parcel maps.
   For parcel maps, the dedications and improvements required by this article
shall be limited to the dedication of rights-of-way, easements, and the
construction of reasonable offsite and onsite improvements for the parcels
being created. The scope of dedications and improvements required, and the
timing of the construction of the improvements, shall be determined by the
Director as required to protect public health and safety, and to provide for
the orderly development of the surrounding area.
(§ 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24, 2016)
Sec. 8-1.907.   Dedications and improvements - building permits.
   (a)   No building, electrical, mechanical, or plumbing permit for any
building or structure shall be issued unless the one-half (1/2) of the street
which is located on the same side of the center of the street as such lot has
been dedicated (via subdivision process in this chapter, or other instrument
acceptable to the County Engineer) and improved for the full width of the lot
so as to meet Yolo County Improvement Standards for such street or such
dedication and improvement has been assured to the satisfaction of the County
Engineer. As used in this section, the center of the street shall mean the
center of the street as shown in County Records. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to the issuance of permits under any of the
following conditions:
   (1)   That the permit is issued for the purpose of performing alterations
made necessary to protect the public health or safety upon the direction of the
Chief Building Official, Health Officer, or other authorized County
representative; or
   (2)   That the permit issued is not related to or does not cause or create a
material change in the character, occupancy, or use of the land or building
involved; or
   (3)   That the permit issued is not related to or does not cause or create a
significant enlargement or expansion of the existing use of the land or the
building involved; and
   (4)   That the permit is issued for the purpose of replacing structures
destroyed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, or acts of God. This exemption shall
be only to the extent that the replacement or restored building has the same or
less square footage as the original structure. If it is significantly larger,
or if there is a material change in the character, occupancy, or use of the
building, then this exemption shall not apply.
   None of the exemptions set forth in subsections (2) or (3) of this section
shall apply to permits for alterations, improvements, or construction costing
five thousand ($5,000) dollars or more. The valuation of such alterations,
improvements, or construction shall be based on the latest table of valuation
used to determine building permit fees.
   (b)   The maximum area of land required to be so dedicated shall not exceed
twenty-five (25%) percent of the area of any such lot which was of record on
September 1, 1969, in the office of the County Clerk-Recorder. In no event
shall such dedication reduce the lot below an area or dimension which would
produce a nonconforming parcel for its specific zoning. Should such dedication
create a substandard yard area or setback for an existing main building, no
variance shall be required to permit additions to such structure provided such
additions comply with all the other zoning regulations and provided further
such additions do not further reduce such nonconforming yard area or setback.
   (c)   No such dedication shall be required with respect to those portions of
such a lot underlying a main building which was existing on September 1, 1969.
   (d)   No additional improvements shall be required on such a lot where
complete roadway, curb, gutter, and sidewalk improvements, in a serviceable
condition and meeting all requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act,
exist within the present dedication contiguous thereto, as determined by the
County Engineer.
   (e)   No building or structure shall be erected on any such lot after
September 1, 1969, within the dedication required by the provisions of this
section.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, where property is to be
developed by the construction of any structure or building, all such structures
or buildings shall be set back as required by any applicable law of the County,
such setback to be measured from the right-of-way line of the proposed widening
or extension of any street adjacent to such property as shown in County records
or, on any existing or proposed street not shown in County records, at the
width adopted by the Board.
   (g)   The provisions of this article shall apply to all property used for
commercial business purposes which use does not require permanent structures or
buildings.
   (h)   Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of an application for a
building permit, together with all required plans and information, the County
Engineer shall either approve such application or return it to the owner or his
or her agent with the requirements of the County Engineer appended thereto.
   (i)   Where the improvements required by this article have not been
completed at the time an application is made for a building permit, except as
hereinafter provided, no building permit shall be issued until the applicant
shall submit to the County Engineer a layout plan for the property, showing all
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and drainage facilities, the location and grade, and
all driveway sizes and locations, received the approval of such layout plan by
the County Engineer, and agreed to the installation and construction of such
improvements, in accordance with the approved layout plan, concurrently with
the construction of the building for which the building permit is sought and
before the issuance of an occupancy permit therefor. The agreement shall
indemnify and hold harmless the County from any and all loss, damage, or
liability resulting from the applicant’s performance or nonperformance of his
or her liabilities under the agreement. The applicant shall obtain and file
with the County a good and sufficient improvement security in a sum or amount
equal to the estimate of the County Engineer of the cost of the required
improvement. The security shall be conditioned upon the full and faithful
performance by the applicant of the terms and conditions of the agreement.
   (j)   If the County Engineer determines that the character of the
surrounding neighborhood, the present development thereof, and the nature of
the proposed use does not require the immediate installation and construction
of the improvements required by the provisions of this article at the time of
the construction of the building or structures authorized by the building
permit, the County Engineer may waive any or all such improvement requirements
or may enter into an agreement with the owner of the property under which the
owner shall be required to install such improvements at his or her own cost and
expense at such time as the County Engineer may determine that the character of
the surrounding neighborhood and the development thereof require the
installation of such improvements.
   Such agreement shall indemnify and hold harmless the County from any and all
loss, damage, or liability resulting from the owner’s performance or
nonperformance of his or her liabilities under the agreement. The agreement
shall be binding upon the owner and his or her heirs, assigns, and successors
in interest and shall contain the promise of the owner to sign a petition
pursuant to the provisions of Division 7, Part 3, Chapter 27, of the Streets
and Highways Code of the State upon the request of the County Engineer to do
so. Such agreement shall be filed for record in the office of the County Clerk-
Recorder.
   (k)   When the County Engineer requires the installation of such
improvements, the owner, or his or her successor in interest, shall comply with
the provisions of this section relating to the approval of the layout plan for
such improvements. Under such determination, the County Engineer shall give
thirty (30) days’ notice in writing to the owner of the property to install the
required improvements. If the owner of the property refuses or neglects to
install the required improvements after such notification, such improvements
may be installed by the Department, and the cost thereof shall become a lien
and charge upon the property.
   (l)   All public improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the County Standards. Once improvements have
been constructed pursuant to the provisions of this article in accordance with
the plans and grades approved by the County Engineer, the property owner shall
not be liable for any future reconstruction of such improvements if such
reconstruction is necessitated by a change in grade or street widening.
   (m)   When all the dedications and improvements required by the provisions
of this article have been completed or have satisfied the requirements of the
County Engineer, a building permit may be issued.
   (n)   If the property owner or applicant for a building permit is
dissatisfied with any determination made by the County Engineer pursuant to the
provisions of this article, the property owner or applicant may appeal in
writing to the Board stating the reasons for his or her dissatisfaction with
the determination of the County Engineer. Such appeal shall be made within ten
(10) days after the action of the County Engineer. The appeal shall be filed
with the Clerk of the Board, and the Board shall hear the appeal within thirty
(30) days after the date of filing the appeal. Notice shall be given by the
Clerk of the Board to the County Engineer and the appellant of the date and
time of hearing the appeal.
   (o)   The provisions of this article are enacted for the protection of the
public health, safety, and welfare and shall be liberally construed to obtain
the beneficial purposes thereof.
(§ 2, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24, 2016)
Chapter 2
ZONING REGULATIONS
Sections:
Article 1. General Provisions
   
8-2.101   Title and reference.
   
8-2.102   Adoption.
   
8-2.103   Scope.
   
8-2.104   Purpose.
   
8-2.105   Authority.
   
8-2.106   Definitions.
   
8-2.107   Consistency of chapter with General Plan and land use designations.
   
8-2.108   Zoning maps.
   
8-2.109   Zoning district boundary determinations.
   
8-2.110   Minimum requirements.
   
8-2.111   Permits run with the land.
   
8-2.112   Statutory references, amendments and additions.
   
8-2.113   Interpretation, constitutionality, and severability.
   
8-2.114   Restrictions.
   
8-2.115   No relief from other provisions.
Article 2. Administrative Provisions
   
8-2.201   Intent.
   
8-2.202   Planning Agency.
   
8-2.203   Board of Supervisors.
   
8-2.204   Planning Commission.
   
8-2.205   Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department.
   
8-2.206   Zoning Administrator.
   
8-2.207   Development Review Committee.
   
8-2.208   General Plan Citizens Advisory Committees.
   
8-2.209   Application requirements.
   
8-2.210   Discretionary review and determining completeness of development
applications.
   
8-2.211   Public notice.
   
8-2.212   Approval of projects.
   
8-2.212.5   Indemnification.
   
8-2.213   Pre-application.
   
8-2.214   Zoning Clearance.
   
8-2.215   Site Plan Review.
   
8-2.216   Permits approved by the Zoning Administrator.
   
8-2.217   Use Permits.
   
8-2.218   Variances.
   
8-2.219   Parcel and subdivision maps.
   
8-2.220   Other ministerial and discretionary permits.
   
8-2.221   Zone Boundary Adjustments.
   
8-2.222   Rezonings.
   
8-2.223   General Plan Amendments.
   
8-2.224   Code Amendments.
   
8-2.225   Appeals.
   
8-2.226   Violations.
   
8-2.227   Use Classification System.
Article 3. Agricultural Zones
   
8-2.301   Purpose.
   
8-2.302   Agricultural Zones.
   
8-2.303   Agricultural Use Types Defined.
   
8-2.304   Tables of Agricultural Permit Requirements.
   
8-2.305   Table of Development Requirements.
   
8-2.306   Specific Use Requirements and Performance Standards.
   
8-2.307   Definitions.
Article 4. Special Agricultural Regulations
   
8-2.401   Clarksburg Agricultural District Overlay (AD-O) Zone.
   
8-2.402   Siting Development Standards for New Homes in Agricultural Zones.
   
8-2.403   Clustered Agricultural Housing.
   
8-2.404   Agricultural Conservation and Mitigation Program.
   
8-2.405   In-Lieu Agricultural Mitigation Fee.
   
8-2.406   Transfer of Development Rights Program (reserved).
   
8-2.407   Williamson Act Land Use Contracts.
Article 5. Residential Zones
   
8-2.501   Purpose.
   
8-2.502   Residential Zones.
   
8-2.503   Residential Use Types Defined.
   
8-2.504   Tables of Residential Permit Requirements.
   
8-2.505   Table of Residential Development Requirements.
   
8-2.506   Specific Use Requirements or Performance Standards.
   
8-2.507   Definitions
Article 6. Commercial Zones
   
8-2.601   Purpose.
   
8-2.602   Commercial Zones.
   
8-2.603   Commercial Use Types Defined.
   
8-2.604   Tables of Commercial Permit Requirements.
   
8-2.605   Table of Development Requirements.
   
8-2.606   Specific Use Requirements or Performance Standards.
   
8-2.607   Definitions.
Article 7. Industrial Zones
   
8-2.701   Purpose.
   
8-2.702   Industrial Zones.
   
8-2.703   Industrial Use Types Defined.
   
8-2.704   Tables of Industrial Permit Requirements.
   
8-2.705   Table of Development Requirements.
   
8-2.706   Specific Use Requirements or Performance Standards.
   
8-2.707   Definitions.
Article 8. Public and Open Space Zones
   
8-2.801   Purpose.
   
8-2.802   Public and Open Space Zones.
   
8-2.803   Public and Open Space Use Types Defined.
   
8-2.804   Tables of Public and Open Space Permit Requirements.
   
8-2.805   Table of Development Requirements.
   
8-2.806   Specific Use Requirements or Performance Standards.
   
8-2.807   Definitions.
Article 9. Specific Plan and Overlay Zones
   
8-2.901   Purpose.
   
8-2.902   Specific Plan Zone.
   
8-2.903   Overlay Zones.
   
8-2.904   Use Types Defined.
   
8-2.905   Table of Permit Requirements.
   
8-2.906   Specific Use Requirements or Performance Standards.
   
8-2.907   Definitions.
Article 10. General and Special Development Standards
   
8-2.1001   Purpose.
   
8-2.1002   Area of lots.
   
8-2.1003   Front yards.
   
8-2.1004   Height regulations.
   
8-2.1005   Fences and walls, hedges, and trees.
   
8-2.1006   Landscaping.
   
8-2.1007   Nonconforming buildings and uses.
   
8-2.1008   Outdoor storage in residential zones.
   
8-2.1009   Public utility lines and structures.
   
8-2.1010   Projections into yards and courts.
   
8-2.1011   Pools.
   
8-2.1012   Commercial coaches.
   
8-2.1013   Manufactured or mobile homes and trailers.
   
8-2.1014   Mobile home parks.
   
8-2.1015   Massage therapy services.
Article 11. Energy and Telecommunications Development Standards
   
8-2.1101   Co-generation facilities.
   
8-2.1102   Wireless telecommunication facilities.
   
8-2.1103   Small and large wind energy systems.
   
8-2.1104   Solar energy systems.
   
8-2.1105   Energy storage facilities.
   
8-2.1106   Major electrical transmission and distribution facilities.
Article 12. Sign Standards
   
8-2.1201   Purpose.
   
8-2.1202   Definitions.
   
8-2.1203   Prohibited signs.
   
8-2.1204   Nonconforming signs.
   
8-2.1205   Signs and sign changes allowed without Site Plan Review.
   
8-2.1206   Sign application and approval requirements.
   
8-2.1207   General standards for signs.
   
8-2.1208   Design standards for signs.
   
8-2.1209   Substitution of non-commercial speech.
Article 13. Off-street Parking and Loading
   
8-2.1301   Purpose.
   
8-2.1302   Definitions.
   
8-2.1303   Applicability.
   
8-2.1304   General parking provisions.
   
8-2.1305   Off-street parking in Downtown Mixed Use (DMX) zones.
   
8-2.1306   Number of parking spaces required.
   
8-2.1307   Special parking space requirements.
   
8-2.1308   Loading space requirements.
   
8-2.1309   Determination of fractional spaces.
   
8-2.1310   Adjustments to parking requirements.
   
8-2.1311   Development standards.
   
8-2.1312   Landscaping and screening.
   
8-2.1313   Paving.
   
8-2.1314   Recreational and commercial vehicle parking in residential zones.
Article 14. Cannabis Land Use Ordinance
   
8-2.1401   Relationship to other county cannabis regulations.
   
8-2.1402   Purpose.
   
8-2.1403   Definitions.
   
8-2.1404   Applicability.
   
8-2.1405   Cannabis use categories and types.
   
8-2.1406   Cannabis permit requirements.
   
8-2.1407   Table of cannabis development regulations.
   
8-2.1408   Specific use requirements and performance standards.
   
8-2.1409   Specific cannabis restrictions and concerns.
   
8-2.1410   Application submittal and processing.
   
8-2.1411   Reporting and inspections.
   
8-2.1412   Enforcement.
   
8-2.1413   Effectiveness.
Article 1: General Provisions
Sec. 8-2.101.   Title and reference.
   This
Chapter 2 shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “Zoning Regulations” or
“Zoning Code” of Yolo County. Reference to section numbers herein is to the
sections of this title or chapter. In any administrative action taken by any
public official pursuant to the authority set forth in this chapter, the use of
the term “Zoning Regulations” or “Zoning Code”, unless further modified, shall
also refer to and mean the provisions of this chapter. The accompanying
development regulations in the other chapters of Title 8 shall be known as, and
may be cited as, the “Land Development Regulations” or “Development
Regulations” of Yolo County.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.102.   Adoption.
   There is hereby adopted a zoning plan for the County, as provided in
Chapter 4 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State. This title
constitutes a precise plan for the use of land in conformity with the adopted
General Plan, any adopted Specific Plans and Area Community Plans, and all Plan
standards.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.103.   Scope.
   The provisions of this title shall apply to all lands and all owners of
lands within all of the unincorporated areas of the County and shall be
applicable not only to private persons, agencies, and organizations but also to
all public agencies and organizations to the full extent that such provisions
may now or hereafter be enforceable in connection with the activities of any
such public agency or organization.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.104.   Purpose.
   The provisions of this title are adopted to promote and protect the public
health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare; to provide a
plan for sound and orderly development; to ensure social and economic stability
within the various zones established by the provisions of this title; to
implement the Yolo County General Plan; and to achieve the following
objectives:
   (a)   To implement the General Plan and to guide and manage the future
growth of the County in compliance with the General Plan;
   (b)   To regulate land use in a manner that will encourage and support the
orderly development and beneficial use of lands in the County;
   (c)   To minimize adverse impacts on the public from inappropriate location,
use or design of building sites, land uses, or other forms of land development
by providing appropriate standards for development;
   (d)   To protect and enhance the significant agricultural, biological,
natural, historic, archaeological, and scenic resources within the County;
   (e)   To protect the members of the public and property from health and
safety concerns such as flooding, earthquakes, fire and other dangers; and
   (f)   To assist the public in identifying and understanding regulations
affecting the use of land in the County.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.105.   Authority.
   This title is adopted pursuant to the following authorities:
   (a)   Local Ordinances and Regulations, California Constitution, Article XI,
Section 7.
   (b)   Planning and Land Use, California Government Code Title 7.
   (c)   California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), California Public
Resource Code, Division 13, and CEQA Guidelines, Title 14 of the California
Code of Regulations.
   (d)   California Subdivision Map Act, California Government Code, Division
2.
   (e)   State Mining and Reclamation Act, California Public Resources Code,
Division 2, Chapter 9.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.106.   Definitions.
   (a)   Scope. For the purposes of this title, unless otherwise apparent from
the context, certain words and phrases used in this title are defined in the
individual chapters, articles, and sections, and are cumulatively listed in
Chapter 14 of this title. The meaning and construction of words and phrases as
set forth herein shall apply throughout this title. If a word is not defined in
this title, the definition provided in the latest edition of the Uniform
Building Code, as adopted by the County, shall be applicable. If said word is
not defined in the latest edition of the Uniform Building Code, as adopted by
the County, the definition provided in Merriam-Webster's Dictionary shall be
used.
   (b)   Rules of construction. The following general rules of construction
shall apply to the textual provisions of this title:
   (1)   Chapter and section references. "Chapter" means a chapter of the
ordinance codified in this title unless some other ordinance is specifically
mentioned. "Section" means a section of the ordinance codified in this title
unless some other ordinance is specifically mentioned. "Subsection" means a
subsection of the section in which the term occurs unless some other section is
specifically mentioned.
   (2)   Headings. Section and subsection headings contained herein shall not
be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning,
or intent of any provision of this title.
   (3)   Illustrations. In case of any differences of meaning or implication
between the text of any section or chapter and any illustration, the text shall
control.
   (4)   Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   (5)   Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.
   (6)   Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future tense includes the present tense.
   (7)   Shall and May. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.107.   Consistency of chapter with General Plan and land use
designations.
   All actions, approvals, and procedures taken with respect to, or in
accordance with, this title and chapter shall be consistent with the Yolo
County General Plan. In the event this title or chapter becomes inconsistent
with the Yolo County General Plan by reason of the adoption of a new General
Plan or by amendment of the existing General Plan or any of its elements, this
title shall be amended within a reasonable time so that it is consistent with
the newly adopted General Plan or remains consistent with the existing General
Plan as amended. Additionally, all amendments to this title and chapter beyond
those previously described, shall be consistent with the Yolo County General
Plan.
   The following table illustrates the consistency of the various zoning
districts in this chapter with the land use designations of the General Plan.
In the event of a conflict between a land use designation of the General Plan
and the underlying zoning of a property, the General Plan designation will
prevail.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1490, eff. August 17,
2017)
Sec. 8-2.108.   Zoning maps.
   A series of zoning maps, to be known collectively as the “Zoning Maps of the
County of Yolo,” shall be maintained by the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department.
   (a)   Contents. The zoning maps shall show the designations and boundaries
of each zone and shall show any base data that the Director of the Planning,
Public Works and Environmental Services Department deems useful or that the
Board of Supervisors directs;
   (b)   Revisions. The Director shall revise the zoning maps to show
amendments, including changes in designations, rezoning of property, and
clarification of zone boundaries; and
   (c)   Incorporation. The zoning maps and all notations, references, data,
and other information contained therein are made a part of this title and
chapter by reference herein.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.109.   Zoning district boundary determinations.
   Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of a zoning district as
shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   (a)   Lot lines. Where a zoning boundary line follows or coincides
approximately with a lot line or a property ownership line, the zoning boundary
line shall be construed as following the lot line or property ownership line.
Table 8-2.107
General Plan and Zoning Consistency
General Plan Land Use Designation   Zoning Districts (Symbol)
(Symbol)
                                    Agricultural Intensive (A-N)
                                    Agricultural Extensive (A-X)
Agriculture (AG)                    Agricultural Commercial (A-C)
                                    Agricultural Industrial (A-I)
                                    Agricultural Residential (A-R)
Residential Rural (RR)              Residential Rural-5 acre (RR-5)
                                    Residential Rural-1 acre (RR-2)
Residential Low (RL)                Low Density Residential (R-L)
Residential Medium (RM)             Medium Density Residential (R-M)
Residential High (RH)               High Density Residential (R-H)
Commercial Local (CL)               Local Commercial (C-L)
                                    Downtown Mixed Use (DMX)
                                    General Commercial (C-G)
Commercial General (CG)             Downtown Mixed Use (DMX)
                                    Highway Service Commercial (C-H)
                                    Light Industrial (I-L)
Industrial (IN)                     Heavy Industrial (I-H)
                                    Office Park Research and Development
                                    (OPRD)
Parks and Recreation (PR)           Parks and Recreation (P-R)
Open Space (OS)                     Public Open Space (POS)
Public/Quasi-Public (PQ)            Public/Quasi-Public (PQP)
Specific Plan (SP)                  Specific Plan (S-P)
                                    Natural Heritage Overlay (NH-O)
                                    Agricultural District Overlay (AD-O)
Natural Heritage Overlay (NHO)      Delta Protection Overlay (DP-O)
Agricultural District Overlay (ADO) Sand and Gravel Overlay (SG-O)
Delta Protection Overlay (DPO)      Sand and Gravel Reserve Overlay (SGR-O)
Mineral Resource Overlay (MRO)      Tribal Trust Overlay (TT-O)
Tribal Trust Overlay (TTO)          Airport Overlay (A-O)
                                    Planned Development (PD) Overlay
                                    Special Building (B) Overlay
 
   (b)   Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following street
and alley lines or lot line, such lines shall be construed to be the boundary
of the said zone, and the following shall apply:
   (1)   When two (2) zones are separated by a street or alley, the zone
boundary shall be the centerline of the street or alley, unless otherwise
specified, and
   (2)   When a residential zone is separated from any other zone by a street
or alley, the residential zone boundary shall include the street or alley.
   (c)   Where any public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned,
the regulations applicable to abutting properties shall apply to the centerline
of such vacated or abandoned street or alley;
   (d)   Where any private right-of-way or easement of any railroad, canal,
transportation, or public utility company is vacated or abandoned, the
regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to the centerline of
such vacated or abandoned property;
   (e)   For unsubdivided property, or in instances where a zone boundary
divides a lot, the location of the zone boundary shall be determined by the
Director unless the zone boundary is indicated by dimensions.
   (f)   Scale on the zoning map. Where a zoning boundary line does not
coincide approximately with a lot line or property ownership line, the zoning
boundary line shall be determined by the use of the scale designated on the
zoning map.
   (g)   Riverfront. Where a zoning boundary line follows the riverbank of the
Sacramento River, old river channel, or Putah Creek, the zoning boundary line
shall be construed as following the ordinary low water line of such riverbank.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7,
2018)
Sec. 8-2.110.   Minimum requirements.
   The provisions of this title are considered to be minimum requirements. The
County may establish more stringent requirements where deemed necessary.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.111.   Permits run with the land.
   All development permits shall run with the land. Permits are not tied to
individuals, including those persons who applied for the permit or who owned
the property at the time the permit was issued.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.112.   Statutory references, amendments, and additions.
   Whenever reference is made to any portion of the ordinance codified in this
title, or of any other ordinance of this County or of any law of this State,
the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.113.   Interpretation, constitutionality, and severability.
   (a)   Ambiguities. Unless otherwise provided, any ambiguity concerning the
content or application of this title shall be resolved by the director.
   (b)   Invalidity. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of
this title is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title.
The Board declares that it would have passed this title and every section,
subsection, clause, and phrase thereof, notwithstanding that one or more
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared
unconstitutional.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.114.   Restrictions.
   It is not intended by this title to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. Where this title
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or upon the
height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or
required by other ordinances, rules, or regulations, or by easements,
covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this title shall prevail.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.115.   No relief from other provisions.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided, no provision of this title shall
be construed as relieving any party to whom a use permit, variance, or other
development approval has been issued from any other provision of State or
Federal law or from any provision, ordinance, rule, or regulation of the County
requiring a license, franchise, or permit to accomplish, engage in, carry on,
or maintain a particular business, enterprise, occupation, transaction, or use.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 2: Administrative Provisions
Sec. 8-2.201.   Intent.
   The intent of this article is to specify the responsibilities of the various
County agencies, groups, and offices in implementing this title; to set forth
administrative provisions related to the processing of applications and
permits; and to identify Use Classifications.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.202.   Planning Agency.
   A Planning Agency for Yolo County is hereby created and established. It
shall consist of the following:
   (a)   Board of Supervisors;
   (b)   Planning Commission;
   (c)   Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department; and
   (d)   Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.203.   Board of Supervisors.
   The Board of Supervisors has the following functions as they apply to this
title:
   (a)   To exercise all appointing power provided under State law and this
title, including the appointment of the Director of the Community Development
Department, the members of the Planning Commission, and the members of the
citizens advisory committees;
   (b)   To adopt the General Plan, Master Plans, Public Financing Plans,
Specific Plans, Area or Community Plans, regulations, ordinances, and
environmental guidelines;
   (c)   To be the final appellate body on all matters as specified in this
title;
   (d)   To annually review the report on the status of the General Plan, and
the Capital Improvement Program of the County for conformity with the General
Plan, pursuant to Article 7 (commencing with Section 65400) of the Government
Code;
   (e)   To serve as the legislative body as that term is used in the
Subdivision Map Act;
   (f)   To determine that there has been adequate environmental review under
the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act, of all matters the
Board of Supervisors is considering.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.204.   Planning Commission.
   The Planning Commission’s role as part of the Planning Agency shall be as
provided in this section and in the internal standing rules adopted by the
Commission. The Planning Commission shall have the following functions in the
administration of this title and related regulations and policies:
   (a)   Prepare, periodically review, and revise, as necessary, the General
Plan and the accompanying Specific Plans and Area or Community Plans for the
County;
   (b)   Consider and recommend amendment, to the General Plan and the other
plans;
   (c)   Investigate and make recommendations regarding reasonable and
practical means for implementing the General Plan and accompanying plans;
   (d)   Consider and recommend amendments to this title;
   (e)   Interpret the text of the General Plan and the plans as they relate to
this title;
   (f)   Interpret the maps of the General Plan as they relate to the text of
the General Plan;
   (g)   Develop and maintain any Specific Plans, or any Area or Community
Plans, necessary or desirable for the implementation of the General Plan;
   (h)   Consider and recommend upon applications for Specific Plans, and any
Area or Community Plans;
   (i)   Annually review the Capital Improvement Program of the County for its
conformity with the General Plan, any Specific Plans, any Area or Community
Plans, and all elements and parts of the General Plan, and provide a report
concerning said Capital Improvement Plan to the Board of Supervisors;
   (j)   Serve as the appellate body for discretionary staff decisions;
   (k)   Review and act upon referrals or appeals from the Floodplain
Administrator;
   (l)   Act as the advisory agency, as that term is used in the Subdivision
Map Act, on Tentative Subdivision and Parcel Maps;
   (m)   Review and act upon applications requiring public hearings, except
those public hearings held by the Zoning Administrator;
   (n)   Act as the Business License Appeal Board according to the process set
forth in
Title 12, Chapter 1;
   (o)   Act as the Historic Preservation Commission, and review and act upon
applications as set forth in
Title 8, Chapter 8;
   (p)   Determine that there has been adequate environmental review under the
provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act, of all matters the
Planning Commission is considering;
   (q)   Recommend changes to the Local CEQA Guidelines for the County; and
   (r)   Perform such other functions as the Board of Supervisors may require,
including conducting studies and preparing plans other than those authorized by
Title 7 of the Government Code.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.205.   Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department.
   The Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department, and/or the
Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Director, shall have the
following functions in the administration of the title and related regulations
and policies:
   (a)   Serves as Secretary to the Planning Commission;
   (b)   Advise Board and Commission. Provides administrative support and
professional advice to the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors;
   (c)   Performs special studies and surveys as directed by the Board of
Supervisors;
   (d)   Performs the duties required for the proper preparation and
administration of the General Plan, as provided by law and ordinance;
   (e)   Performs the duties required for the proper preparation and
administration of Specific Plans, Area or Community Plans, and regulations as
provided by law and ordinance;
   (f)   Promotes public interest in, comment on, and understanding of the
General Plan and regulations relating to it;
   (g)   Consults and advises with public officials and agencies; public
utility companies; civic, educational, professional, and other organizations;
and citizens concerning the preparation and implementation of the General Plan;
   (h)   Has the authority to make formal interpretations of the General Plan
text, policies and diagrams, subject to appeal to the Planning Commission and
Board of Supervisors, including the following responsibilities:
   (1)   Accept and interpret as substantially consistent minor variations from
the land use diagram and other figures, based on actual field measurements,
engineering and/or surveying.
   (2)   Determine whether or not a proposed modification to a physical
component of the General Plan is “substantive,” thus triggering an amendment of
the General Plan within the meaning of Government Code Section 65385(b).
   (3)   Make an interpretation, binding upon the County, as to whether the
original intent and purpose of the General Plan are still met, i.e., no adverse
effects on connectivity or livability, and no change in total area or amount of
specific land uses, density, number of units, street capacity, amenities,
roadway level of service, etc. Said modification shall not be interpreted as
“substantive.”
   (4)   Interpretation of General Plan text, policies, and diagrams is an
administrative decision without notice and hearing, except that an applicant
can appeal the Director’s decision pursuant to Section
8-2.225.
   (i)   Promotes the coordination of local plans and program, with the plans
and programs of other public agencies;
   (j)   Provides an annual report to the Board of Supervisors on the status of
the General Plan and progress in its implementation;
   (k)   Administers the County Code including the Zoning Regulations of this
chapter;
   (l)   Prepares and maintains local guidelines for the implementation of the
California Environmental Quality (Yolo County’s Local CEQA Guidelines), and
conducts environmental assessments pursuant to the California Environmental
Quality Act and the Local Guidelines as are necessary for the consideration of
projects, as defined therein, when the exercise of authority vested by this
article in the Department or the Zoning Administrator results in the
consideration of a project as defined by the California Environmental Quality
Act; and
   (m)   Review and act upon all applications requiring Site Plan Review as
required under Section
8-2.215.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.206.   Zoning Administrator.
   The Director of the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Department or designee shall appoint the Zoning Administrator to perform such
duties and exercise such authority as set forth in this article. The Zoning
Administrator is hereby authorized to delegate to such appropriate members of
the staff of the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department
the powers and duties of the Zoning Administrator as set forth in this article.
Pursuant to Section 65901 of the Government Code of the State, the powers and
duties of the Zoning Administrator shall be as follows:
   (a)   Approve certain permits, including Minor Use Permits, Minor Variances,
Lot Line Adjustments, Certificates of Compliance, and other permits as set
forth in this title, and authorize such modifications as are set forth in this
article;
   (b)   Act as the advisory agency, as provided in the Subdivision Map Act
(Government Code Section 66415), for Lot Line Adjustments and Mergers, and
Notices of Violation;
   (c)   Provide such public notice as is required by the State Planning Law or
this chapter prior to issuing any such permit or granting such modification;
and provide such additional notice as is appropriate, in the discretion of the
Zoning Administrator; and
   (d)   Conduct public hearings and convene and preside over meetings which
are authorized or required by the State Planning Law, this chapter, or Federal,
State, or County laws or regulations, or when public hearings are appropriate,
in the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, due to public interest in a
project.
   (e)   When, in the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, there is
significant public interest in a project, or the decision on a project involves
policy considerations which should be reviewed by the Planning Commission, the
Zoning Administrator may elect to refer the case, with or without a
recommendation, to the Commission for decision. The Commission shall apply the
standards set forth in this article, as well as other applicable statutes,
ordinances, rules, and regulations, in making any such decision on the referred
matter; and
   (f)   Make such environmental assessments pursuant to the California
Environmental Quality Act as are necessary for the consideration of projects,
as defined therein, when the exercise of authority vested by this article in
the Zoning Administrator results in the consideration of a project as defined
by the California Environmental Quality Act.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.207.   Development Review Committee.
   The Yolo County Planning Agency has established a Development Review
Committee (DRC), a group of primarily County agencies, which meets to discuss
and review all major discretionary development applications prior to when they
are set for public hearing. The DRC generally includes representatives from the
Planning Division; Public Works; the Building Division; Environmental Health;
Economic Development; the Fire District; the Agricultural Commissioner; the
Local Agency Formation Commission staff; and any other agencies that may have
review/permitting authority.
   The DRC generally meets once per month at a set time. The Planning Division
coordinates the DRC meetings, sends out agendas and memorandum, and takes
meeting notes. The DRC will normally meet three times during the review of a
major discretionary project. The first DRC meeting will review the application
for completeness. The second DRC meeting will review the draft Conditions of
Approval and the environmental analysis that has been prepared by the project
planner. A third DRC “pre-construction” meeting will review the approved
Conditions of Approval with the applicant or contractor after project approval
and prior to construction. The DRC meetings are internal County meetings that
are closed to the public; however, the project applicant and/or their
representative are encouraged to attend second and third meetings, but not the
first meeting.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.208.   General Plan Citizens Advisory Committees.
   Although not a part of the Planning Agency, Yolo County encourages and
supports several General Plan or land use Citizens Advisory Committees. The
purpose of the appointed General Plan Citizens Advisory Committees is to
provide local input and recommendations to the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department on implementation of the County General Plan,
any local plans, and related land use matters. Citizens Advisory Committees
consider and make recommendations to the Planning Commission on all
discretionary applications that are received by the County within the
designated committee comment area. Members of the Citizens Advisory Committees
are appointed by the Yolo County Board of Supervisors. The Citizens Advisory
Committees abide by adopted Bylaws, approved by the Board of Supervisors. Each
Citizens Advisory Committee adopts their own Standing Rules, which may set
detailed rules and procedures for their own local committees, so long as they
remain consistent with the Bylaws.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.209.   Application requirements.
   The following general provisions shall apply to the development applications
that are subject to public hearing before the Zoning Administrator, Planning
Commission, or the Board of Supervisors.
   (a)   The requirements specified herein are considered minimum and may be
expanded or modified by specific application requirements as set forth on
application forms prepared by the Department for specific types of permits.
   (b)   At the discretion of the Director, a “pre-application” submittal and
conference, as set forth in Section
8-2.213, may be encouraged or required. The purpose of such a pre-application
submittal shall be to ensure that the applicant is aware of issues and
requirements related to the project.
   (c)   Applications shall be filed with the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department on forms provided by that Department and
shall, at a minimum, contain the following:
   (1)   Name and address. The name, address, and signature of the applicant
and, for privately initiated, property-specific applications, the name,
address, and signature of the property owner;
   (2)   A statement of the proposed new construction or use.
   (3)   A Site or Plot Plan showing the following:
   (i)   The lot lines;
   (ii)   The adjoining or nearest roads;
   (iii)   The locations and dimensions of pertinent existing improvements,
including on-site and nearby off-site wells and leachfields;
   (iv)   The locations and dimensions of proposed improvements, including on-
site wells and leachfields; and
   (v)   Any other dimensions and data necessary to show that yard
requirements, parking requirements, loading requirements, use requirements, and
all other provisions of this chapter or any other title of the County Code are
fulfilled.
   (4)   A statement from the applicant that the proposed project is consistent
with the General Plan text and maps;
   (5)   A statement from the applicant that he or she has read the Design
Guidelines that apply to the project and the project has been designed to be as
consistent with the Guidelines as is feasible;
   (6)   Other documents, drawings, and plans as required by the Director; and
   (7)   A fee shall be submitted, as provided by a fee schedule approved by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.210.   Discretionary review and determining completeness of
development applications.
   (a)   Processing and determining completeness of project applications shall
be in accordance with the Permit Streamlining Act, Section 65920 et seq,
Chapter 4.5 of the State Planning and Zoning Laws of the California Government
Code, and
Chapters 1 and
2 of this Code. The Permit Streamlining Act applies to all discretionary
development projects that are quasi-adjudicatory actions such as approvals of
Use Permits, Tentative Subdivision Maps, and Variances. The Permit Streamlining
Act does not apply to ministerial projects such as building permits, or to
legislative or quasi-legislative projects such as rezoning requests, and
General Plan Amendments (Government Code section 65928 and related court
interpretations).
   (b)   After an application has been filed and appropriate fees have been
paid, the application shall be examined by staff of the Planning Services
Division and other appropriate County departments, to determine whether it
contains all of the required information and is complete for the purposes of
complying with Section 65943 of the Government Code. No later than 30 days
following the submittal of the application, the applicant shall be notified in
writing whether the application is deemed by staff to be complete or
incomplete. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the applicant
shall be notified in writing of the reasons therefor and informed of the
information still needed to make the application complete.
   (c)   If the application together with the submitted materials are
determined not to be complete, and the applicant disagrees, the applicant may
appeal the staff decision to the Planning Commission in accordance with the
appeal procedure specified in Section
8-2.225. A final written determination on the appeal shall be made not later
than sixty (60) calendar days after receipt of the applicant’s written appeal.
If the final written determination on the appeal is not made within the sixty
(60) day period, the application with the submitted materials shall be deemed
complete.
   (d)   Upon written notification to the applicant, processing of an
incomplete application may be terminated if no reasonable effort has been made
by the applicant to complete the application for a period of six (6) months
from the date of notification of incompleteness. All unused fees shall be
refunded to the applicant. The Planning Director on written request by the
applicant showing good cause may grant an extension of this six (6) month
period.
   (e)   In addition to the standards and findings set forth in this title, the
Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department may prepare
supplemental guidelines for the submission of applications and minimum
standards, and criteria for approval of applications.
   (f)   All discretionary projects shall be reviewed for consistency with the
Countywide General Plan text and Land Use maps. A project application not
determined to be consistent with the General Plan shall be considered
incomplete.
   (g)   The discretionary review of development proposals shall evaluate and
address impacts on the rural landscapes and views. Any potential for land use
incompatibilities shall require incorporation of design features to reduce
potential impacts, to the greatest extent feasible.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.211.   Public notice.
   Notification to the public of public hearings on development applications
shall be given in accordance with Section 65090 et seq. of the California
Government Code and the provisions of this section. Notice of the time, place,
and purpose of the public hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days before
the hearing in the following manner:
   (a)   By at least one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation
in the County;
   (b)   Wherever practical, by mailing a notice, postage prepaid, to the
owners of all property within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior
boundaries of the property involved, using for such purpose the last known name
and address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the
County. If determined to be necessary by the Director to reach an affected
group in an agricultural or rural residential area, the radius of notified
property owners may be expanded; and
   (c)   When deemed appropriate by the Director, notice may also be given by
posting notices not more than five hundred (500) feet apart along each and
every street upon which the property abuts for a distance of not less than
three hundred (300) feet in each direction from the exterior limits of such
property.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.212.   Approval of projects.
   (a)   Approval of project applications shall be determined in accordance
with applicable State laws, including Section 65920 et seq. (Permit
Streamlining Act), Section 65950 et seq. (Approval of Development Permits), and
Section 66410 et seq. (Subdivision Map Act), of the California Government Code,
and this section.
   (b)   The Planning Director, Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, and
the Board of Supervisors may impose reasonable conditions on the approval of
any permit or entitlement granted pursuant to this article in order to find or
insure compliance of the use with the applicable requirements of this chapter
or Federal, State, or County laws or regulations, or to provide the mitigation
of environmental impacts caused by the use. Such conditions shall be in
writing.
   (c)   Decisions of the Planning Director, Zoning Administrator, and Planning
Commission under this article shall take effect, and appeals thereof made and
considered, in the manner provided in Section
8-2.225 of this article.
   (d)   The Board is hereby authorized to promulgate by resolution a schedule
of fees to be charged for the issuance by the Planning Director, Zoning
Administrator, or Planning Commission, or Board of any permit or entitlement
authorized by this article, such fees to be reasonably related to the actual
costs to the County of processing such applications and issuing and policing
such permits or entitlements.
   (e)   Any violation of the terms or conditions of any permit or entitlement
issued by the Planning Director, Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, or
Board pursuant to this article shall constitute a violation of this chapter,
shall be a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as set forth in Section
8-2.226 of this article. The enforcement of this article shall be by the
procedure set forth in Section
8-2.226 of this article, and all remedies set forth therein for violations of
this chapter shall be available against violations of this article.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8- 2.212.5.   Indemnification.
   As a condition of approval of a permit or entitlement issued under this
title, the applicant shall agree to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the
County or its agents, officers and employees from any claim, action, or
proceeding (including damage, attorney fees, and court cost awards) against the
County or its agents, officers, or employees to attack, set aside, void, or
annul an approval of the County, advisory agency, appeal board, or legislative
body concerning the permit or entitlement when such action is brought within
the applicable statute of limitations. Any condition imposed pursuant to this
section shall include a requirement that the County promptly notify the
applicant of any claim, action or proceeding and that the County cooperate in
the defense. If the County fails to promptly notify the applicant of any claim,
action, or proceeding, or if the County fails to cooperate in the defense, the
applicant shall not thereafter be responsible to defend, indemnify, or hold the
County harmless as to that action. The County may require that the applicant
post a bond or other security in an amount determined to be sufficient to
satisfy the above indemnification and defense obligation.
(§ 3, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24, 2016)
Sec. 8-2.213.   Pre-application.
   (a)   An applicant may submit to the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department, for consideration by Planning staff and
reviewing agencies, a “pre-application” of preliminary development plans for a
project that would require the issuance of discretionary permit(s). The intent
of the pre-application process is to give an applicant an opportunity to “test
the waters” prior to submitting a formal application. The pre-application
process provides the applicant with an initial understanding of the issues and
type of conditions of approval that could be raised by the project. A pre-
application does not result in any formal approval of any permits by the
County, but instead is concluded with a letter and meeting with the applicant.
   (b)   After submittal of a pre-application form and payment of a fee, the
form and any other provided information is distributed by Planning staff to
appropriate County and other reviewing agencies for response and comments. The
pre-application may be referred to the Development Review Committee. Following
staff and agency review, a letter is prepared by staff and a meeting scheduled
with the applicant. The purpose of the letter and meeting is to summarize the
issues raised by the proposed project and the conditions and mitigation
measures that could be applied if a subsequent formal application were to be
filed with the County. Other departments and public agencies may be invited to
attend the pre-application conference.
   (c)   A pre-application and conference may be required by the Director as
set forth in Section
8-2.209(b) of this article.
   (d)   No formal application for the development project being considered may
be accepted until a pre-application letter and conference is considered
complete by the Director.
   (e)   The fee associated with the pre-application conference shall be
credited to any subsequent formal application for the proposed development
project, provided the subsequent formal application is submitted within a
timely manner.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.214.   Zoning Clearance.
   (a)   The purpose of the Zoning Clearance approval process is to quickly
determine compliance between a development project seeking a building or
related permit and not subject to discretionary review, with the provisions of
this Code and the Yolo County General Plan. A Zoning Clearance is an “over-the-
counter” review and approval of an application that is usually accomplished at
the same time that a building permit is issued. The application is checked to
ensure it is consistent with height, setback, parking, and other zoning
standards or requirements for the specific zone district in which it is
located, as set forth in this title.
   (b)   If an application is found to not be consistent with one or more
zoning standards, the applicant must be required to modify the building plans
or design to be consistent with the zoning, or the application must be
resubmitted as a Variance or other discretionary action.
   (c)   No unique conditions of approval or development standards may be
attached to a Zoning Clearance, although standard conditions or development
requirements may be attached.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.215.   Site Plan Review.
   (a)   The purpose of the Site Plan Review approval process is to determine
compliance between a more complicated development project seeking a building or
related permit, not subject to discretionary review, with the provisions of
this Code and the Yolo County General Plan. A Site Plan Review is triggered by
a development application or use that is allowed “by right” yet is subject to
specific zoning standards. These applications require a more thorough and
lengthy review than a simple Zoning Clearance.
   (b)   Development standards or simple conditions may be attached to a Site
Plan Review approval, consistent with the requirements for the Use Type of the
application and the zone within which it is located.
   (c)   Approval of a Site Plan Review shall be required, at the discretion of
the Director, in the following instances:
   (1)   For the establishment or change of use of any land, building, or
structure, including complex or extensive uses of agriculturally-zoned land,
that is allowed “by right,” requires a building permit, and is subject to
specific zoning or development standards; and
   (2)   For the construction, erection, enlargement, alteration, or moving of
large and/or multiple buildings or structures, including farm residences;
provided, however, no such approval shall be required for growing field,
garden, or tree crops or for general farming operations.
   (d)   Site Plan Review applications shall be submitted to the Planning
Division, which shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove, such
application or set the application on the agenda of the Planning Commission for
interpretation and determination. Standard conditions that have been drafted to
be specific to the proposed use may be placed on the approval of a Site Plan
Review application by the Planning and other Divisions or Departments. The
application shall be denied unless it is found to satisfy the requirements of
this Code and the policies and standards of the General Plan.
   (e)   Whenever the proposed Site Plan Review has been approved, and no such
use has been initiated within one (1) year after the date of such approval, the
approval shall thereupon become null and void, unless a permit extension has
been requested and granted.
   (f)   A Site Plan Review permit may be extended for a period not to exceed
one (1) year by the Department.
   (g)   The decision of the Planning Director, Planning Division, Building
Division or any other County department or official shall take effect, and
appeals thereof made and considered, in the manner provided in Section
8-2.225 of this article.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.216.   Permits approved by the Zoning Administrator.
   The following section describes the types of discretionary and other permits
that may be approved or denied by the Zoning Administrator.
   (a)   The Zoning Administrator, after holding a public hearing, may approve
Minor Use Permits, upon adoption of Findings as set forth in Section
8-2.217.
   (b)   The Zoning Administrator may approve Minor Variances to the otherwise
applicable standards and design criteria set forth in this subsection, and to
the extent set forth, after making the Findings set forth in Section
8-2.218. Variances that exceed the modifications in the applicable standards
and design criteria are Major Variances that must be considered by the Planning
Commission. Minor Variances include:
   (1)   In any zone, modifications of the front, side, or rear yard setback
requirements; provided, however, the total modification shall not reduce the
applicable setbacks to less than seventy-five (75%) percent of those otherwise
required in the zone;
   (2)   In any zone, modifications of building heights; provided, however,
such building heights shall not exceed one hundred twenty-five (125%) percent
of the otherwise applicable maximum height in the zone;
   (3)   In any zone, modifications of the minimum lot area, width, and depth;
provided, however, such modifications shall not reduce the total lot area to
less than seventy-five (75%) percent of that otherwise required in the zone;
and
   (4)   In any zone, modifications of the maximum area or height of signs
otherwise applicable in the zone; provided, however, such modifications shall
not result in a sign exceeding one hundred twenty-five (125%) percent of either
the maximum height or maximum size otherwise applicable in the zone.
   (c)   The Zoning Administrator shall process applications for mergers of
parcels and/or lot line adjustments pursuant to
Chapter I of this title. Mergers and Lot Line Adjustments are not subject to a
public hearing and do not require public notice to surrounding property owners.
   (d)   The Zoning Administrator may approve minor modifications to existing
Use Permits, including those approved by the Commission pursuant to Section
8-2.217. Such minor modifications shall be approved only if Findings are
adopted that such modifications substantially conform with the plans or
standards approved by the Commission or Zoning Administrator and that the
appearance and function of the total development and the surrounding
development will not be significantly adversely affected as a result of such
modification.
   (e)   The Zoning Administrator may approve minor modifications of the
detailed development plans or detailed development standards in Planned
Development (PD) Zones approved by the Planning Commission pursuant to this
chapter. Such minor modifications may be approved only if Findings are adopted
that such modifications are in substantial conformity with the plans or
standards approved by the Commission, and that the appearance and function of
the total development will not be significantly adversely affected as a result
of such modification.
   (f)   The Zoning Administrator may approve extensions of time for Use
Permits and Variances, including those approved by the Planning Commission.
Such extensions shall be approved only if Findings are adopted that
circumstances under which the permit was granted have not changed. Such
extensions shall be approved for no more than two (2) years.
   (g)   The Zoning Administrator may approve modifications of the off-street
parking requirements set forth in Article 13 of this chapter; provided,
however, the total variance shall not reduce the off-street parking to less
than seventy-five (75%) percent of that otherwise required off-street parking.
Such modifications shall be authorized only if it is found that the off-street
parking, as modified, provides, either on the same site or on some reasonably
and conveniently located site, adequate parking, loading, turning, and
maneuvering space to accommodate substantially such needs as are generated by
the use and will not result in a safety hazard to the users of the site or
surrounding areas.
   (h)   Surfacing materials required to satisfy the paving requirements for
off-street parking and loading may be modified by the Zoning Administrator when
the Zoning Administrator finds that the location of the parking or storage area
or the nature or weight of the vehicles or equipment is such as to make the
normally required surfacing materials unnecessary.
   (i)   The Zoning Administrator may defer to the Planning Commission a
decision on any discretionary permit application noted above. The Planning
Commission shall then hold the public hearing and make all required findings
and decisions. The reasons for the Zoning Administrator to defer decisions on
any of the above discretionary permits to the Planning Commission may include,
but are not limited to, the following:
   (1)   The project may result in significant adverse environmental impacts
which cannot be mitigated to less than significant levels;
   (2)   The project involves substantial controversy;
   (3)   The project is in conflict with County policies;
   (4)   The project may be precedent setting;
   (5)   The Zoning Administrator has determined that the project should be
reviewed by the Planning Commission in order to best protect the public
welfare.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.217.   Use Permits.
   (a)   The purpose of a Use Permit shall be to allow the proper integration
into the community of uses which may be suitable only in specific locations in
a zone or only if such uses are designed or laid out on the site in a
particular manner.
   (b)   Applications for Use Permits shall be filed by the owner or his/her
authorized agent in the office of the Community Services Department, on forms
provided by the Department, accompanied by a fee, a Site or Plot Plan, and any
other drawings or information as may be required to fully describe the request,
as set forth in Section
8-2.209. No application may be filed which proposes any use which is not
consistent with the General Plan of the County, as amended. The rejection of
applications on the basis of inconsistency may be appealed as provided in
Section
8-2.225 of this chapter.
   (c)   The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator shall hold a public
hearing on the requested Use Permit, notice of which shall be given by mail as
provided in Section
8-2.211. The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator may approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove an application for a Use Permit. The
Planning Commission shall act on applications for Major Use Permit, as that
term is defined in this title, and the Zoning Administrator shall have the
discretion to act on applications for a Minor Use Permit, as that term is
defined in this title, or send the Minor Use Permit application to the Planning
Commission.
   (d)   If the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator approves a Use
Permit application, it may attach such Conditions of Approval, including
standard and specific design, development, and performance requirements,
infrastructure requirements, standard time limitations, guarantees,
amortization schedules, assurances, and requirements, as may be necessary to
accomplish the objectives set forth in this chapter and the requirements of the
General Plan. The Planning Commission and Zoning Administrator may impose such
Conditions of Approval as are necessary to allow the findings set forth in this
subsection to be made and may require the applicant to execute and record
documents which insure that such conditions run with the land.
   (e)   In granting a Use Permit, the Planning Commission or Zoning
Administrator, with due regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent
structures and uses, the zone within which the structures and uses are located,
and the General Plan, shall find the following general conditions to be
fulfilled:
   (1)   The requested use is listed as a conditional use in the zone
regulations or elsewhere in this chapter;
   (2)   The requested use is essential or desirable to the public comfort and
convenience;
   (3)   The requested use will not impair the integrity or character of the
neighborhood nor be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general
welfare;
   (4)   The requested use will be in conformity with the General Plan;
   (5)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, sanitation, and/or other
necessary facilities will be provided;
   (6)   The requested use, if located in an agricultural zone, will serve and
support production of agriculture, the agricultural industry, or is otherwise
agriculturally related; or if the use is not agriculturally related (e.g.,
solar or wind energy, rural recreation, and other non-agricultural uses), the
use is listed as a conditional use consistent with subsection (1), above, and
generally relies on a rural location; and
   (7)   The requested use, if located in an agricultural zone, and if proposed
on prime farmland, cannot be reasonably located on lands containing non-prime
farmland.
   (f)   Revocation and modification. A Use Permit may be revoked or modified
as provided by the provisions of this section. For purposes of this section,
such modification may include the modification of the terms of the permit
itself or the waiver, alteration, or imposition of new conditions.
   (1)   Grounds for Revocation or Modification. Revocations or modifications
may be made upon a finding of any one or more of the following grounds:
   a.   That such permit was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation;
   b.   That any person making use of or relying upon the Use Permit is
violating or has violated any conditions of the permit, or that the use for
which the Use Permit was granted is being, or has been exercised contrary to
the terms or conditions of such approval;
   c.   If the use for which the Use Permit was granted is being, or has been
exercised in violation of any state law, ordinance or regulation adopted
pursuant;
   d.   That the use for which the Use Permit was granted is so conducted as to
be a nuisance or detrimental to the public health, welfare, or safety; or
   e.   That the use for which the Use Permit was granted has been materially
altered or expanded beyond the scope of the use originally authorized. Factors
such as, but not limited to, increased number or size of structures, finding
that a nuisance exists, or alteration of the approved project plan may be cause
for modification or revocation of a conditional use permit.
   (2)   Automatic revocation. If the permittee has not taken substantial steps
towards putting the property into the use for which the Use Permit was granted
within the time limit set when granted, or within one year after the date of
the hearing if no specific time has been set, and an extension of time has not
been approved by the Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator according
to Section
8-2.216(f), the Use Permit shall be deemed to be null and void without further
action.
   (3)   Initiation of Action. An action to revoke or modify a Use Permit may
be initiated by order of the Board of Supervisors or Planning Commission, on
its own motion or on the request of the Planning Director or Zoning
Administrator, or his/her authorized designee(s).
   (4)   Proceedings for Revocation or Modification.
   a.   Guidelines. Unless otherwise required by California law or this
subsection (4), the adopted guidelines for quasi-judicial appeals and hearings
shall apply to procedures arising under this chapter. As set forth in the
guidelines, the chair of the hearing body may modify or waive provisions of the
guidelines as appropriate. The guidelines do not create any additional rights
and any failure to follow these guidelines shall not affect the validity of the
hearing or the decision made.
   b.    Public hearing; notice. Any action to revoke or modify a Use Permit
shall require a public hearing held by the Planning Commission or Zoning
Administrator, whichever granted the Use Permit, and notice given pursuant to
Section 65091 of the Government Code.
   c.   Notice contents. The contents of the notice shall contain the following
information:
   (i)   Date, time and place of the public hearing;
   (ii)   A general explanation of the matter to be considered at the public
hearing including the basis therefor; and,
   (iii)   A general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the
real property, if any, that is the subject of the public hearing.
   d.   Conduct of hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted as follows:
   (i)   The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator will hear sworn
testimony and consider other evidence concerning the proposed action;
   (ii)   County staff and the permittee may be present at such hearing, may be
represented by counsel, may present testimony, and may cross-examine any and
all witnesses.
   (iii)   Formal rules of evidence or procedure shall not apply, including
rules relating to evidence, witnesses and hearsay. Any relevant evidence shall
be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are
accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs regardless of the
existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the
admission of the evidence over objection in civil actions. The hearing officer
has discretion to exclude evidence if its probative value is substantially
outweighed by the probability that its admission will necessitate undue
consumption of time.
   (iv)   The standard of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence.
   (g)   The decision of the Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator
shall take effect, and appeals thereof made and considered, in the manner
provided in Section
8-2.225.
   (h)   No Use Permit which has been approved by the Planning Commission or
Zoning Administrator shall become valid prior to the expiration of the appeal
period, as set forth in Section
8-2.225, or the final action on an appeal to the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1543, eff. October 14,
2021)
Sec. 8-2.218.   Variances.
   (a)   The purpose of a Variance is to allow variation from the strict
application of the provisions of this chapter where special circumstances
pertaining to the physical characteristics and location of the site are such
that the literal enforcement of the requirements of this chapter would involve
practical difficulties or would cause hardship and would not carry out the
spirit and purposes of this chapter and the provisions of the General Plan.
   (b)   Applications for Variances shall be filed by the owner or his
authorized agent in the office of the Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services Department, on forms provided by the Department, accompanied by a fee,
a Site or Plot Plan, and any other drawings or information as may be required
to fully describe the request, as set forth in Section
8-2.209. No application may be filed which proposes any Variance which is not
consistent with the General Plan of the County, as amended. The rejection of
applications on the basis of inconsistency may be appealed as provided in
Section
8-2.225 of this chapter.
   (c)   The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator shall hold a public
hearing on the requested Variance, notice of which shall be given by mail as
provided in Section
8-2.211. The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator may approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove an application for a Variance. The
Planning Commission shall act on applications for Major Variance, as that term
is defined in this title, and the Zoning Administrator shall have the
discretion to act on applications for a Minor Variance, as that term is defined
in this title, or send the Minor Variance application to the Planning
Commission.
   (d)   If the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator approves a Variance
application, it may attach such Conditions of Approval, including standard and
specific design, development, and performance requirements, infrastructure
requirements, standard time limitations, guarantees, amortization schedules,
assurances, and requirements, as may be necessary to accomplish the objectives
set forth in this chapter and the requirements of the General Plan. The
Planning Commission and Zoning Administrator may impose such Conditions of
Approval as are necessary to allow the findings set forth in this subsection to
be made and may require the applicant to execute and record documents which
insure that such conditions run with the land.
   (e)   The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator shall grant a Variance
only when, in accordance with the provision of Section 65906 of the California
Government Code, all of the following circumstances are found to apply:
   (1)   That any Variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will
assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of
special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in
the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is situated;
   (2)   That, because of special circumstances applicable to the subject
property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the
strict application of the provisions of this chapter is found to deprive the
subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and
under the identical zone classification;
   (3)   That the Variance shall not be granted for a parcel of property which
authorizes a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the
zone regulation governing the parcel of property, excluding uses allowed by
conditional Use Permit; and
   (4)   That the granting of such Variance will be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter and will be in conformity with the Master
Plan.
   (f)   In the event the conditions of a Variance have not been, or are not
being, complied with, the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Department shall give the permittee notice of intention to revoke such Variance
at least ten (10) days prior to a Planning Commission review thereon. After the
conclusion of the review, the Planning Commission may revoke such Variance.
   (g)   In the event the project or use for which the Variance was granted has
not commenced within the time limit set by the Planning Commission or the
Zoning Administrator, or within one (1) year after the date of the hearing if
no specific time has been set, and an extension of time has not been approved
by the Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator according to Section
8-2.216(f), the Variance shall be deemed to be null and void without further
action.
   (h)   The decision of the Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator
shall take effect, and appeals thereof made and considered, in the manner
provided in Section
8-2.225.
   (i)   No Variance which has been approved by the Planning Commission or
Zoning Administrator shall become valid prior to the expiration of the appeal
period, as set forth in Section
8-2.225, or the final action on an appeal to the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.219.   Parcel and subdivision maps.
   (a)   Applications and approvals of Tentative Parcel Maps and Tentative
Subdivision Maps, and (Final) Parcel Maps and Final Subdivision Maps, shall be
processed according to the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act (Section
66410 et seq. of the California Government Code) and the provisions of this
article and
Chapter 1 of this title.
   (b)   Applications for all Tentative Parcel Maps and Tentative Subdivision
Maps shall be heard and decided by the Planning Commission, unless a concurrent
application requires legislative action by the Board of Supervisors, such as a
rezoning. The Planning Commission is authorized by this section to serve as an
“advisory agency” as that phrase is defined (Section 66415) and used (Sections
66473.5, 66474, 66474.6, and 66474.7) in the State Subdivision Map Act.
   (c)   Any interested party may appeal a final decision of the Planning
Commission regarding any Tentative Parcel Map or tentative Subdivision Map to
the Board of Supervisors, in the manner provided in Section 8-2.225. An
appellant shall be entitled to the same notice and rights regarding testimony
as are accorded a subdivider under Section 66452.5 of the State Subdivision Map
Act.
   (d)   Applications for (Final) Parcel Maps and Final Subdivision Maps shall
be accepted by the Board of Supervisors.
   (e)   The Planning Commission shall consider extensions of time for
Tentative Maps, consistent with Sections 66452.6 and 66463.5 of the State
Subdivision Map Act. The Planning Commission is authorized by this section to
approve or conditionally approve the extension of a Tentative Map only if
findings are adopted that circumstances under which the Tentative Map was
approved have not changed. Any such decision to approve, conditionally approve,
or deny an extension of time may be appealed as set forth in subsection(c),
above.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7,
2018)
Sec. 8-2.220.   Other ministerial and discretionary permits.
   (a)   The following is a list of other ministerial and discretionary permits
that may not be identified by name in this article but which may be issued by
the County:
   (1)   Business License, Home Occupation, or Itinerant Vendor Permit
   (2)   Historic Site Plan Review or Permit
   (3)   Master Subdivision Site Plan Review
   (4)   Public Works permits such as Encroachment, Transportation, Parade,
etc.
   (5)   Lot Line Adjustment
   (6)   Minor and Major Certificate of Compliance
   (7)   Gas or Oil Well Permit
   (8)   Animal Density Permits
   (9)   Lot Merger
   (10)   Annual Development Agreement Review
   (11)   Establishment of a Williamson Act Contract
   (12)   Approval of a Williamson Act Successor Agreement
   (13)   Minor Agricultural Contract Division
   (14)   Certificate of Correction
   (15)   Minor or Major Code Interpretation
   (16)   Minor Use Permit Amendment or Extension
   (17)   Major Use Permit Amendment or Extension
   (18)   Tentative Parcel or Subdivision Map Extension
   (19)   Reversion to Acreage
   (20)   ABC License Use Permit, for beer, wine, and spirits
   (21)   Model Water Efficiency Landscape Plans
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.221.   Zone Boundary Adjustments.
   (a)   Minor Zone Changes or Zone Boundary Adjustments are defined as those
rezoning applications that do not change the amount of land in each zone by
more than ten (10) percent, or a maximum of five (5) acres, and do not increase
the maximum intensity of land use allowed by the General Plan and zoning by
more than ten (10) percent. Applications for Zone Boundary Adjustments are to
be processed as a rezoning legislative action, with hearing and recommendation
by the Planning Commission, and hearing and final action by the Board of
Supervisors, as required by Sections 65854 through 65857 of the Government
Code.
   (b)   Applications that exceed the thresholds in (a) are defined as
rezonings and are to be processed according to Section
8-2.222.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.222.   Rezonings.
   (a)   Rezoning applications are defined as those actions that change the
zoning of land from one zoning district to another zoning district, or that
change the amount of land in a zoning district by more than ten (10) percent,
or increase the maximum intensity of land use allowed by the General Plan and
zoning by more than ten (10) percent. Changing the zoning of land to add or
delete a Planned Development (PD) zoning district is a rezoning.
   (b)   Applications for rezonings are to be processed as a legislative
action, with hearing and recommendation by the Planning Commission, and hearing
and final action by the Board of Supervisors, as required by Sections 65854
through 65857 of the Government Code.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.223.   General Plan Amendments.
   The following section describes the process by which an amendment to the
2030 Yolo Countywide General Plan may be authorized to proceed, and then
processed.
   (a)   Pursuant to Section 65358(b) of the Government Code, the approval of
amendments is limited to four (4) times per calendar year. Amendments may be
initiated by the Board of Supervisors, Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services Department staff, the property owner, or any authorized agent of the
property owner. However, requests for amendments to the General Plan by private
parties are generally discouraged.
   (b)   Corrections and/or non-substantive changes to the General Plan do not
constitute an amendment of the Plan within the meaning of Section 65358(b).
Corrections and/or nonsubstantive changes may be processed by the Planning,
Public Works and Environmental Services Director (Director), but must be
approved by the Board of Supervisors in the form of a resolution of approval.
   (c)   Amendments to the General Plan shall be required when a proposal
would:
   (1)   Substantively change the boundaries or location of any land use
designation within the plan;
   (2)   Substantively change the text, figures, or tables of the plan;
   (3)   Adopt or significantly revise a Specific Plan, Area or Community Plan,
or other policy plan.
   (d)   All amendments to the General Plan proposed by private parties must
first be authorized for further study by the Board of Supervisors before the
amendment can be environmentally evaluated and processed by Planning, Public
Works and Environmental Services Department staff.
   (e)   Initial Authorization Application Requirements. An initial request by
any private party to authorize a General Plan Amendment (GPA) study shall
include the application forms, required documentation, and applicable fee as
established by the County Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Department and shall provide the following:
   (1)   A detailed statement identifying the reasons for the GPA authorization
request and demonstrating how the proposed GPA furthers the vision and goals of
the General Plan.
   (2)   A detailed description of the General Plan text, figures and maps that
would require modification as a result of the request.
   (f)   An initial request by a private party to authorize a General Plan
Amendment study must be filed with and reviewed by the Planning Director at a
Pre-Application conference. Upon receipt of an initial application to authorize
a General Plan Amendment, the Director shall immediately notify and solicit
comments from the appropriate Yolo County departments or adjacent jurisdictions
that may be affected, as well as any citizens advisory committees. Following
the Pre-Application conference and receipt of any comments from other
department or agencies, the Director shall prepare a report and recommendation
on the GPA authorization to be placed on the Board of Supervisors agenda as a
public hearing.
   (g)   At the GPA authorization hearing, the Board of Supervisors may request
a presentation by the applicant. Following the conclusion of the hearing, the
Board of Supervisors Council may authorize the General Plan Amendment for
further study and processing by staff, or the Board of Supervisors may deny the
authorization request. If the GPA authorization request is denied, no formal
GPA application can be submitted to the County, and no further study of the GPA
will be conducted by the staff.
   (h)   If the Board of Supervisors Council authorizes the General Plan
Amendment for further study, a revised formal General Plan Amendment
application shall be completed and submitted to the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department by the applicant with appropriate fees and
technical studies to support the GPA. The formal GPA application shall include
an appropriate deposit, as determined by the Director, to initiate the
environmental evaluation required to comply with the California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA).
   (i)   Any authorized application for a General Plan Amendment, accompanied
by the appropriate CEQA document, shall be processed in accordance with State
law. The GPA application and environmental document must first be heard by the
Planning Commission, which shall make a recommendation to the Board of
Supervisors.
   (j)   Any General Plan Amendment that is approved must be approved by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors and shall be documented in the table of
changes in the front of the General Plan.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.224.   Code amendments.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter may be amended by changing the
boundaries of zones, by changing the zoning districts or zoning regulations, or
by changing any provision of this chapter whenever the public necessity,
convenience, and general welfare require such amendments.
   (b)   An amendment may be initiated by:
   (1)   One or more owners of property affected by the proposed amendment or
by the authorized agent of any such owner;
   (2)   The Board of Supervisors; or
   (3)   The Planning Commission.
   (c)   Applications of one or more property owners, or the authorized agent
thereof, for amendments shall be filed in the office of the Planning
Department, on forms provided by the Planning Department, at least forty-five
(45) days prior to the meeting date on which action may be desired. Such
applications shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by the
Board by resolution and by such other information as may be required to fully
describe the request.
   (d)   No application may be filed which proposes any use which is not
consistent with the General Plan of the County, as amended. The rejection of
applications on the basis of inconsistency may be appealed as provided in
Section
8-2.225 of this chapter.
   (e)   Applications involving projects for which Negative Declarations or
Environmental Impact Reports are required shall not be heard until the
environmental assessment procedures set forth in Title 10 of the County Code
and the Yolo County Local CEQA Guidelines are satisfied. Applications continued
to an unspecified time awaiting the submission of additional environmental
information by the applicant pursuant to said provisions of Title 10 shall be
deemed denied if the required information is not submitted within one (1) year
after the date of filing the application.
   (f)   Pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 4 of Title 7 of the State Government Code (General Plan
Administration), if, from the facts presented at the public hearing provided
for and by investigation, the Commission finds that the public health, safety,
and general welfare warrant the change of zones or regulations, and such change
is in conformity with the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan, Area
or Community Plan, or other policy plan, the Commission may recommend such
change to the Board of Supervisors. If the facts do not justify such change,
the Commission shall recommend that the application be denied. A Commission
recommendation for approval shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors for
its consideration. A recommendation for denial shall terminate consideration of
the matter unless the applicant or other interested party appeals to the Board
in the manner provided in Section
8-2.225 of this title. The Commission’s recommendation to the Board shall be
accompanied by a written report of findings and a summary of the hearing.
   (g)   Pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 4 of Title 7 of the State Government Code, at its next regular meeting
after the receipt of the Commission recommendation concerning an amendment, the
Board of Supervisors shall set a date for a hearing thereon. The giving of
notice shall be as set forth in this article for hearings by the Commission.
The Board of Supervisors shall act on zoning amendments as follows:
   (1)   The Board may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the
Planning Commission; provided that any modification not previously considered
by the Commission during its hearing shall first be referred to the Commission
in the manner and subject to the time limitations specified in Section 65857 of
the Government Code.
   (2)   Prior to approving any such amendment, the Board shall find that the
proposed amendment is in conformance with the General Plan and that the public
health, safety and general welfare warrant the change of zones or regulations.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.225.   Appeals.
   (a)   Except to the extent expressly provided otherwise in this title,
actions and decisions of the Planning Director, Zoning Administrator, and
Planning Commission shall be effective and shall be appealed in the manner
provided in this section. A decision of an appeal by a subordinate body may be
appealed to the Board of Supervisors in the same manner. As used in this
section, “Deciding Authority” shall refer to the Planning Director, Zoning
Administrator, or Planning Commission as the circumstances require.
   (b)   Actions or decisions of the Deciding Authority shall take effect on
the sixteenth (16th) day following the action or decision, unless a notice of
appeal is filed prior to the sixteenth (16th) day with the clerk of the
Planning Commission in the case of Planning Director, Zoning Administrator or
other County official’s decisions, or with the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors in the case of Planning Commission decisions. A timely filing of a
notice of appeal shall nullify the decision of the Deciding Authority appealed
from, whose decision shall serve as a recommendation to the body appealed to.
An appeal shall not be considered as timely filed until it is accompanied by
the fee established by the Board of Supervisors for such appeal.
   (c)   Within the time otherwise provided for filing appeals, and where there
is a potential for an impact of Countywide importance, any member of the Board
of Supervisors may file an appeal. When an appeal is filed by a member of the
Board of Supervisors, the clerk with whom it is filed shall cause the matter to
be placed on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the Board of Supervisors
for a determination by the Board of Supervisors. If the Board determines that
there is a potential for an impact of Countywide importance resulting from an
action or decision, it may order the appeal to go forward. In the absence of an
affirmative determination at that meeting or at a subsequent meeting to which
the matter is ordered continued, the appeal shall be deemed withdrawn. No fee
shall be required of any appeal taken pursuant to a notice of appeal filed by a
member of the Board. A timely filing shall nullify the decision of the Deciding
Authority appealed from, whose decision shall serve as a recommendation to the
body appealed to.
   (d)   No appeal, once filed, may be withdrawn without the approval of the
body appealed to. The body appealed to shall give such approval after
conducting a noticed hearing at which other interested persons shall be given
the opportunity to indicate their intention to file appeals in lieu of the
appeal to be withdrawn. Upon the expiration of five (5) days after the approval
of withdrawal of the appeal, if no other appeals are then pending and no
further appeals have been filed, the decision appealed from shall take
immediate effect without further order or action. If other appeals are pending
or filed, the matter shall continue to be reviewed in the appeal process.
   (e)   An appeal shall be set for hearing at a subsequent meeting, but in no
event later than sixty (60) days after the date of the filing of the notice of
appeal with the County Clerk. In the event the body deciding the appeal fails
to take action on or continue to a later time a matter appealed under this
title, the failure to take action shall be considered a denial without
prejudice of the appeal. The matter may be reconsidered upon the giving of
proper notice of a new hearing.
   (f)   The body deciding the appeal shall conduct a public hearing on the
matter, notice of which shall be given in the manner required by State planning
law. The hearing may be continued from time to time provided that a decision is
rendered within the time limits, if any, established by State planning law.
   (g)   Any appeal of a decision or action shall also serve as an appeal of
all related matters decided together with the action appealed from, regardless
of the grounds and issues described in the notice of appeal. The body deciding
the appeal may reverse, modify or affirm the decision appealed from. In
considering the appeal, the body shall consider the evidence presented at
previous hearings and/or in the administrative record, and any additional
evidence that may be presented at the hearing before it.
   (h)   Unless otherwise required by California law, the guidelines for quasi-
judicial appeals adopted by the Board of Supervisors shall apply to appeals
arising under this chapter that are considered by the Board of Supervisors and
any subordinate body that elects to adopt its own guidelines that are based on,
or generally consistent with, the guidelines adopted by the Board. Unless
otherwise set forth therein, any adopted guidelines used in hearing an appeal
under this chapter may be modified or waived by the Chair of the hearing body
in his or her sole discretion. Such guidelines do not create any additional
rights and any failure to follow the guidelines shall not affect the validity
of the hearing or the decision made.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018; as amended by § 3, Ord.
1506, eff. February 28, 2019)
Sec. 8-2.226.   Violations.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the Planning Director to enforce the
provisions of this chapter pertaining to the use of any land or structure. It
shall be the duty of the Chief Building Inspector to enforce the provisions of
this chapter pertaining to bulk, height, and land coverage of structures, open
spaces about structures, and the dimensions and area of sites upon which
structures are located. Requirements pertaining to health and sanitation, fire
protection, and Building Code regulations shall be enforced by the respective
agencies which have jurisdiction in such matters. Whenever there is a conflict
between the provisions of this chapter and other County, State, and Federal
regulations, the more restrictive regulations shall apply.
   (b)   All departments, officials, and public employees of the County vested
with the duty or authority to issue permits, certificates, or licenses shall
conform to the provisions of this chapter and shall issue no permit,
certificate, or license for uses, buildings, or purposes in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, and any such permit, certificate, or license issued
in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, intentionally or otherwise,
shall be null and void.
   (c)   Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise,
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as set forth in
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. Such person shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any such
violation is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be
punishable as set forth in said
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
   (d)   If any person is arrested for any such violation and such person is
not immediately taken before a magistrate, the arresting officer, pursuant to
the provisions of Section 853.6 of the Penal Code of the State, shall prepare,
in duplicate, a written notice to appear in court. Such written notice shall
contain the name and address of such person and the offense charged and shall
set forth the time when and the place where such person shall appear in court.
The time set forth in the notice to appear shall be at least five (5) days
after such arrest. The place set forth in the notice to appear shall be the
court of the magistrate before whom the person would be taken if the
requirement of taking an arrested person before a magistrate were complied
with, or shall be an officer authorized by such court to receive a deposit of
bail.
   (e)   The arresting officer shall deliver one (1) copy of the notice to
appear to the arrested person, and the arrested person, in order to secure
release, shall give his written promise so to appear in court by signing the
duplicate notice which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the
arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. The
officer shall, as soon as practicable, file the duplicate notice with the
magistrate specified therein. Thereupon, the magistrate shall fix the amount of
bail which, in his judgment, in accordance with the applicable provisions of
the Penal Code of the State, will be reasonable and sufficient for the
appearance of the defendant and shall endorse upon the notice a statement
signed by the magistrate in the form set forth in the applicable section of
said Penal Code. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he promised to
appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail thus set.
Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before a
magistrate, if the defendant shall not appear, either in person or by counsel,
the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and may, in his discretion, order
that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. Upon the making of such
order that no further proceedings be had, all sums deposited as bail shall
forthwith be paid into the County Treasury for disposition pursuant to the
applicable provisions of said Penal Code. No warrant shall issue on such charge
for the arrest of a person who has given such written promise to appear in
court unless and until he has violated such promise or has failed to deposit
bail, to appear for arraignment, trial, or judgment, or to comply with the
terms and provisions of the judgment as required by law.
   (f)   Any person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the
charge upon which he was originally arrested. Whenever a person signs a written
promise to appear at the time and place set forth therein and has not posted
bail as provided in said Penal Code, the magistrate shall issue and have
delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within twenty (20) days after
the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate
having jurisdiction over the offense. When such person violates his promise to
appear before the officer authorized to receive bail, other than a magistrate,
the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction
over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if
any, filed by the arresting officer.
   (g)   Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered,
enlarged, converted, moved, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, or any use of any property conducted, operated, or maintained contrary
to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same is hereby declared to
be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the District Attorney, upon an order of
the Board, shall immediately commence an action or proceedings for the
abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof in a manner provided by law and
shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have
jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such building or
structure and restrain and enjoin any person from setting up, erecting,
constructing, altering, enlarging, converting, moving, maintaining, or using
any such building or structure, or using any property contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.227.   Use Classification System.
   (a)   The intent of this section is to classify uses according to a limited
number of Use Types on the basis of common functional, product, or
compatibility characteristics, thereby providing a basis for regulation of uses
in accordance with criteria which are directly relevant to the public health,
safety, and general welfare. These classifications shall apply throughout this
title.
   (b)   All uses shall be classified according to the Use Types described in
this chapter beginning with Section
8-2.303. The classifications shall comply with the provisions of this section.
   (c)   The most prevalent Use Types identified for each zone district are
“principal” uses allowed by right. Use Types also include “accessory” or
“ancillary” uses identified by broad category. Use Types also include
conditional uses permitted through the issuance of a Use Permit.
   (d)   The description of the Use Types in this chapter often contains
individual specific uses that are classified within the Use Type. These
specific typical uses are examples and are not meant to include all uses that
may properly be classified within the Use Type.
   (e)   New specific uses shall be classified into use types based upon the
description of the Use Types and upon characteristics similar to other uses
already classified within the Use Type, subject to the applicable provisions of
Subsection (f) of this section.
   (f)   The principal uses conducted on a single parcel shall be classified
separately.
   (g)   The Director of the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Department shall have the following authority and responsibilities with respect
to the Use Classification System:
   (1)   The Director shall have the authority to classify uses according to
Use Types or to determine that a use does not fit under any use type and,
therefore, is not permitted.
   (2)   The Director may make an interpretation, binding upon the County, as
to whether a particular use is either a principal allowed use, accessory or
ancillary use, conditional use, or is not allowed in a particular zone.
   (3)   The Director may determine that a particular use is consistent with
the general purposes of the zone and is of the same general character as those
uses expressly listed as either permitted, accessory, and conditional uses in
the zone, and therefore determine that the use is allowed in the zone as either
a permitted, accessory, or conditional use.
   (4)   The Director shall develop and maintain an administrative list of
common uses and the Use Types into which they are classified.
   (5)   The classification of a use is an administrative decision without
notice and hearing, except that an applicant can appeal the Director’s decision
pursuant to Section
8-2.225.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 3: Agricultural Zones
Sec. 8-2.301.   Purpose.
   The purpose of the Agricultural Zones shall be to provide for land uses that
support and enhance agriculture as the predominant land use in the
unincorporated area of the County. Such uses shall be compatible with
agriculture, and may include uses that support open space, natural resource
management, outdoor recreation, and enjoyment of scenic beauty.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.302.   Agricultural Zones.
   Agricultural land is separated into five zoning districts, with specific Use
Types, minimum lot area, and other requirements, as described below.
   (a)   Agricultural Intensive (A-N) Zone.  The Agricultural Intensive (A-N)
Zone is applied to preserve lands best suited for intensive agricultural uses
typically dependent on higher quality soils, water availability, and relatively
flat topography. The purpose of the zone is to promote those uses, while
preventing the encroachment of nonagricultural uses. Uses in the A-N Zone are
primarily limited to intensive agricultural production and other activities
compatible with agricultural uses. This includes allowing agriculturally-
related support uses, excluding incompatible uses, and protecting the viability
of the family farm. Minimum lot size for newly created parcels(1) in the A-
N Zone is forty (40) acres for irrigated parcels primarily planted in permanent
crops, such as orchards or vineyards; eighty (80) acres for irrigated parcels
that are cultivated; one hundred sixty (160) acres for parcels that are
generally uncultivated and/or not irrigated.
   (1)   Minimum parcel size requirements apply to the creation of new parcels
and do not affect the status of any previously existing legal parcel regardless
of acreage.
   (b)   Agricultural Extensive (A-X) Zone. The Agricultural Extensive (A-X)
Zone is applied to protect and preserve lands that are typically less dependent
on high soil quality and available water for irrigation. Such lands require
considerably larger parcel sizes to allow extensive agricultural activities
such as livestock and ranching operations, and dry land farming. These lands
may also be used for open space functions that are often connected with
foothill and wetlands locations, such as grazing and pasture land, and wildlife
habitat and recreational areas. Minimum lot size for newly created parcels in
the A-X Zone is one hundred sixty (160) acres for dry land farming and three
hundred twenty (320) acres for rangeland.
   (c)   Agricultural Commercial (A-C) Zone.  The Agricultural Commercial (A-C)
Zone is applied to existing and planned commercial uses in the agricultural
areas. The Agricultural Commercial Use Types set forth in Section
8-2.303(c) and
Table 8-2.304(c) do not require rezoning to the A-C Zone. The Agricultural
Commercial Zone is to be applied only when the primary use of the property is
for significant commercial agricultural activities. The commercial activities
must be compatible with and enhance the primary agricultural use of the greater
area. Maximum parcel size in the A-C Zone shall be determined by the existing
or proposed use, and shall have a minimum parcel size of one (1) acre, and a
maximum parcel size of twenty (20) acres.
   (d)   Agricultural Industrial (A-I) Zone.  The Agricultural Industrial (A-I)
Zone is applied to land in the rural areas for more intensive processing and
industrial-type uses, which are directly related to the local agricultural
industry. Minimum parcel size in the A-I Zone shall be adequate enough to
support the use, with a minimum of five (5) acres.
   (e)   Agricultural Residential (A-R) Zone.  The Agricultural Residential (A-
R) Zone shall be applied only to those lots created through a subdivision
approved under the Clustered Agricultural Housing Ordinance (see Section
8-2.403). Minimum parcel size in the A-R Zone is two and one-half (2.5) acres.
The maximum parcel size can be increased to four (4.0) acres to accommodate an
agricultural buffer or farm worker housing.
   (f)   Overlay Zones.  In addition to the five (5) zones identified above,
there are seven (7) overlay zones that may be combined with the underlying
agricultural zone districts. The overlay districts are described in Article 4
(Special Agricultural Regulations) and Article 9 (Specific Plan and Overlay
Zones).
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.303.   Agricultural Use Types Defined.
   As required by Sec.
8-2.227 in Article 2 of this chapter, a Use Classification System has been
employed to identify agricultural Use Types. The agricultural Use Types include
the full range of cultivated agriculture, such as the on-site production of
plant and animal products by agricultural methods, as well as agricultural
commercial uses, agricultural industrial uses, and agricultural residential
uses, serving the rural areas. The descriptions of the Use Types in this
chapter also contain individual specific uses that are classified within the
Use Type. These specific typical uses are examples and are not meant to include
all uses that may properly be classified within the Use Type.
   (a)   Agricultural Production, Processing, and Accessory Uses.  This Use
Type includes a wide range of agricultural land uses and operations to be used
for the production of food and fiber. Typical production uses do not require
the application of any development or performance standards. This Use Type also
includes processing or packaging of harvested crops grown or produced primarily
on the premises or in the local area, whether or not value is added, for the
onsite preparation of market or for further processing and packaging elsewhere.
These uses do not include rendering, tanning, or reduction of meat. Accessory
agricultural uses that are incidental or subordinate to the principal
agricultural use of the property include buildings or structures for the
purposes of supply of goods, materials, or services that support agricultural
uses. Accessory structures are defined and regulated in Section
8-2.506(b) of this chapter. This Use Type also includes cultivated or
uncultivated lands used for wildlife habitat. Cannabis uses, including
cultivation (outdoor, indoor and mixed-light), processing, and nurseries,
require the issuance of a Major Use Permit as regulated by Article 14 of this
Chapter.
   (b)   Animal Facilities Uses.  This Use Type includes a wide array of
activities associated with the keeping of certain animals that typically
require the application of development or performance standards, subject to a
non-discretionary or discretionary permit. The keeping of farm animals solely
for the purpose of pasturing, grazing, or breeding is an allowed use by right
and is not regulated under this section. The raising and keeping of farm
animals when used for 4-H, FFA, and other youth animal farming projects is not
subject to any regulations in this section. Other animal facilities such as
feedlots, dairies, kennels, and stables are subject to regulatory review.
   (c)   Agricultural Commercial and Rural Recreation Uses. This Use Type
includes commercial uses incidental to the agricultural or horticultural
operations of the area that preserve the rural lifestyle and stimulate the
agricultural economy, including some tourism-related uses that may be the
primary use of a particular property. These Use Type examples do not require
the rezoning of the land to the Agricultural Commercial Zone, which is reserved
for significant agricultural commercial uses that are the primary use of the
property. Examples of this Use Type include wineries, special events, lodging/
bed and breakfasts, commercial horse stables, "Yolo Stores," and farm-based
tourism (i.e., working farms or ranches), which educate or entertain visitors,
guests or clients, and generate income for the owner/operator. Cannabis uses,
including retail (storefront and non-storefront), nurseries, and microbusiness
require the issuance of a Major Use Permit as regulated by Article 14 of this
Chapter.
   This Use Type also includes commercial or non-commercial operations related
to outdoor sporting or leisure activities that require large open space areas
that do not have any detrimental impact on adjacent agricultural lands.
   (d)   Agricultural Industrial, Resource Extraction, and Utilities Uses.
This Use Type includes industrial or research uses subordinate to, and in
support of, agriculture. These uses may include product processing plants that
provide regional serving opportunities, and agriculturally based laboratories
or facilities for the production or research of food, fiber, animal husbandry
or medicine, and may include administrative office space in support of the
operation. Many of these Use Types are most appropriately located on lands
zoned A-I.
   Uses related to the agricultural industry may require more intensive methods
such as warehousing, transportation facilities, crop dusting, agricultural
chemical and equipment sales, and other agricultural related industries, which
generate more traffic, noise, and odor than typical agricultural practices.
These uses may be located on lands not suitable for intensive agriculture due
to soil quality, topography, or water availability. Cannabis uses, including
distribution and manufacturing (volatile, non-volatile and infusion) require
the issuance of a Major Use Permit as regulated by Article 14 of this Chapter.
   This Use Type also includes mineral extraction, wind and solar power, gas
and oil wells, electrical utilities and yards, and wireless communication
towers. More detailed regulations governing wind and solar energy systems, and
wireless communication towers are found in Article 13, Special Use Development
Standards.
   (e)   Residential and Other Uses.  This Use Type includes all residential
structures that are allowed in the agricultural zones, as well as a range of
related residential activities such as group/home care, child care, and home
occupations.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1494, eff. January
11, 2018; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1545, eff. January 6, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.304.   Tables of Agricultural Permit Requirements.
   The five (5) tables on the following pages set forth the permit requirements
for each of the agricultural Use Types, listing several examples of specific
activities under each Use Type.
   The most prevalent Use Types identified for each agricultural zone district
are “principal” uses allowed “by right” (no zoning permit required, although a
building permit for new structures may be required); “accessory” or “ancillary”
uses allowed through a non-discretionary (no public hearing) Site Plan Review
and building permit; and conditional uses permitted through the issuance of a
Minor or Major Use Permit, which requires a public hearing before either the
Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission.
   
Table 8-2.304(a) on the following page identifies some specific examples of
Agricultural Production, Processing, and Accessory uses under each general Use
Type. Each specific use is identified by being allowed by right (identified as
“A” in the table); by non-discretionary Site Plan Review (“SP”); by conditional
Use Permit (“UP(m)” or “UP(M)”); or uses that are not allowed (“N”).
   
Table 8-2.304(b) on the following page identifies examples of specific Animal
Facilities Use Types that are allowed by right, by Site Plan Review, by
conditional Use Permit, or uses that are not allowed.
   
Table 8-2.304(c) identifies Agricultural Commercial and Rural Recreation Use
Type examples that are allowed or permitted in each category.
   
Table 8-2.304(d) identifies examples of Agricultural Industrial and Resource
Use Types that are allowed or permitted, and the last
Table 8-2.304(e) identifies Residential Use Type examples that are allowed by
right, by non-discretionary Site Plan Review, by conditional Use Permit, or
uses that are not allowed, in each of the agricultural zones.
Table 8-2.304(a)
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Agricultural Production,
Processing, and Accessory Uses
A = Allowed use, subject Land Use Permit Required by Zone
to zoning clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                     Specific Use
UP (m) = Minor Use                                        Requirements or
Permit required          A-N A-X A-C A-I A-R              Performance Standards
UP (M) = Major Use
Permit required
N = Use Not Allowed
A = Allowed use, Land Use Permit Required by Zone
subject to
zoning
clearance*
SP = Site Plan
Review                                                         Specific Use
UP (m) = Minor                                                 Requirements or
Use Permit       A-N            A-X            A-C   A-I   A-R Performance
required                                                       Standards
UP (M) = Major
Use Permit
required
N = Use Not
Allowed
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION, PROCESSING, AND ACCESSORY USES
Production
Crop production,
orchards and     A              A              A     A     A
vineyards
Cannabis
cultivation, all UP(M)          UP(M)          UP(M) UP(M) N   See Article 14
types (3)
Keeping farm     A              A              A     A     A
animals (1)
Apiaries and     A              A              A     A     A
aviaries
Horse breeding   A              A              A     A     A
Dry land farming A              A              A     A     A
Exempt or not
covered habitat  A              A              N     N     N
mitigation                                                     See Section
projects                                                       8-2.306(a),
                                                               307, and
Covered habitat                                                Title 10,
mitigation       UP(m) or UP(M) UP(m) or UP(M) N     N     N   Chap.10
projects

Processing (2)
Alfalfa cubing,
hay baling and   A              A              A     A     SP
cubing
Custom canning,
freezing,
preserving, and  A              A              A     A     SP
packing of
fruits and
vegetables
Corn shelling;
drying of corn,
rice, hay,       A              A              A     A     SP
fruits and
vegetables
Grain cleaning
and custom
grinding; custom
grist mills;     A              A              A     A     SP
custom milling
of flour, feed
and grain
Commercial hay
sales and
distribution,    SP             SP             SP    A     N
large scale
(over 25 trucks
per day)
Wine, beer,
spirits, and
olive oil                                                      See Sec.
production       A              A              SP    A     N   8-2.306(j)
(small, no
tastings or
retail sales)
Tree nut hulling                                               See Sec.
and shelling,    A              A              A     A     N   8-2.306(r)
on-site use only
Forestry         A              A              N     A     N
Cannabis
processing,      UP(M)          UP(M)          UP(M) UP(M) N   See Article 14
drying, storing,
trimming (3)
Accessory
Structures/Uses
Barns and        A              A              A     A     A
storage sheds
Coolers and cold
storage houses,
dehydrators,     A              A              A     A     N
grain elevators,
hullers, silos
Farm offices     A              A              A     A     A   See Sec.
                                                               8-2.506(b)
Greenhouses,
commercial, up   A              A              A     A     N
to 100,000 sq.
ft.
Greenhouses,
commercial, over SP             SP             SP    A     N
100,000 sq. ft.
Cannabis
greenhouses,     UP(M)          UP(M)          UP(M) UP(M) N   See Article 14
nurseries (3)
Other accessory
agricultural     A              A              A     A     A   See Sec.
support                                                        8-2.506(b)
structures
Privately-owned                                                See Sec.
reservoirs,      A              A              A     A     A   8-2.306(b)
ponds, basins
 
*   An “allowed use” does not require a land use permit, but is still subject
to permit requirements of other Yolo County divisions such as Building,
Environmental Health, and Public Works.
(1)   Includes pasturing and grazing; does not include confined animal
operations.
(2)   Regional-serving agricultural operations, including processing
facilities, require Site Plan Review (under 100,000 square feet and uses that
generate less than 60 truck trips per day) or a Use Permit, at the Planning
Director’s discretion.
(3)   Cannabis uses require the issuance of a Use Permit pursuant to the
Cannabis Land Use Ordinance in Article 14.
Table 8-2.304(b)
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Animal Facilities
A = Allowed use, subject Land Use Permit Required by Zone
to zoning clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                     Specific Use
UP(m) = Minor Use Permit                                  Requirements or
required                 A-N A-X A-C A-I A-R              Performance Standards
UP(M) = Major Use Permit
required
N = Use Not Allowed
A = Allowed use,   Land Use Permit Required by Zone
subject to zoning
clearance*
SP = Site Plan                                               Specific Use
Review                                                       Requirements or
UP(m) = Minor Use  A-N         A-X         A-C   A-I   A-R   Performance
Permit required                                              Standards
UP(M) = Major Use
Permit required
N = Use Not
Allowed
ANIMAL FACILITIES USES (1), (2), (3)
Animal feedlots
and cow dairies,   UP(m)/UP(M) UP(m)/UP(M) N     UP(m) N     See Sec.
over 50 animal                                               8-2.306(c)
units
Stockyards         UP(m)       UP(m)       N     SP    N
Goat, sheep and
cow dairies, under
50 animal units    A           A           A     A     SP
(500 goat, sheep/                                            See definition of
50 cows)                                                     animal unit
Goat, sheep
dairies, over 50   UP(m)       SP          N     SP    N
animal units (500
goat/sheep)
Fowl/poultry
ranches, under 200 A           A           SP    A     SP
animal units                                                 See definition and
(20,000 fowl)                                                Sec.
Fowl/poultry                                                 8-2.306(d)
ranches, over 200  UP(m)       SP          N     SP    N
animal units
(20,000 fowl)
Hog farms or
ranches, under 100 A           A           SP    A     N
hogs (25 animal                                              See definition and
units)                                                       Sec.
Hog farms or                                                 8-2.306(e)
ranches, over 100  UP(m)       SP          N     SP    N
hogs (25 animal
units)
Small animal
farms, under 100   A           A           A     A     SP
animal units
(5,000 animals)                                              See definition of
Small animal                                                 animal unit
farms, over 100    SP          SP          N     SP    N
animal units
(5,000 animals)
Aquaculture, over  UP(m)       UP(m)       N     SP    N
3 acres in area
Animal hospitals                                             See Sec.
and veterinary     UP(m)       UP(m)       UP(m) SP    N     8-2.306(f)
medical facilities
Non-profit rescue
facilities, less                                             See Sec.
than 10 dogs or    A           A           A     A     A     8-2.306(g)
domesticated
animals
Kennels and animal
shelters, five or                                            See Sec.
more dogs or       UP(m)       UP(m)       UP(M) SP    UP(M) 8-2.306(h)
domesticated
animals
Private stables,
less than 16       A           A           SP    SP    UP(m) See Sec.
boarded horses and                                           8-2.306(i)
no special events
Small and large                                              For A-R zone, see
domestic animals   A           A           A     A     A     Sec.
                                                             8-2.506(j)
 
*   An “allowed use” does not require a land use permit, but is still subject
to permit requirements of other Yolo County divisions such as Building,
Environmental Health, and Public Works.
(1)   The keeping of farm animals solely for the purpose of pasturing, grazing,
or breeding is an allowed use by right and is not regulated under this section.
The raising and keeping of farm animals when used for 4-H, FFA, and other youth
animal farming projects is not subject to any regulations in this section.
(2)   The keeping, care or sheltering of wild animals, which requires a permit
from the State Department of Fish and Wildlife pursuant to the Fish and Game
Code, shall require a Minor Use Permit.
(3)   See definition of concentrated animal feeding operation (CAFO) in Section
8-2.307.
Table 8-2.304(c)
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Agricultural Commercial and Rural
Recreational Uses
A = Allowed use, subject Land Use Permit Required by Zone
to zoning clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                     Specific Use
UP(m) = Minor Use Permit                                  Requirements or
required                 A-N A-X A-C A-I A-R              Performance Standards
UP(M) = Major Use Permit
required
N = Use Not Allowed
A = Allowed use, subject to zoning     Land Use Permit Required
clearance*                             by Zone                   Specific Use
SP = Site Plan Review                                            Requirements
UP(m) = Minor Use Permit required                                or
UP(M) = Major Use Permit required      A-N A-X A-C   A-I   A-R   Performance
N = Use Not Allowed                                              Standards

AGRICULTURAL COMMERCIAL AND RURAL RECREATIONAL USES
Commercial Uses
                                                                 1 annual sale
Commercial farm equipment sales        N   N   SP    SP    N     event in A-N,
                                                                 A-X
Farm equipment repair, light           See “agricultural support services” in
manufacturing                          Table 8-2.304(d)
Christmas trees/pumpkin patches, over  SP  SP  SP    SP    N
100 daily customers
Corn mazes                             SP  SP  SP    SP    N
Nurseries and landscaping materials    UP  UP  SP    SP    N     See
                                       (m) (m)                   definition
Cannabis nurseries, microbusiness,     UP  UP  UP(M) UP(M) N     See Article
non- storefront delivery (1)           (M) (M)                   14
Permanent roadside/produce stands,     SP  SP  A     SP    SP
farmers markets, U-pick farms, etc.                              See Table. 8-
                                                                 2.506 (must
Seasonal roadside/produce stands       A   A   A     A     SP    meet parking
                                                                 requirements)

“Yolo Stores,” less than 100 daily SP  SP  SP    SP    N
customers                                                        See
“Yolo Stores,” over 100 daily      UP  UP  SP    SP    N     definition
customers                              (m) (m)
Wineries, breweries, distilleries,     SP  SP  SP    A     UP(m)
olive mills, small                                               See Sec.
Wineries, breweries, distilleries,     UP  UP  SP    SP    N     8-2.306(j)
olive mills, large                     (m) (m)
Special event facilities, over 40
acres, 8 events per year, less than    A   A   N     A     N     See Sec.
150 attendees                                                    8-2.306(k)
Special event facilities, small        UP  UP  A     A     UP(m) and
                                       (m) (m)                   Table 8-2.401
Special event facilities, large        UP  UP  UP(m) UP(m) UP(M)
                                       (M) (M)
Private stables w/ events              SP  SP  SP    SP    N
Commercial stables, small              SP  SP  SP    SP    N     See Sec.
Commercial stables, large              UP  UP  SP    SP    N     8-2.306(i)
                                       (m) (m)
Bed and breakfasts/lodging, small      SP  SP  SP    N     UP(m) Sec.
                                                                 8-2.306(l)
Bed and breakfasts/lodging, large      UP  UP  UP(m) N     N     and
                                       (M) (M)                   Table 8-2.401

Farm stays, farm dinners               A   A   SP    N     UP(m) See Sec.
                                                                 8-2.306(m)
Hotels, motels                         N   N   N     N     N
Rural restaurants                      N   N   UP(m) N     N     See Sec.
                                                                 8-2.306(o)
Cottage food operation                 A   A   A     A     A     See Sec.
                                                                 8-2.506(k)
Rural Recreational
Campground                             N   UP  UP(m) N     N
                                           (M)                   See
                                                                 definition
Primitive campground                   UP  UP  N     N     N     and Sec.
                                       (M) (m)                   8-2.306(p)

Recreational vehicle parks             N   N   UP(M) N     N
Parks, golf courses, country clubs     N   N   N     N     N
Fisheries, game preserves              UP  UP  N     N     N
                                       (m) (m)
Sport shooting, hunting, gun and       UP  UP
fishing clubs (more than 50 people per (m) (m) N     N     N
day)
Off-road vehicle courses               N   UP  N     N     N     See Sec.
                                           (M)                   8-2.306(p)
Commercial pools, ponds, or lakes      UP  UP  UP(M) N     N
                                       (M) (m)
Health resorts, spas, and retreat      UP  UP  UP(M) N     N
centers                                (M) (M)
Rural sports activities, hiking,       UP  UP  N     SP    N
biking                                 (m) (m)
 
*   An “allowed use” does not require a land use permit, but is still subject
to permit requirements of other Yolo County divisions such as Building,
Environmental Health, and Public Works.
(1)   Cannabis uses require the issuance of a Use Permit pursuant to the
Cannabis Land Use Ordinance in Article 14.
Table 8-2.304(d)
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Agricultural Industrial, Resource
Extraction, and Utilities
A = Allowed use, subject Land Use Permit Required by Zone
to zoning clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                     Specific Use
UP(m) = Minor Use Permit                                  Requirements or
required                 A-N A-X A-C A-I A-R              Performance Standards
UP(M) = Major Use Permit
required
N = Use Not Allowed
A = Allowed use,      Land Use Permit Required by Zone
subject to zoning
clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                    Specific Use
UP(m) = Minor Use     A-N       A-X      A-C   A-I   A-R Requirements or
Permit required                                          Performance Standards
UP(M) = Major Use
Permit required
N = Use Not Allowed
AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRIAL, RESOURCE EXTRACTION, AND UTILITIES USES
Industrial Uses
Alcohol and biomass   UP(m)     UP(m)    N     SP    N
fuel production
Agricultural
chemical, fertilizer  UP(m)     UP(m)    UP(M) SP    N
sales and storage
Agricultural support  SP        SP       UP(m) A     N   See definition
services, small
Agricultural support  UP(m)     UP(m)    N     A     N   See definition
services, large
Agricultural and seed UP(m)     UP(m)    N     SP    N   See Sec.
research facilities                                      8-2.306(q)
Large industrial      UP(m)     UP(m)    N     SP    N
canneries
Regional processing   SP/UP (m) SP/UP(m) N     SP    N   See Sec.
facilities                                               8-2.306(r)
Cannabis
distribution,
manufacturing,        UP(M)     UP(M)    UP(M) UP(M) N   See Article 14
nurseries,
processing, testing/
lab (1)
Very large wine,
brewery, and olive
oil processing        UP(m)     UP(m)    N     SP    N
facilities (over
100,000 sq ft)
Commercial
composting, green     UP(M)     UP(M)    N     UP(m) N
waste facility
Construction yards    N         N        N     N     N
Crop dusting facility UP(m)     UP(m)    N     SP    N
Airports and          UP(m)     UP(m)    UP(M) SP    N
heliports, private
Airports and          UP(M)     UP(M)    N     UP(m) N
heliports, public
Explosives handling   N         N        N     UP(m) N
Sewage treatment
plants and disposal   N         N        N     UP(m) N
areas
Slaughterhouses       UP(M)     UP(M)    N     UP(m) N
Resource Extraction
Oil and gas well      SP        SP       N     SP    N   See Sec.
drilling operations                                      8-2.306(s)
                                                         See Sec.
Surface mining        UP(M)     UP(M)    N     SP    N   8-2.306(t) and Title
                                                         10
Utilities
Electrical
distribution,                                            See Secs.
transmission                                             8-2.1009 and 1106
substations;          UP(m)     UP(m)    N     SP    N   (Major Use Permit for
communication                                            facilities over 200
equipment buildings;                                     kV)
public utility
service yards
Small solar energy
system, onsite use    A         A        A     A     A
only
Small wind energy     SP        SP       SP    SP    SP
system for onsite use
Medium-sized solar
facility, where less
than 2.5 acres of     SP        SP       N     SP    N
habitat/farmland are                                     See Sec.
disturbed                                                8-2.306(u)
Medium-sized solar
facility, 2.5 acres
or more of habitat/   UP(m)     UP(m)    N     UP(m) N
farmland are
disturbed
Large and very large
solar and wind energy UP(m)     UP(m)    N     UP(m) N
facilities
Co-generation         UP(m)     UP(m)    UP(m) UP(m) N   See Sec.
facilities                                               8-2.306(v)
Wireless                                                 See Sec.
communication         UP(m)     UP(m)    UP(m) UP(m) N   8-2.306(w)
facilities
Vehicle charging      A         A        A     A     N   See definition in Sec.
station                                                  8-14.102
 
*   An “allowed use” does not require a land use permit, but is still subject
to permit requirements of other Yolo County divisions such as Building,
Environmental Health, and Public Works.
(1)   Cannabis uses require the issuance of a Use Permit pursuant to the
Cannabis Land Use Ordinance in Article 14.
Table 8-2.304(e)
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential and Other Uses
A = Allowed use, subject Land Use Permit Required by Zone
to zoning clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                     Specific Use
UP(m) = Minor Use Permit                                  Requirements or
required                 A-N A-X A-C A-I A-R              Performance Standards
UP(M) = Major Use Permit
required
N = Use Not Allowed
A = Allowed use, Land Use Permit Required by Zone
subject to
zoning
clearance*
SP = Site Plan
Review                                                         Specific Use
UP(m) = Minor                                                  Requirements or
Use Permit       A-N      A-X      A-C      A-I      A-R       Performance
required                                                       Standards
UP(M) = Major
Use Permit
required
N = Use Not
Allowed
RESIDENTIAL USES
Primary farm
dwelling         A        A        N        N        A
including duplex                                               See Secs.
Ancillary                                                      8-2.306(x) and
(second)         A        A        N        N        UP(m)     306(y);
dwelling                                                       8-2.402; and
More than two                                                  8-2.506(l) and
dwellings,                                                     (m)
including        UP(m)    UP(m)    N        N        N
manufactured
homes
Caretaker        SP       SP       UP(m)    UP(m)    N         See Sec.
residence                                                      8-2.306(z)
Guest house      SP/UP(m) SP/UP(m) N        N        SP/ UP(m) See
                                                               Table 8-2.506
Farm worker      A/SP     A/SP     N        UP(m)    N         See Sec.
housing                                                        8-2.306(aa)
Group/home care
( 6 or less      A        A        A        A        A         See Sec.
beds)                                                          8-2.506(f)
Group/home care  SP/UP(m) SP/UP(m) SP/UP(m) SP/UP(m) N
(7 or more beds)
Emergency        N        N        N        N        N         See Sec.
shelters                                                       8-2.606(m)
OTHER USES
Child care (<9   A        A        A        A        A
children)                                                      See Sec.
Child care (9 to SP/UP(m) SP/UP(m) N        N        N         8-2.506(g)
14 children)
Child care                                                     See Sec.
center (>14      UP(m)    UP(m)    N        N        N         8-2.506(h)
children)
Artist studio    A        A        A        A        A         See
                                                               Tables 8-2.504
Other accessory  A        A        A        A        A         (b) and
structures                                                     506

Second or        SP       SP       N        N        SP        See Sec.
outdoor kitchen                                                8-2.506(b)(7)
Vehicle storage, SP       SP       N        N        N
personal use
Home occupations A        A        N        N        A         See Sec.
                                                               8-2.306(ab)
Cottage food     A        A        A        A        A         See Sec.
operation                                                      8-2.506(k)
Cemeteries,
crematoriums,    N        N        N        N        N
mausoleums
Private schools,
churches, non-
profit           UP(M)    UP(M)    N        N        N         See Sec.
organizations,                                                 8-2.306(ac)
fraternal
organizations
Cannabis
cultivation,        See Cannabis Land Use Ordinance, Article 14
personal use
 
*   An “allowed use” does not require a land use permit, but is still subject
to permit requirements of other Yolo County divisions such as Building,
Environmental Health, and Public Works.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 4, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1494, eff. January 11, 2018; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1522, eff. August 6, 2020)
Sec. 8-2.305.   Table of Development Requirements.
   The following
Table 8-2.305 identifies the development requirements, including minimum parcel
sizes, building setbacks, and other standards that allowed and permitted uses
in the agricultural zones must meet as a standard or condition of any issued
building permit, Site Plan Review, or Use Permit.
Table 8-2.305
Development Requirements in Agricultural Zones(4)
 
                  Front Yard Rear Yard   Side Yard   Height       Building     Building  Density
AG   Minimum Lot  Setback    Setback     Setback     Restriction  Separation   Size      (dwellings
ZONE Area (acres) (feet)     (feet)      (feet)      (4) (feet)   (feet)       (square   per
                                                                               feet)     parcel)
     40 acres, if
     irrigated
     and in
     permanent
     crops; 80
     acres, if
A-N  irrigated
     and                                                          250 feet
     cultivated;                                                  max. between
     160 acres,                                                   dwellings;
     if                                                           10 feet
     uncultivated                                                 between      No limit
     and/or not   20 feet                                         dwellings    on
     irrigated    from                               40 feet for  and          primary   One
                  property                           residential  agricultural dwelling; primary
                  line, or                           uses;        structures,  ancillary dwelling
                  50 feet    25 feet     20 feet     Unrestricted unless       dwelling  (can be
                  from       from        from        for          building/    no        duplex),
                  centerline property    property    agricultural fire codes   greater   plus one
                  of         line (2)    line (2)    uses, except require      than      or more
                  roadway,   (3) (7)     (3) (7)     where        greater      2,500     ancillary
                  whichever                          required for distance;    square    (second)
                  is greater                         conditional  distance     feet,     dwellings
     160 acres,   (1) (2)                            uses         between      exclusive (5)
     if dry land  (3) (7)                                         accessory    of garage
A-X  farmed; 320                                                  structures   space
     acres, if                                                    as per
     rangeland                                                    Building and
                                                                  Fire Codes
                                                                  (7)







     1 acre
     minimum, 20                                     40 feet,
     acres        None,      None,       None,       unless
A-C  maximum;     unless     unless      unless      otherwise    As per
     parcel size  otherwise  specified   specified   specified by Uniform                None,
     determined   specified  by Use      by Use      Use Permit   Building and No limit  except as
     by use       by Use     Permit or   Permit or                Fire Codes.            caretaker
     5 acres;     Permit (2) required ag required ag None, unless (7)                    residence
     parcel size  (3) (7)    buffer(2)   buffer(2)   otherwise
A-I  must be                 (3)(7)      (3)(7)      specified by
     adequate                                        Use Permit
     size for use
                                                                  50 feet min.
                                                                  between
                                                                  dwellings;
                                                                  10 feet
                  20 feet    25 feet     20 feet                  between
                  from       from        from        40 feet for  dwellings    No limit
     2.5 acres;   property   property    property    residential  and          on        One
     parcel size  line, or   line if     line if     uses;        agricultural primary   primary
     may be       50 feet    adjoining a adjoining a unrestricted structures,  dwelling; dwelling
     increased to from       rural       rural       for          unless       ancillary (can be
A-R  4.0 acres to centerline residence,  residence,  agricultural Building/    dwelling  duplex),
     accommodate  of         100 to 300  100 to 300  uses, except Fire Codes   no        plus one
     an           roadway,   foot buffer foot buffer where        require a    greater   ancillary
     agricultural whichever  if          if          required for greater      than      (second)
     buffer(6)    is greater adjoining   adjoining   conditional  distance;    1,200     dwelling
                  (1) (2)    agriculture agriculture uses         distance     square    (5)
                  (3)        (2) (3)     (2) (3)                  between      feet
                                                                  accessory
                                                                  structures
                                                                  as per
                                                                  Building and
                                                                  Fire Codes
 
Notes:
1.   Yard abutting road is considered front. Properties abutting a major
arterial require a 30-foot front yard setback, as measured from the edge of
right-of-way.
2.   These minimum setback requirements shall be increased to no less than 100
feet if adjacent agricultural operations require a larger setback to
accommodate agricultural spraying. Development near the toe of any levee is
restricted, see Section
8-2.306(ad).
3.   For accessory structures, see Section
8-2.506(b) and
Table 8-2.506. The Director may approve the location of any standard accessory
structure within the required side or rear yards, which must be at least five
feet from the side and rear property lines, if a standard structure cannot be
located within standard setbacks.
4.   Appropriate findings for discretionary projects, and ministerial
residential projects, located within the floodplain are required, see Section
8-2.306(ae). Structures built in the 100-year flood plain to comply with FEMA
and local requirements will be measured from the top of the bottom floor, which
may include a basement, crawlspace, or enclosed floor.
5.   Ancillary dwelling(s) must meet home siting criteria as set forth in
Section
8-2.402.
6.   See Section
8-2.403 (Clustered Agricultural Housing).
7.   For cannabis uses, see Article 14 (Cannabis Land Use Ordinance) for
development requirements.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 681.229, eff. October 29,
2015; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1545, eff. January 6, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.306.   Specific Use Requirements and Performance Standards.
   The following specific use requirements or standards are applicable to some
of the specific uses identified in the previous
Tables 8-2.304(a) through
(e), and shall be applied to any issued building permit, Site Plan Review, or
Use Permit for uses in the agricultural zones.
   (a)   Covered and exempt habitat mitigation projects."Covered habitat
mitigation projects" undertaken to authorize mitigation in Yolo County for
impacts to biological resources occurring outside Yolo County, that are not
exempt pursuant to Section
10-1.301 of Title 10 of this Code, shall be subject to issuance of a Minor Use
Permit (if the project is less than forty (40) acres in size) or a Major Use
Permit (forty (40) acres or more in size). See Section
8-2.307 of this article for a definition of "covered habitat mitigation
projects," and see
Chapter 10 of Title 10 of this Code (the Habitat Mitigation Ordinance) for
specific requirements pertaining to such projects. Covered habitat mitigation
projects that are exempt under
Chapter 10 of Title 10 of this Code (the Habitat Mitigation Ordinance), and all
other habitat projects that do not qualify as "covered habitat mitigation
projects," are not subject to this Use Permit requirement.
   (b)   Privately-owned reservoirs.  Privately-owned reservoirs and/or water
retention basins, with associated on-site water transmission facilities, are
allowed as accessory uses in the Agricultural Zones, provided that such
reservoir or retention facility is found to have a potential either to provide
flood control, fire suppression, water supply, wildlife habitat improvement,
groundwater recharge, or tailwater enhancement, and is not for commercial use.
   (c)   Animal feedlots and cow dairies.
   (1)   In the A-N and A-X zones, small animal feedlots and cow dairies,
operating as animal feeding operations and defined as greater than fifty (50)
and less than one thousand (1,000) animal units, require the issuance of a
Minor Use Permit.
   (2)   In the A-N and A-X zones large animal feedlots and dairies (a CAFO),
defined as more than one thousand (1,000) animal units, require the issuance of
a Major Use Permit.
   (3)   One (1) mature cow, with or without calf, or animal of similar size is
equal to one (1) animal unit.
   (4)   A CAFO is a concentrated animal feeding operation where 1) animals are
confined for at least forty-five (45) days in a twelve (12) month period; 2)
there is no grass or other vegetation in the confinement area during the normal
growing season; and 3) the operation meets specific Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) regulatory thresholds. A CAFO, regulated by the State under the
authority of the EPA, may require a National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) Permit. A CAFO must meet a setback of no less than one hundred
(100) feet from any property line. A CAFO must manage storm water to prevent
any processing wastes or by-products from discharging into a storm facility or
waterway, unless a permit is received from the appropriate State or Federal
agency.
   (d)   Fowl and poultry ranches.
   (1)   In the A-N zone, fowl and poultry ranches, defined as more than two
hundred (200) animal units (or twenty thousand (20,000) fowl), are subject to
Site Plan Review if the operation consists solely of free range (no confined
structures or operations). If the animals are confined, issuance of a Minor Use
Permit is required. A CAFO shall meet the standards of subsection (c)(4),
above.
   (2)   Fowl and poultry ranches (with confined operations) on parcels less
than ten (10) acres may be subject to Site Plan Review or Minor Use Permit, at
the Director’s discretion.
   (3)   One hundred (100) fowl or poultry over three (3) pounds are equivalent
to one (1) animal unit.
   (e)   Hog farms or ranches.
   (1)   In the A-N and A-X zones, small hog farms or ranches, defined as less
than one hundred (100) confined hogs (twenty-five (25) animal units), raised
for commercial purposes (not for onsite consumption), are allowed by right.
   (2)   In the A-N and A-X zones, large hog farms or ranches, defined as more
than twenty-five (25) animal units (one hundred (100) confined hogs), are
subject to Minor Use Permit and Site Plan Review, respectively.
   (3)   Small hog farms or ranches, defined as more than fifty (50) but less
than one hundred (100) confined hogs on parcels less than fifteen (15) acres,
shall be treated as large hog farms or ranches.
   (4)   Four (4) butcher or breeding swine over fifty-five (55) pounds are
equivalent to one (1) animal unit.
   (f)   Animal hospitals and veterinary medical facilities.  Animal hospitals
and veterinary medical facilities are not allowed on any land under an active
Williamson Act contract.
   (g)   Household pets and non-profit rescue facilities.  Non-profit rescue
facilities that include more than ten (10) household pets are subject to a
Minor Use Permit and applicable kennel permit.
   (h)   Kennels and animal shelters.  Kennels and animal shelters are not
allowed on any land under an active Williamson Act contract.
   (i)   Stables.
   (1)   Stables are defined as “private” or “commercial” depending on the
number of horses that are boarded and if any events are held at the stable.
   (2)   “Private stables” include the boarding of fifteen (15) or fewer equine
animals that are not owned or leased pursuant to a written agreement, by either
the property owner or resident. No more than six (6) shows, exhibitions, or
other public/quasi-public events may be held per year. For the purposes of this
section, a public/quasi-public event is defined as a gathering where an
admission fee is charged, and/or where food and drink are sold onsite. Private
stables holding public/quasi-public events shall require approval of a Site
Plan Review, with the exception of events that draw more than one hundred (100)
vehicle trips per event. In such cases, a Minor Use Permit shall be required,
at the Director’s discretion. Private stables that hold more than six (6) such
events per year shall be considered a commercial stable, regardless of the
number of horses boarded.
   (3)   “Small commercial stables” are those that board between sixteen (16)
and twenty (20) horses and do not hold more than four (4) events per year.
   (4)   “Large commercial stables” are those that board more than twenty (20)
equine animals and may include the retail or wholesale sales of tack, feed, and
other equestrian products. Such sales shall be incidental to the operation of
the stable. Shows, exhibitions, or other public/quasi events related to equine
animals may be included as a part of the large commercial stable.
   (5)   Any structures used by the public, i.e., barns, indoor riding arenas,
etc., are required to be fully permitted, and shall be classified with respect
to the occupancy group and the listed use, as determined by the Chief Building
Official. Agriculturally exempt structures shall not be used by the public.
   (6)   Commercial stables on land under Williamson Act contract shall occupy
no more than ten percent (10%) of the total aggregate area, or five (5) acres,
whichever is more.
   (j)   Wineries, breweries, distilleries, and olive mills.
   (1)   “Small wineries, breweries, distilleries, and custom olive mills” are
defined as those that are housed in a space less than fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet in size, provide tastings, and have annual sales of less than
twenty-one thousand (21,000) cases per year.
   (2)   “Large wineries breweries, distilleries, and olive oil operations”
include tastings and sales in space greater than fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet with sales of more than twenty-one thousand (21,000) cases per
year.
   (3)   Wineries, olive mills, breweries, and distilleries with no tastings or
sales in facilities less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet are an
allowed use in the A-N and A-X Zones. A Site Plan Review may be required, at
the Director’s discretion.
   (k)   Special event facilities.
   (1)   Special event facilities include farm and residential land and
structures that are used for special events such as receptions, tastings,
special or seasonal celebrations, rodeos, and other gatherings, and may include
tasting rooms.
   (2)   A special event facility located on a parcel that is a minimum of
forty (40) acres is allowed by right, so long as the facility holds no more
than one (1) event per month not to exceed eight (8) events per year, and
attracts fewer than one hundred fifty (150) attendees at each event, and each
event generates less than one hundred (100) vehicle trips. At the discretion of
the Planning Director, a Site Plan Review or Minor Use Permit may be required
if there are any agricultural, residential, vehicle access, traffic, or other
land use compatibility issues, or if any of the development standards are not
met.
   (3)   Any structures used by the public, i.e., barns, indoor riding arenas,
etc., are required to be fully permitted, and shall be classified with respect
to the occupancy group and the listed use, as determined by the Chief Building
Official. Agriculturally exempt structures shall not be used by the public
unless the structures are reclassified through the issuance of a new building
permit.
   (4)   Small special event facilities are allowed in the A-N, A-X and the A-
R agricultural zones and in the RR-5, RR-2, and R-L residential zone with a
Minor Use Permit. Small special event facilities are allowed with a Site Plan
Review in the Clarksburg Agricultural District, and are allowed by right with
building and environmental health permits in the A-C and A-I zones, provided
that the project meets all development standards. At the discretion of the
Planning Director, a Minor Use Permit may be required for a small special event
facility if there are any agricultural, residential, vehicle access, traffic,
or other land use compatibility issues, or if any of the development standards
are not met. A Minor Use Permit shall be required if the project involves noise
generating activities after 10 p.m.
   (5)   Large special event facilities require the issuance of a Major Use
Permit in the A-N, and A-X, and A-R zones, except in the A-C and A-I zones, and
the Clarksburg Agricultural District, where a Minor Use Permit is required. At
the discretion of the Planning Director, a Major Use Permit may be required for
a large project in the A-C and A-l zones and the Clarksburg Agricultural
District, if there are any agricultural, residential, vehicle access, traffic,
if other land use compatibility issues, or if any of the development standards
are not met. A Major Use Permit shall be required if the project involves noise
generating activities after 10 p.m.
   (6)   Parking for special events, receptions, marketing promotional events,
and similar functions may utilize temporary, overflow parking areas.
   (7)   Review of a special event facility subject to discretionary approval
shall consider vehicular access as it relates to traffic, public safety,
potential conflicts with farming equipment, and points of access to public
roads. Vehicular access shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Director, and all jurisdictional authorities including the local Fire District
and CalFire. The adequacy of vehicular access shall also be reviewed for
comment by the County Sheriff's Office and the Highway Patrol, as appropriate.
In determining whether to issue a Use Permit, the decision-making authority
shall consider the relevant factors and considerations identified in section
8-2.217(e).
   (8)   A special event facility must be designed to be compatible with any
adjoining agricultural operations and single family residences, including
appropriate setbacks, landscaping, and parking. Adequate land area must be
available for the provision of on-site services, e.g., leachfields, to
accommodate the projected number of attendees. Approval of large special event
facility applications shall include conditions that regulate potential impacts
to adjacent agricultural operations and neighbors including noise, lighting,
dust, spray buffers, crime/trespassing/ vandalism; and advance notification for
large events over one hundred fifty (150) participants.
   (9)   Small and large special event facilities subject to discretionary
approval shall include an agricultural spraying buffer or setback from any
nearby established and active orchard or farm field that employs spraying,
measured from the outdoor areas where participants may congregate, based on
existing nearby agricultural operations. A buffer or setback may be reduced or
eliminated, either permanently or for a fixed number of years, with the
approval of all owners of neighboring properties affected by the buffer. Such
approval must be in writing, binding on all successors in interest, filed with
the Department of Community Services and Agricultural Commissioner, and
recorded with the County Recorder.
   (10)   An application for a small and large special event facility located
in a Fire Hazard Severity Zone shall include a public safety/fire and emergency
evacuation plan. The Public Safety Plan shall require: a detailed fire plan,
including evacuation; a staffing plan; employees/staff training in all safety
procedures; a smoking policy; and a ban on all fireworks.
   (11)   A large special event facility located on lands under a Williamson
Act contract or in a Williamson Act Agricultural Preserve must be incidental to
an established agricultural operation and found to comply with the Williamson
Act statutes, including Government Code Section 51238.1. If a finding of
consistency or compatibility with the Williamson Act cannot be made, the land
must have exited the Williamson Act program prior to permit approval.
   (l)   Bed and breakfasts/lodging.
   (1)   A "small" bed and breakfast/lodging is defined as one which has six
(6) guest rooms or less. A "large" bed and breakfast/lodging has more than six
(6) guest rooms and not more than ten (10) guest rooms. Different thresholds
apply within the Clarksburg Agricultural District (see Sec.
8-2.401). A bed and breakfast/lodging of any size that holds "special events"
shall also comply with all applicable requirements for special event facilities
found in Sec.
8-2.306(k).
   (2)   Small bed and breakfasts/lodging are allowed by right within the
Clarksburg Agricultural District, with the issuance of a Site Plan Review in
all of the A-X, A-N, and A-C agricultural zones, and with the issuance of a
Minor Use Permit in the A-R zone and in the RR-5, R-L, R-M, and R-H residential
zones, provided that the project includes no newly constructed cottages or
buildings.
   (3)   Large bed and breakfasts/lodging are subject to a Major Use Permit in
the A-X and A-N zones all of the residential zones, and are subject to a Minor
Major Use Permit in the A-C agricultural zone and the Clarksburg Agricultural
District.
   (4)   At the discretion of the Planning Director, a Minor Use Permit may be
required for a small bed and breakfast/lodging, or a Major Use Permit may be
required for a large bed and breakfast/lodging, if there are any agricultural,
residential, vehicle access, traffic, or other land use compatibility issues,
or if any of the following development standards are not met:
   (i)   All guest rooms must be located within and accessible through the main
single-family dwelling. Alternatively, guest rooms may be located outside the
primary residence cottages (newly constructed structures or existing buildings
that are renovated for habitable use), provided that any newly constructed
cottages require the issuance of a Major Use Permit.
   (ii)   Food service for a traditional bed and breakfast must be restricted
to breakfast or a similar early morning meal. The price of food must be
included in the price of overnight accommodation. Lodging other than a
traditional bed and breakfast is not required to serve breakfast for guests,
but all other standards must be met.
   (iii)   Adequate parking and access must be provided, as set forth in Sec.
8-2.306(k)(5) and (6), above.
   (iv)   The project must be designed to be compatible with any adjoining
agricultural operations and single family residences, including appropriate
setbacks, landscaping, and parking.
   (v)   Adequate land area is available for the provision of on-site services,
e.g., leachfields, to accommodate the number of guests and employees, if the
project is not connected to public services.
   (vi)   Bed and breakfast inns/lodging shall comply with all CCDEH
(California Conference of Directors of Environmental Health) guidelines and
CURFFL (California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law) requirements.
   (5)   Small and large bed and breakfasts/ lodging subject to discretionary
approval shall include an agricultural spraying buffer or setback from any
nearby established and active orchard or farm field that employs spraying,
measured from the outdoor areas where participants may congregate, based on
existing nearby agricultural operations. A buffer or setback may be reduced or
eliminated, either permanently or for a fixed number of years, with the
approval of all owners of neighboring properties affected by the buffer. Such
approval must be in writing, binding on all successors in interest, filed with
the Department of Community Services and Agricultural Commissioner, and
recorded with the County Recorder. In determining whether to issue a Use
Permit, the decision-making authority shall consider the relevant factors and
considerations identified in section
8-2.217(e).
   (6)   A large bed and breakfast/lodging facility located on lands under a
Williamson Act contract or in a Williamson Act agricultural preserve must be
incidental to an established agricultural operation, and must be found to
comply with the Williamson Act statutes, including Government Code Section
51238.1. If a finding of consistency or compatibility with the Williamson Act
cannot be made, the contract must be cancelled or must have exited the
Williamson Act program through non-renewal prior to permit approval.
   (m)   Farm stays.
   (1)   A "farm stay" includes six (6) or fewer guestrooms or accommodates no
more than fifteen (15) guests, in a single family dwelling, or main farm house,
or accessory guest house, provided as part of a working farm or ranch
operation. A farm stay may hold farm dinners for guests. A farm stay may hold
no more than four (4) special events per year, attended by no more than fifty
(50) attendees. A farm stay that exceeds these performance standards shall be
processed as either a Special Event Facility or a Bed and Breakfast, as
applicable.
   (2)   Farm stays are allowed in all of the agricultural zones, with the
exception of the A-I zone, and in the RR-5 residential zone, provided that the
project is designed to be compatible with any adjoining agricultural operations
and single family residences. At the discretion of the Planning Director, a
Minor Use Permit may be required for a project if there are any compatibility
issues, or if any of the following development standards are not met:
   (i)   An agricultural/farm stay must be located on and be a part of a farm
or ranch that produces agricultural products as its primary source of income.
An on-site farmer or rancher must be in residence on the property. Lodging and
meals must be incidental to, and not the primary function of, the farm stay.
   (ii)   The price of food must be included in the price of overnight
accommodation.
   (iii)   Adequate parking and access must be provided, as set forth in Sec.
8-2.306(k)(5) and (6), above.
   (iv)   The project must be designed to be compatible with any adjoining
agricultural operations and single family residences, including appropriate
setbacks, landscaping, and parking.
   (v)   Adequate land area must be available for the provision of on-site
services, e.g., leachfields, to accommodate the number of guests and farm
employees, if the project is not connected to public services.
   (vi)   Farm stays shall comply with all CCDEH (California Conference of
Directors of Environmental Health) guidelines and CURFFL (California Uniform
Retail Food Facilities Law) requirements, if applicable.
   (n)    (Reserved.)
   (o)   Rural restaurants. Rural restaurants must be appurtenant to the
primary agricultural use of the area. Rural restaurants are allowed only in the
A-C zone. New rural restaurants may not be established as the only or single
use on a parcel in a predominantly agricultural area.
   (p)   Rural recreational facilities.
   (1)   Activities on Williamson Act-contracted land in the A-N and A-X zones
shall require issuance of a Major Use Permit for any rural recreational uses
requiring any new construction, including significant grading, and/or
generating in excess of one hundred (100) vehicle trips per use or per day.
Such uses shall be found to meet the following standards:
   (i)   The use will not substantially modify the land’s natural
characteristics or change them beyond those modifications already related to
current or previous agricultural uses;
   (ii)   The use will not require permanent cessation of agriculture on the
subject lands or preclude conversion back to agriculture if desirable in the
future; and
   (iii)   The use will not be detrimental to surrounding agricultural uses in
the area.
   (2)   In addition to the above findings, proposed uses such as health
resorts, spas, and retreat centers must be found to benefit from locating in a
quiet, sparsely-populated, agricultural or natural environment.
   (q)   Small experimental agricultural and seed research facilities.
Agricultural and seed research facilities require the issuance of a Minor Use
Permit. However, small, experimental, or pilot agricultural and seed research
facilities occupying no more than five (5.0) acres of a site, which are
incidental to the main agricultural use, may be allowed through the issuance of
a Site Plan Review.
   (r)   Regional agricultural processing facilities.  Agricultural processing
facilities, such as nut hullers, wine presses, and olive mills, that include
one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more of building area and/or
generate sixty (60) truck trips or more per day require issuance of a Minor Use
Permit in the A-N and A-X Zones. However, those agricultural processing
facilities located on land subject to a Williamson Act contract may require a
Major Use Permit, at the Director’s discretion. Those agricultural processing
facilities with building areas less than one hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet and/or that do not generate more than sixty (60) truck trips per day may
be allowed through the issuance of a Site Plan Review, at the Director’s
discretion.
   (s)   Oil and gas well drilling operations.
   (1)   No oil or gas drilling operation shall be established in the
unincorporated area of the County until the Director of Planning, Public Works
and Environmental Services or his designee has approved the Site Plan or such
operation, and the applicant agrees to operate/conduct the drilling operation
in compliance with the below listed conditions.
   (2)   The applicant shall post a performance bond or other good and
sufficient surety approved by the County in the amount of not less than
$5,000.00 to secure compliance with the criteria and conditions imposed upon
the approval of the oil and gas drilling operation Site Plan Certificate. The
release of the performance bond shall not occur until the reclamation of land
disturbed during the drilling operation and the removal of all equipment not
necessary for the normal maintenance of the oil and gas well is complete.
   (3)   The oil or gas well drilling operation shall not be located within
one-half (½) mile of any designated residential area shown on the adopted
County General Plan and/or a City General Plan or a county and/or city
residential zone district.
   (4)   A Use Permit shall be required if the oil or gas well drilling
operation cannot meet the following criteria:
   (i)   Except for drill stem testing and emergency procedures, no drilling
operation shall result in an ambient noise level in excess of sixty (60)
decibels (measured as an LDN average), measured at the outside of the nearest
residence at the bedroom window closest to the drilling site; unless, however,
it can be demonstrated that the ambient noise level at such location prior to
the commencement of the drilling operation was fifty-seven (57) decibels or
higher, then the noise standard shall be that the drilling operation does not
result in the addition of more than three (3) decibels to the preexisting
ambient noise level. The noise level requirements may be waived if the
applicant has received a written waiver from the resident of any residence at
which the noise level would exceed the standards set forth in this subsection.
If the dwelling is leased, the tenant shall execute the waiver, and the
property owner shall be notified.
   (ii)   All lights on the drill site shall be erected/installed according to
CAL-OSHA employee safety requirements and shall be shielded and/or directed so
as to focus the direct rays from the lights onto the drilling site and away
from the residences, except where required for aircraft warning purposes.
   (iii)   All vehicle parking and maneuvering areas shall be treated in such a
manner as to control dust. Such treatment may be accomplished by placing gravel
on such areas and/or periodically watering the areas, or by other means
approved by the Director.
   (iv)   The drilling operation shall comply with the requirements of all
other agencies having jurisdiction over the site and operation. Yolo County
Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services may require additional
permits, including, but not limited to:
   A.   A grading permit if the drilling operation results in any ground
disturbance;
   B.   A building permit for the erection of structures;
   C.   A flood elevation certificate if construction occurs in a FEMA
designated one hundred (100) year flood zone; and
   D.   An encroachment permit if the construction of access roads connects to
a County right-of-way.
   (v)   The drilling operation shall be located no closer than the following
distances from the specified uses if such uses are located:
   A.   Within five hundred (500) feet of any school;
   B.   Within five hundred (500) feet of any church or place of public
worship;
   C.   Within five hundred (500) of any place of public assembly;
   D.   Within five hundred (500) feet of any dwelling (the applicant must show
or state the distance to the nearest residence), unless residents of such
dwelling have filed a written waiver;
   E.   Within one hundred (100) feet of the property line to any County road
or State highway; and
   F.   Within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any levee owned by any public
agency.
   (5)   Abandoned gas wells shall be sealed in accordance with Division of Oil
and Gas regulations, and all drilling or production facilities shall be
removed.
   (6)   The disturbed surface area of an abandoned gas well shall be
reincorporated into adjoining agricultural operations or re-vegetated with
native vegetation within one (1) year after abandonment.
   (t)   Surface mining.
   (1)   Surface mining operations must comply with all applicable regulations
in
Title 10, Chapter 3 (Cache Creek Area Plan In-Channel Maintenance Mining
Ordinance,
Chapter 4 (Off-Channel Surface Mining),
Chapter 5 (Surface Mining Reclamation), and
Chapter 8 (Agricultural Surface Mining Reclamation Ordinance). Commercial
surface mining operations may be allowed only when located within the Cache
Creek Off-Channel Mining Plan area on lands within the Mineral Resources
Overlay (MR-O) zone and when the operations are consistent with all policies
and regulations of the Cache Creek Area Plan and its implementing ordinances.
   (2)   Agricultural surface mining operations may be allowed outside the MR-
O zone where it is wholly integral and necessary to the conduct of agricultural
activities, including but not limited to the following circumstances: to
improve soil quality, as a byproduct of land leveling, to develop aquaculture
facilities, to create or enhance wildlife habitat, or to maintain or improve
drainage and flood control facilities (see
Chapter 8, Agricultural Surface Mining Reclamation Ordinance).
   (u)   Solar and wind energy facilities. See regulations for solar and wind
energy facilities in Article 11 of this chapter.
   (v)   Cogeneration facilities. See regulations for cogeneration facilities
in Article 11 of this chapter.
   (w)   Wireless telecommunications facilities.  See regulations for wireless
telecommunications facilities in Section
8-2.1102 in Article 11 of this chapter.
   (x)   Manufactured or mobile homes and commercial coaches.  Manufactured or
mobile homes, and commercial coaches, may be located in agricultural zones and
shall comply with the following development standards:
   (1)   In addition to any other requirements set forth in this chapter, the
use of manufactured homes shall be governed by the sanitary regulations and
building regulations prescribed by the State and/or County, together with all
amendments thereto subsequently adopted and as may otherwise be required by
law.
   (2)   The manufactured home shall have a floor area of sufficient size to be
compatible with existing dwellings in the area.
   (3)   Approved manufactured home skirting shall be applied around the base
of the mobile home so as to obscure the area beneath the unit. Wood skirting
located nearer than six (6) inches to the earth shall be treated wood or wood
of natural resistance to decay and termites as defined in the most current
edition of the Uniform Building Code, or any amendment thereto. Metal skirting
shall be galvanized or treated metal or metal resistant to corrosion.
   (4)   The manufactured home, its installation and facilities, any permanent
buildings, and any manufactured home accessory buildings and structures shall
be governed by the standards adopted by the Department of Housing and Community
Development of the State, and said provisions shall govern the maintenance,
use, and occupancy of such mobile homes.
   (5)   A commercial coach or trailer is allowed in the agricultural zones,
with the exception of the Agricultural Residential (A-R) zone, through the
issuance of a Site Plan Review, subject to the requirements of Section
8-2.1012 and
8-2.1013 of Article 10.
   (6)   A mobile home or commercial coach may be used as a temporary dwelling
or office in any of the agricultural zones, pending the construction of the
permanent dwelling or office, after obtaining a building permit for the
construction of the permanent dwelling or office, pursuant to the requirements
of Section
8-2.1013 of Article 10.
   (y)   Agricultural dwellings.
   (1)   A new primary or ancillary home in an agricultural zone is allowed “by
right” with the issuance of a building permit, provided the home meets all of
the development siting standards of Section
8-2.402.
   (2)   Construction of a new ancillary dwelling, including installation of a
new manufactured home, is limited in size to no more than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet, excluding garage space. New dwellings must meet
the development siting standards in Section
8-2.402.
   (3)   Construction of more than two (2) dwelling units, as well as the
legalization of more than two (2) existing units, may be permitted through the
issuance of a Minor Use Permit, upon a finding that the residential use is
compatible and appurtenant with the principal agricultural use of the property.
   (z)   Caretaker residence.  A caretaker residence is allowed on A-C and A-
I zoned property as an ancillary use to the primary agricultural commercial or
agricultural industrial use of the property, as determined by the Director of
Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services. A caretaker residence is not
allowed on A-R zoned property if two (2) homes already exist. A caretaker
residence on A-N and A-X zoned property that is in addition to a primary and
ancillary dwelling requires a Minor Use Permit.
   (aa)   Farm worker housing. As required by State law (Health and Safety Code
Sec. 17021.6), farm worker housing projects of thirty-six (36) beds or less, or
twelve (12) separate housing units or less, are allowed in the agricultural
zones with the issuance of a building permit, except in the A-I, A-C, and A-
R zones. A project with more than thirty-six (36) beds or twelve (12) units
requires a Minor or Major Use Permit, at the discretion of the Planning
Director. A Site Plan Review may be required for projects that do not meet any
of the following development standards:
   (1)   The project is designed to be compatible with any adjoining single
family residences, including appropriate setbacks, landscaping, and parking.
   (2)   Adequate land area is available for the provision of on-site services,
e.g., leachfields, to accommodate the number of farm employees, if the project
is not connected to public services.
   (3)   The project meets State regulatory requirements and has received, or
will receive in the near future, all necessary State operating permits,
including certificates from the Department of Housing and Community
Development.
   (ab)   Rural home occupations.  A rural home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and secondary to the residential and/or agricultural use of the
dwelling or premises and shall meet the following standards:
   (1)   Confined within the dwelling and occupies not more than fifty percent
(50%) of the gross area of one floor; or, is confined within a detached
accessory structure such as a private shop or office, and is fully permitted
for such use.
   (2)   Operated by the members of the family occupying the dwelling, plus a
maximum of two (2) additional employees.
   (3)   Produces no external evidence of its existence by storing goods and
materials associated with the occupation in an enclosed structure(s), including
any vehicles associated with the use.
   (4)   Generates no dust, odors, noise, or other such nuisances beyond that
normal in the area in which such use is located.
   (5)   The activity does not exceed the volume of truck, passenger, or
pedestrian traffic normally associated with the rural or agricultural uses of
the surrounding area, and shall not interfere with vehicle circulation.
   (6)   Meets the requirements of the Chief Building Official and the fire
district of the jurisdiction.
   (7)   Signage is limited to a single, non-illuminated wall-mounted or free-
standing sign of not more than six (6) square feet in area and four (4) feet in
height.
   (ac)   Private schools, churches, non-profit organizations.  A private
school, church, non-profit or fraternal organization proposed in an
agricultural zone may not be approved unless it is found that the use has
demonstrated a benefit from the agricultural use of the area. Otherwise, such a
use must be proposed on lands that are zoned, or will be zoned, Public and
Quasi-Public (PQP). Such uses may not be allowed on lands under Williamson Act
contract.
   (ad)   Development near toe of levee, restricted.
   (1)   A fifty (50) foot setback is required for all permanent improvements
from the toe of any flood control levee.
   (2)   Land uses proposed within five hundred (500) feet of the toe of any
flood control levee shall be restricted (or prohibited) to the items listed
below, unless site specific engineering evidence demonstrates an alternate
action that would not jeopardize public health or safety:
   (i)   Permanent unlined excavations shall be prohibited.
   (ii)   Large underground spaces (such as basements, cellars, swimming pools,
etc.) must be engineered to withstand the uplift forces of shallow groundwater.
   (iii)   Below-grade septic leach systems shall be prohibited.
   (iv)   Engineered specifications for buried utility conduits and wiring
shall be required.
   (v)   New water wells shall be prohibited.
   (vi)   New gas or oil wells shall be prohibited.
   (vii)   Engineered specifications for levee penetrations shall be required.
   (viii)   Landscape root barriers within fifty (50) feet of the toe shall be
required.
   (ae)   Approvals within the 100- and 200-year floodplain. Before approving
any discretionary project or permit located on land within the floodplain, or
any ministerial project or permit that would result in the construction of a
new residence, the Chief Building Official, Zoning Administrator, or decision-
making body shall make a finding related to urban level of flood protection
based on substantial evidence in the record for one of the following:
   (1)   The facilities of the State Plan of Flood Control or other flood
management facilities protect the project to the urban level of flood
protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency
Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas.
   (2)   The city or county has imposed conditions on the permit or
discretionary entitlement that will protect the project to the urban level of
flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal
Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas.
   (3)   The local flood management agency has made adequate progress on the
construction of a flood protection system which will result in flood protection
equal to or greater than the urban level of flood protection in urban or
urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard
of flood protection in nonurbanized areas for property located within a flood
hazard zone, intended to be protected by the system. For urban and urbanizing
areas protected by project levees, the urban level of flood protection shall be
achieved by 2025.
   (af)   Cannabis operations. Cannabis uses are regulated under Article 14 of
this Chapter.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 681.229, eff. October 29,
2015; as amended by § 4, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24, 2016; as amended by § 3,
Ord. 1468, eff. May 13, 2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1494, eff. January 11,
2018; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1501, eff. August 23, 2018; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1545, eff. January 6, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.307.   Definitions.
   Accessory agricultural support structure
   “Accessory agricultural support structure” shall mean an uninhabited
agricultural building or facility that is incidental and accessory to the
primary agricultural use of the subject property. Such structures include, but
are not limited to, the following: farm office, barn, roadside stand, and
reservoir.
   Accessory use
   “Accessory use” shall mean a use lawfully permitted in the zone, which use
is incidental to, and subordinate to, the principal use of the site or of a
main building on the site and serving a purpose which does not change the
character of the principal use, and which is compatible with other principal
uses in the same zone and with the purpose of such zone.
   Agricultural airfield or landing strip
   Any area of land or water used for the landing and take-off of agricultural
aircraft as well as any appurtenant areas used for airport buildings,
operations, and related facilities. Also includes heliports used for
agricultural purposes.
   Agricultural and seed research
   “Agricultural and seed research” shall mean industrial or scientific uses
subordinate to, and in support of agriculture, and include product processing
plants and agriculturally based laboratories or facilities for the production
or research of food, fiber, seeds, animal husbandry or medicine, and may
include administrative office space in support of the operation.
   Agricultural building or structure
   An uninhabited building or structure used to shelter farm animals, farm
implements, supplies, products and/or equipment; and that contains no
residential use, is not open to the public, and is incidental and accessory to
the principal use of the premise. An agricultural building may contain
processing activities as a direct result of the farming operation on the
premises.
   Agricultural processing facility
   A fixed establishment performing any processing or packaging of crops after
harvest, whether or not value is added, for the onsite preparation of market or
for further processing and packaging elsewhere, including but not limited to:
alfalfa and hay cubing; corn shelling; drying of corn, rice, hay, fruits and
vegetables; pre-cooling and packaging of fresh or farm-dried fruits and
vegetables; grain cleaning and custom grinding; custom grist mills; custom
milling of flour, feed and grain; sorting, grading and packing of fruits and
vegetables; canning, freezing, or preserving fruits and vegetables; tree nut
hulling and shelling; and alcohol fuel production.
   Agricultural support services
   “Agricultural support services” are industrial, wholesale trade,
warehousing, and trucking uses directly supporting agricultural activities and
products in the unincorporated areas of Yolo County. Examples of “agricultural
support services” include the manufacturing, assembly, or repair (but not
unlimited retail sales) of agricultural equipment; the manufacturing, storage,
distribution, transport, and wholesaling of fertilizer and agricultural
chemicals; and the storage, distribution, transport, and wholesaling of other
agricultural products from Yolo County. “Agricultural support services” do not
include any activities or uses that serve primarily non-agricultural or urban
customers. Specifically, trucking firms and industrial shops that do not serve
local agricultural customers are prohibited from locating in any of the
agricultural areas of Yolo County.
   Agricultural support services, large and small
   Large agricultural support services are those uses that occupy more than
five (5) acres of land or more than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet of
indoor space, and/or that generate more than sixty (60) truck trips per day.
Small agricultural support services are those that do not meet any of these
thresholds.
   Agriculture
   The use of land for the raising of crops, trees or animals, including
farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture, apiaries, and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary
accessory uses thereto; provided, however, the operation of any such accessory
uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities. For the
purposes of this section, “accessory use” shall mean supply, service, storage,
and processing areas and facilities for any other agricultural land. The uses
set forth in this section shall not include plants for the reduction of animal
matter.
   Agri-tourism
   Agri-tourism uses include, but are not limited to, wine, beer, and olive oil
tasting, sale of local agricultural products, seasonal and permanent farm
stands, "Yolo Stores," farm tours, lodging (including bed and breakfasts and
farm stays), and event centers that accommodate receptions, music, and limited
dining including farm dinners.
   Ancillary dwelling
   A structure designed, intended, or used for rural residential purposes, as
elsewhere provided for herein, and including “Granny Units,” that is located
appurtenant to, clustered with, and on the same agricultural parcel as the main
residential facilities. The term does not include farm worker housing.
   Animal hospital
   A building wherein the care and treatment of sick or injured dogs, cats,
rabbits, birds, and similar small animals are performed.
   Animal keeping
   The keeping, feeding or raising of animals as a commercial agricultural
venture, avocation, hobby or school project, either as a principal land use or
subordinate to a residential use. Includes the keeping of common farm animals,
small-animal specialties, bee farms, aviaries, worm farms, household pets, etc.
   Animal processing
   The slaughtering and processing of animals for commercial purposes,
including rendering plants.
   Animal unit
   A measure of numbers of livestock equivalent to a mature cow which is based
on the concept that a one thousand (1,000) pound cow, with or without an
unweaned calf, is one (1) animal unit.
   The following measurements can be used to determine animal unit equivalency:
 
Type of Animal                Animal Unit Equivalent Number of Animals Equal to
                                                     One Animal Unit
Mature cow, with or without
calf, or animal of similar    1.0                    1
size
Butcher or breeding swine     0.25                   4
over 55 pounds
Mature sheep, goats, or       0.1                    10
animal of similar size
Rabbits or other small animal 0.02                   50
of similar size
Fowl or poultry over 3 pounds 0.01                   100
 
   Appurtenant use or activity
   An appurtenant use is one that is an addition to, or attached to, and is
compatible with, the primary use or activity on the parcel.
   Barn
   A building used to store farm vehicles and equipment, as a warehouse for
farm products and supplies, to house livestock, or to conduct maintenance
activities.
   Bed and Breakfast (B&B)/lodging
   A single-family dwelling, and accessory buildings, cottages and bungalows,
with an owner or manager in residence or on-site, containing no more than ten
(10) guest rooms used, let or hired out for transient night-to-night lodging,
and that meets all of the standards in Section
8-2.306(l). Food service, if provided, is restricted to breakfast or a similar
early morning meal, subject to applicable County Health Department regulations.
   Campground
   Land or premises which is used, or intended to be used, let, or rented for
transient occupancy by persons traveling by automobile or otherwise, or by
transient persons using tents, recreational vehicles, or similar quarters. A
campground may include permanent amenities, such as structures, bathroom
facilities, running water and proper sewage disposal.
   Campground, primitive
   A seasonal campground that does not require grading activity for the
placement of permanent improvements or amenities, such as bathroom facilities,
running water or sewage disposal fields. Informal overnight camping in fields
or orchards in connection with single annual events is not covered by this
definition.
   Caretaker units
   A permanent residence, secondary and accessory to an existing main dwelling,
for persons employed principally onsite for purposes of care and protection of
persons, property, plants, animals, equipment, or other circumstances.
   Composting facility
   A commercial/industrial facility where organic matter is transformed into
soil or fertilizer by biological decomposition. Composting activities accessory
to an onsite residential or agricultural use are excluded from this definition.
   Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO)
   An agricultural animal feeding operation (AFO) where animals are kept and
raised in confined situations. Feed is brought to the animals rather than the
animals grazing or otherwise seeking feed in pastures, fields, or on rangeland.
An AFO is a CAFO if: 1) animals are confined for at least forty-five (45) days
in a twelve (12) month period; 2) there is no grass or other vegetation in the
confinement area during the normal growing season; and 3) the operation meets
specific Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulatory thresholds. A CAFO,
regulated by the State under the authority of the EPA, may require a National
Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit.
   Conservation easement
   A non-possessory interest in real property imposing limitations or
affirmative obligations, the purpose of which includes retaining or protecting
natural, scenic, or open space values of real property; assuring its
availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or open space use;
protecting natural resources; or maintaining air or water quality.
   Cottage food operation
   Cottage food operations involve the preparation of low risk food products in
a private home, as defined and regulated by the Environmental Health Division
according to the requirements of State law (AB 1616, 2012, the California
Homemade Food Act).
   Cottages
   Bungalows or cottages, attached or unattached, that are part of an approved
bed and breakfast use, that are located within an agricultural area on
agricultural-zoned lands, and that are incidental to permitted agri-tourism
uses located on the parcel or in the immediate agricultural area. Cottages may
be newly constructed structures or existing buildings that are renovated for
habitable use. Cottages are not motel rooms and are not used to house
permanent, year-round residents.
   Covered habitat mitigation project
   A "covered habitat mitigation project" is any mitigation bank, Mitigation
Credit Agreement entered into pursuant to an adopted Regional Conservation
Investment Strategy, or other project within the County that is undertaken to
authorize mitigation in Yolo County for impacts to biological resources
occurring outside of the County. A "covered habitat mitigation project" also
includes all other habitat restoration, creation, enhancement, or preservation
activities (including the sale of a conservation easement or interest therein)
carried out within the County partly or entirely in connection with projects or
other actions impacting biological resources in locations outside of the
County. This includes, among other things, any such project that implements
actions described in a Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Communities
Conservation Plan or in a biological opinion issued by the United States Fish
and Wildlife Service or other Federal agency. This term is to be interpreted
broadly, consistent with the intent of Ordinance No. 1426, to include all
projects, plans, and activities that are substantially similar to any of the
foregoing, regardless of whether they are specifically described herein.
   Cultivation
   The growing and harvesting of agricultural produce for food and fiber. Crop
cultivation includes farms, orchards, groves, greenhouses, and wholesale
nurseries primarily engaged in growing crops, plants, vines, or trees and their
seeds.
   Dairy
   A department, establishment, or facility concerned with the business of
production of milk, butter, or cheese, including the sale or distribution of
milk and milk products, from animals. The feeding and care for dairy stock may
be by feed lot, pasture or grazing, or any combination thereof, as elsewhere
provided for herein. A dairy facility does not include the incidental feeding,
breeding, raising, and keeping of livestock for the production of milk when
used for 4-H, FFA, or other youth projects.
   Dry land farming
   The practice of crop production without irrigation.
   Exempt habitat mitigation projects
   “Exempt habitat mitigation projects” are those that are defined as exempt
under Section
10-10.301(c) of
Chapter 10 of Title 10 of this Code (the Habitat Mitigation Ordinance), and all
other habitat projects that do not qualify as “covered habitat mitigation
projects.”
   Farm
   Under Section 52262 of the Food and Agricultural Code, a farm is defined as:
“a place of agricultural production which has annual sales of agricultural
products of $1,000 or more.”
   Farm office
   A private administrative office within an enclosed building for the purpose
of running a farming operation.
   Farm stay
   A form of agricultural tourism where a farmer or rancher hosts guests or
tourists at his/her working farm or ranch to familiarize the visitors with the
daily activities associated with farming or ranching. Farm stays include six
(6) or fewer guestrooms, or accommodations for no more than fifteen (15)
guests, in a single family dwelling, or main farm house, or accessory guest
house, provided as part of a farming operation, with an on-site farmer in
residence, that includes all meals provided in the price of the lodging, and
that meets all of the standards in Section
8-2.306(m).
   Farm worker housing
   Any living quarters, dwelling, boardinghouse, bunkhouse, mobile home, or
other housing accommodation maintained in connection with any work or place
where work is being performed and the premises upon which such accommodations
are situated, and/or the areas set aside and provided for the accommodation of
farm workers.
   Feed lot or animal feed yard
   (1)   “Feed lot” shall mean any premises used principally for the raising or
keeping of livestock in a confined feeding area, such as a dairy or stockyard.
   (2)   “Confined feeding area” shall mean any livestock feeding, handling, or
holding operation or feed yard where animals are concentrated in an area:
   (i)   which is not normally used for pasture or for growing crops and in
which animal wastes may accumulate; or
   (ii)   where the space per animal unit is less than six hundred (600) square
feet; or
   (iii)   dry lot feeding, where animals are confined in an enclosed area, and
fed.
   (3)   “Feed lot” is not intended to otherwise preclude the raising of
animals as part of a general farming and/or livestock operation or as an FFA,
4-H, or other student project in an agricultural zone.
   (4)   “General farming and/or livestock operation” shall mean one in which
the confined feeding of animals is an incidental part of, or complimentary to
the total livestock operation. Normal grazing activities for pastured livestock
are excluded from this definition.
   (5)   A lot used for the feeding and rearing of poultry (poultry farms)
shall be considered a “feed lot.”
   Fowl or poultry ranch
   A confined animal feeding operation consisting of a lot or building or
combination of lots and buildings intended for the raising and keeping of
poultry for egg production (laying hens) or meat production (broilers). A
poultry farm does not include the incidental raising and keeping of poultry for
egg production or meat production when used for 4-H, FFA, and other youth
projects.
   Grazing
   The keeping of cattle, sheep, or other similar animals on fields or
rangeland for the purpose of grazing and feeding.
   Greenhouse
   “Greenhouse” shall mean an agricultural structure, with transparent or
translucent roof and/or wall panels intended for the raising of agricultural
plants. “Greenhouse” shall also mean a residential accessory structure, with
transparent or translucent roof and/or wall panels intended for the raising of
household plants.
   Hog farm
   Any premises used exclusively for the raising or keeping of more than fifty
(50) hogs, under confinement, that are raised, fed, or fattened for the
purposes of sale and consumption by other than the owner of the site. The term
“hog farm” is not intended to otherwise preclude the raising of hogs as part of
a general farming operation or as an F.F.A., 4-H, or other student project in
an agricultural zone.
   Home occupation, rural
   The gainful employment of the occupant(s) of a rural dwelling, with such
employment activity being subordinate to the residential and/or agricultural
use of the property, subject to provisions in Section
8-2.306(ab).
   Incidental
   "Incidental" shall mean a use or activity that is accompanying but not a
major part of a primary use.
   Kennel
   Any enclosure, premises, building, structure, lot or area, except where
reasonably necessary to support an agricultural use (i.e., to contain herding
dogs), where five (5) or more dogs or other small domestic animals, which are
not sick or injured and are ten (10) weeks in age or older, are boarded for
compensation, cared for, trained for compensation, kept for sale, or bred for
sale, or ten (10) or more dogs or other small domestic animals that are ten
(10) weeks of age or older which are kept and maintained as pets, “rescue”
animals, or for any other non-commercial purpose (also see “Animal hospital.”)
   Manufactured home
   A transportable prefabricated structure designed to be moved from one place
to another and to be used for residential purposes. Also commonly referred to
as a “modular” or mobile home. Also see definition in Section
8-2.1013.
   Mining
   Resource extraction establishments primarily engaged in mining, developing
mines, or exploring for minerals, or surface mines extracting crushed and
broken stone, dimension stone or sand and gravel.
   Nurseries and landscaping materials
   Commercial agricultural establishments engaged in the large-scale, year-
round production of agricultural and ornamental plants and other nursery
products, grown under cover or outdoors, and sold to the public through
wholesale or retail sales. Small-scale seasonal nurseries that are incidental
to the main agricultural use of the property are not included in this
definition.
   Off-road vehicle courses
   Rural areas set aside for the use of off-road vehicle enthusiasts including
dirt bike, enduro, hill climbing, or other off-road motorcycle courses; also,
rural areas for competitive events utilizing four-wheel drive vehicles. Does
not include sports assembly facilities, or simple access roads which are usable
by only four-wheel drive vehicles.
   Oil and gas well drilling operation
   Resource extraction establishments primarily engaged in recovering oil from
oil sands and shales and producing natural gasoline and cycle condensate.
Activities include exploration, drilling, oil and gas well operation and
maintenance, operation of natural gas and cycle plants, the mining and
extraction of oil from oil sand and shales, and on-site processing only to the
extent necessary to permit extraction.
   Open space
   Land subject to valid restrictions against housing or other urban
development, the maintenance of which in its natural or protected states is
necessary for the enhancement of living conditions in Yolo County.
   Pasture
   The grazing of livestock.
   Permanent crop
   A crop produced from plants, such as orchards and vineyards, that lasts for
several seasons and need not be replanted after each harvest.
   Primary farm dwelling
   A structure designed, intended, and used for residential purposes, as
elsewhere provided for herein, including manufactured or mobile homes. It shall
not include an ancillary dwelling; a secondary dwelling; a guest house; or farm
labor housing.
   Regional agricultural processing facilities
   Regional agricultural processing facilities include heavy agricultural
processing of products from the greater local area, including outside Yolo
County, such as nut hulling and rice mills, or large-scale wineries and olive
processing plants.
   Roadside or produce stand
   A business established and operated for the display and sale of agricultural
products grown on the premises, or on adjacent lands or other lands in Yolo
County owned or leased by the operator, which may include a limited amount of
prepackaged food, such as preserved, baked or packaged products from crops
grown onsite that have been prepared onsite, subject to all applicable health
codes.
   Rural recreation
   Outdoor sporting or leisure activities that require large open space areas
and do not have any significant detrimental impact on agricultural use of lands
that are in the general vicinity of the rural recreation activity. Rural
recreation activities shall include, but are not limited to: the shooting of
skeet, trap, and sporting clays; archery; gun, hunting, or fishing, clubs;
sport parachuting; riding; picnicking; nature study; viewing or enjoying
historical, archaeological, scenic, natural or scientific sites; health
resorts, rafting, hiking, backpacking, bicycling, or touring excursions; or
camping.
   Slaughterhouse
   An establishment where animals are butchered.
   Small animal farms
   Farms or ranches which raise small animals for sale, such as rabbits or
other fur-bearing animals.
   Solar energy system
   A photovoltaic or other system that converts sunlight into electrical power
for the primary purpose of: (a) resale or off-site use, or (b) on-site use and
not for resale.
   Special event
   A "special event" or "event" is a community or private gathering such as a
harvest festival, reception, farm dinner, corporate retreat, party, seasonal
tasting, or rodeo, that is held at a special event facility/tasting room.
   Special event facility/tasting room
   The use of land and/or facilities, for which a fee is normally charged, for
a community or private event that is held on the premises of an agricultural
property. A special event facility can include a tasting room, in which the
general public, customers or guests may taste and purchase wine, beer, olive
oil, cider, food items, or other incidental products commonly sold at such
tasting rooms. A tasting room may be located at a vineyard, orchard, or other
agricultural property, without the need for a winery, brewery, distillery, or
olive mill facility or other processing facility to be located upon the
premises.
   Stable, commercial
   A stable, other than a private stable, where sixteen (16) or more equine
animals are boarded, that are not owned or leased pursuant to a written
agreement, by either the property owner or resident. Commercial stables may
include the retail or wholesale sales of tack, feed, and other equestrian
products. Shows, exhibitions, or other public/quasi events related to equine
animals may be included as a part of the commercial stable.
   Stable, private
   Those facilities used for the shelter, breeding, and/or training of horses
and similar equine animals for the use of the residents and their guests.
Private stables may include the boarding of fifteen (15) or fewer equine
animals that are not owned or leased pursuant to a written agreement, by either
the property owner or resident. Private stables that hold more than six (6)
events per year, or generate more than one hundred (100) vehicle trips per
event, shall be considered a commercial stable, regardless of the number of
horses boarded. Private stables that hold large rodeo events shall be defined
as a “special event facility.”
   Stockyard
   A confined animal facility intended for the temporary confinement and care
of livestock for the purpose of selling or trading, prior to being slaughtered
or shipped to market.
   Tourism
   That industry which promotes and accommodates the recreational touring,
sight-seeking, leisure travel, and sojourns by individuals and groups within
Yolo County, including eco-tourism and agri-tourism.
   Vehicle trip
   One vehicle trip is a vehicle traveling to a destination and back, i.e., a
round trip.
   Wetlands
   The area and the plant communities that include fresh or salt water marshes,
generally found in areas of shallow, standing, or sluggishly moving water.
   Wildlife habitat
   The environmental factors that support one or more plant or wildlife species
at a particular place or region, providing food, water cover, and space needed
for survival and reproduction.
   Wind energy systems
   A wind driven machine that converts wind energy into electrical power for
the primary purpose of: (a) resale or off-site use, or (b) on-site use and not
for resale.
   Winery
   A building, or portion thereof, used for the crushing of grapes, the
fermenting and/or processing of grape juice, the aging, processing, storage,
and bottling of wine, or the warehousing and shipping of wine. It shall also
include accessory uses, such as: related office, laboratory, wholesale, and
retail sales activities and wine tasting and winery tours.
   Yolo Store
   A “Yolo Store” is a structure, wherein the majority of the items offered for
sale are primarily grown or manufactured in Yolo County (e.g., out-of-county
bottled wines, but made from Yolo grapes, or locally grown nursery products,
etc.).
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 4, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1494, eff. January 11, 2018; as amended by § 5,
Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1501, eff. August 23,
2018)
Article 4: Special Agricultural Regulations
Sec. 8-2.401.   Clarksburg Agricultural District Overlay Zone.
   (a)   Purpose. The Clarksburg Agricultural District overlay zone (CAD) is a
set of zone regulations that overlays the existing base zoning on those parcels
designated as Agriculture within the Clarksburg Area Plan, as reflected in the
2030 Countywide General Plan. The CAD overlay zone is intended to enhance and
promote the distinctive agricultural and recreational character of the
Clarksburg area, by streamlining regulations and providing greater flexibility
that allows farms the ability to produce and market agricultural products, as
well as provide agricultural tourism services.
   The CAD overlay zone is intended to work concurrently with Williamson Act
contracts (where applicable), the Natural Heritage Program, the Land Use and
Resource Management Plan of the Delta Protection Commission, and the policies
of the Delta Stewardship Council.
   (b)   Table of Clarksburg Agricultural Permit Requirements. The following
Table 8-2.401 identifies certain Use Types, as well as specific examples of
uses that are allowed by right, by non-discretionary Site Plan Review, and by
conditional Use Permit, as well as those uses that are not allowed, on
agricultural zoned parcels within the CAD overlay zone. The table does not
include a list of all the allowed or conditionally permitted uses in the
Clarksburg agricultural zones. The table only includes those uses for which the
zoning regulations are different than for the agricultural base zones in the
other parts of the unincorporated County.
   (c)   Specific Use Requirements or Performance Standards.
   (1)   Parking.
   (i)   Permanent parking spaces, either of gravel or other permeable surface,
shall be provided for all sales, gift, handicraft and food service areas. Paved
handicapped spaces shall be provided as required.
Table 8-2.401
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Certain Uses in the Clarksburg
Agricultural Zones
A = Allowed use, subject
to zoning clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review    Land Use Permit Required in Specific Use Requirements
UP(m) = Minor Use Permit the Clarksburg Agricultural or Performance Standards
required                 District (CAD) Overlay Zone
UP(M) = Major Use Permit
required
A = Allowed use, subject
to zoning clearance*       Land Use Permit Required
SP = Site Plan Review      in the Clarksburg        Specific Use Requirements
UP(m) = Minor Use Permit   Agricultural District    or Performance Standards
required                   (CAD) Overlay Zone
UP(M) = Major Use Permit
required
AGRICULTURAL COMMERCIAL AND RURAL RECREATIONAL USES
Visitor information and
interpretive displays or   A                        One per parcel
kiosks, less than 120
square feet in roof area
Picnic areas               A
Public or private horse    A
riding or hiking trails
Permanent public bathrooms SP
Farm supply, feed store    SP
(up to 2,000 square feet)
Farm supply, feed store    UP(m)
(over 2,000 square feet)
Bed and breakfast (up to 6
beds, less than 12 events  A
per year)
Bed and breakfast (6 to 10                          See Sec.
beds, and/or up to 18      SP                       8-2.306(l)
events per year)
Bed and breakfast (11 to
20 beds, and/or over 18    UP(m)
events per year)
Special event facilities,  SP
up to 18 events per year                            See Sec.
Special event facilities,  UP(m)                    8-2.306(k)
more than 18 events/year
Stand-alone wine tasting
room (under 2,000 square   SP
feet)
Stand-alone wine tasting
room (over 2,000 square    UP(m)
feet)
Small winery (under        SP
100,000 cases/year)
Medium winery (100,000 to  UP(m)
1,000,000 cases/year)
Large winery (over         UP(M)
1,000,000 cases/year)
Petting zoos, hay and
tractor rides, hay bale    SP                       Excluding exotic animals
mazes, and similar related
rural recreational uses
Yolo Stores, gift shops,
arts and crafts sales      A
(under 1,000 square feet)
Yolo Stores, gift shops,
arts and crafts sales      SP                       Must be ancillary to the
(over 1,000 square feet)                            primary agricultural use
Restaurants, bakeries,
commercial kitchens,       UP(m)
catering facilities, and
culinary classes
Museums, botanical
gardens, tours of historic SP
features, and similar uses
Commercial fisheries and
stock ponds (more than 150 UP(m)
visitors per day)
Campgrounds                UP(m)                    See Sec.
                                                    8-2.306(p)
Recreational vehicle parks UP(m)                    Ancillary to primary
                                                    agricultural use
Commercial marinas         UP(M)
Lodges and centers for
conferences, education, or UP(M)
training
RESIDENTIAL USES
Third home on a single     SP
parcel                                              Must conform with siting
Fourth or more home on a                            criteria in Sec.
single parcel              UP(m)                    8-2.402 

ALL OTHER USES
For all other uses not listed in this table, see
Tables 8-2.304(a),
(b),
(c),
(d), and
(e)
For Cannabis uses, including personal use, see Article 14
 
*   An “allowed use” does not require a land use permit, but is still subject
to permit requirements of other Yolo County divisions such as Building,
Environmental Health, and Public Works
   (ii)   Parking for special events, receptions, marketing promotional events,
and similar functions may utilize temporary, overflow parking areas.
   (iii)   On-street parking shall not be permitted.
   (2)   Access.
   (i)   Access to any tourist or sales facility shall be connected directly to
a public road, except as allowed under (ii), below.
   (ii)   Where a facility is located on a private road, access shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Director and local Fire District.
   (iii)   Where improvements to a County road are required, alternative
standards (e.g. reduced widths, surfacing, striping, signage, etc.) may be
allowed subject to the approval of the Director and local Fire District.
   (3)   Signs.
   (i)   One agricultural sign not to exceed forty (40) square feet may be
allowed at the entryway to the site. Agricultural signs may be double-sided,
but shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height.
   (ii)   Entryways (pilasters, gates, etc.) and on-site signs may be located
within the front yard setback, upon approval of a building permit. Entries and
signs may not be located within any part of the County right-of-way.
   (d)   Other Conditions.
   (1)   Outdoor events are limited to the hours of 9 AM to 10 PM.
   (2)   Farm stay and bed and breakfast inns shall comply with all CCDEH
(California Conference of Directors of Environmental Health) guidelines and
CURFFL (California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law) requirements.
   (3)   Pools and spas used by guests must meet all Building, and Health and
Safety Code requirements.
   (4)   Exterior lighting shall be shielded and directed in such a manner as
to not directly shine into adjoining residences.
   (5)   Where applicable, subject to the approval of the Environmental Health
Director, portable toilets and related facilities may be used instead of
permanent systems for events.
   (e)   Wildlife friendly practices.  The following practices are encouraged
for farmers within the Agricultural District:
   (1)   Establishing native shrub hedgerows and/or tree rows along field
borders, roadsides, and rural driveways.
   (2)   Protecting remnant valley oak trees.
   (3)   Restoring field margins (filter strips), ponds, and woodlands in non-
farmed areas.
   (4)   Using native species and grassland restoration in marginal areas.
   (5)   Managing and maintaining irrigation and drainage canals to provide
habitat, support native species, and serve as wildlife movement corridors.
   (6)   Managing winter stubble to provide foraging habitat.
   (7)   Widening watercourses, including the use of setback levees.
   (f)   Agricultural Home Site Parcels.  A Lot Line Adjustment may be approved
to create an agricultural home site parcel in the CAD overlay zone on two (2)
or more contiguous parcels under common ownership if the Lot Line Adjustment
complies with all of the following requirements:
   (1)   All of the affected parcels shall have an Agriculture (AG) land use
designation in the General Plan and the agricultural home site parcel shall be
rezoned to Agricultural Residential (A-R). No other general plan and zoning
designations shall qualify.
   (2)   All of the affected parcels shall have adequate potential for suitable
water supply and sewage disposal and shall comply with the development
standards set forth in Section
8-2.403(e) of this chapter.
   (3)   The Lot Line Adjustment will result in an agricultural home site
parcel that is at least two and one-half (2.5) acres in size, with a maximum
area of four (4.0) acres. The home site parcel shall be designed to be as small
as possible, while meeting all other County requirements. The remainder (non-
home site) parcel(s) shall meet the minimum parcel requirements in the A-
N zone.
   (g)   Fee Exemptions.  Farm worker housing shall be exempt from the payment
of County Facilities and Services Authorization (FSA) fees. Farm worker housing
shall also be exempt from the payment of any General Plan Cost Recovery (GPCR)
fees.
   (h)   Advisory Committee.  The Clarksburg Citizens Advisory Committee shall
also act as the Agricultural District Advisory Committee, to advise the
Planning Commission regarding the implementation of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014, as amended by Ord. 1452, eff. January 15,
2015; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1545, eff. January 6, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.402.   Siting Development Standards for New Homes in Agricultural
Zones.
   (a)   Purpose.  Agricultural preservation is a key component of the Yolo
County General Plan, which includes policies set forth to protect existing farm
operations and prime farmland from impacts related to the encroachment of urban
uses. The expansion of rural home sites in the agricultural zones has
contributed to an increase in residential uses unrelated to farm- or ranch-
oriented residential use. In order to preserve the long-term agricultural
resources of the County, standards have been developed to address residential
uses in the agricultural areas. This section outlines development standards for
the siting and size of new residential uses in the two (2) main agricultural
zones, the A-N (Agricultural Intensive) and A-X (Agricultural Extensive) zones,
where agriculture, such as crop production and animal husbandry, is the primary
use.
   (b)   Definitions.
   Ancillary home or dwelling
   A second residence used by a family member(s) or employee(s) of the farm or
ranch operation. For purposes of complying with this section, if a manufactured
home has been constructed or installed first on an agricultural parcel as the
primary home, and a conventional “stick-built” home is then proposed to be
built, the “stick-built” home may be considered the primary house and the
manufactured house or residence may be considered the ancillary residence.
   Conventional “stick-built” home
   A traditional single family residence constructed on-site of lumber, not
prefabricated materials.
   Farm worker housing
   Accommodations that are used solely for the purpose of providing cooking,
sanitary, and sleeping facilities to house farm workers on a farm or ranch
operation.
   Flag lot
   A lot whose general configuration is in the shape of an “L” or “T”, and
which takes access from the road by means of a narrow strip which is part of
the lot.
   Lot line, front
   In the case of an interior lot, the line separating the lot from the street
right-of-way and, in the case of a corner lot, the shorter street frontage.
   Manufactured home
   A transportable prefabricated residential structure that has been partially
or entirely constructed in a factory and then transported to the site for
assembly. Manufactured homes include modular and mobile homes.
   Primary home or dwelling
   The first existing or proposed residence to be located on an agricultural
parcel.
   Residential accessory uses
   Those uses customarily ancillary to the residential use of the property.
Such structures or improvements may include, but are not limited to, decorative
landscaping, garden greenhouses, pools, gardening sheds, detached garages or
shops for personal storage and hobby work, carports, and artificial ponds not
serving an agricultural use, but do not include long driveways to residence(s).
   Residential footprint or building envelope
   The area established for home site development, including ancillary uses.
Such area may include a primary residence, an ancillary dwelling clustered with
the primary home, any allowable accessory structures, and other improvements,
such as driveway(s), landscaping, leach fields, etc. A residential footprint is
assumed to be approximately two and one-half (2.5) acres per legal parcel.
Domestic leach field areas, including any required replacement leach field
area, must be contained within the building envelope.
   (c)   Permits required.  A new primary or ancillary home in the agricultural
zones is allowed “by right” with the issuance of a building permit, provided
the home is located on a parcel that meets all of the development standards of
this section. On agricultural parcels in the A-N and A-X zones, more than two
(2) dwelling units, as well as the legalization of existing units, may be
permitted through the issuance of a Minor Use Permit, upon finding that the
residential use is compatible and appurtenant with the principal agricultural
use of the property.
   (d)   Development standards. The following standards have been established
to minimize the impact of residential uses on agricultural operations and
resources in the A-N and A-X Zones, without limiting the residential needs of
farmers and ranchers or restricting agricultural activities. The intent of
allowing residences in the agricultural areas is to provide dwellings for those
directly involved in onsite farming activity, including agricultural employees,
landowners, and their family members.
   (1)   Residential footprint or building envelope. Homes built on
agricultural lands may include extensive residential accessory uses such as
ancillary dwellings, parking areas, pools, detached garages or hobby shops,
decorative landscaping, and gardening sheds/greenhouses that are included
within the home site. To protect productive farmland and ranchland, home site
development shall be contained within a residential footprint or building
envelope, as follows:
   (i)   All proposed home sites, including all ancillary or accessory uses,
shall be situated in close proximity to the dwelling unit(s) within a
designated residential footprint that is no larger than two and one-half (2.5)
acres. Residential accessory uses include detached garages for non-farm
vehicles/storage, yards and other landscaping features, leach field areas,
garden/storage sheds, swimming pools, etc., but do not include long driveways.
   (ii)   Those parcels developed with farm worker housing are allowed an
increased residential footprint of up to four (4) acres.
   (iii)   Legal parcels containing 80 acres or more shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section.
   (2)   Size of ancillary residence. The size of the primary dwelling unit is
not regulated. The size of the ancillary residence is limited to twenty-five
hundred (2,500) square feet or less, excluding garage space. For purposes of
complying with this section, a manufactured home may be considered the
ancillary unit even if it has been constructed or installed prior to the
primary “stick-built” house.
   (3)   Siting of primary residences. These standards may be modified by the
Planning Director according to the “exceptions” listed in Sec.
8-2.402(d)(5), below, or may be modified through the issuance of a variance by
the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission upon adoption of findings.
   (i)   To the extent feasible, all residences located on agriculturally-zoned
property shall be located within the front portion of a legal parcel, and shall
be sited to minimize the conversion of agricultural land and to minimize
impacts to agricultural operations, including ground and aerial application of
herbicides and pesticides.
   (ii)   There is no maximum front yard setback for a new home on properties
fronting along a County road.
   (iii)   The minimum front yard setback from the front lot line (County
right-of-way) shall be twenty (20) feet or fifty (50) feet from the centerline
of a roadway, whichever is greater. Properties abutting an arterial, or major
or minor two-lane County road, require a thirty (30) foot front yard setback,
as measured from the edge of right-of-way. The minimum back yard setback from
the rear property line shall be twenty-five (25) feet. The minimum side yard
setback from the side property lines shall be twenty (20) feet. However, these
minimum setback requirements shall be increased to no less than one hundred
(100) feet if adjacent agricultural operations require a larger setback to
accommodate agricultural spraying.
   (iv)   Front yard setbacks on flag lots shall be measured from the rear lot
line of the forward lot. If a parcel has more than one (1) lot line with road
frontage, the setback will be measured from one (1) road frontage only, at the
owner’s choice.
   (v)   Where a private road provides access to a parcel(s), it shall be
considered the same as a public right-of-way for purposes of determining
setbacks. If access is via an easement across an adjoining parcel, setback
measurements shall be taken from the point where the easement intersects with
the subject parcel.
   (vi)   New homes shall be sited to retain existing natural features and
avoid impacts to environmental resources to the extent feasible. Existing trees
and vegetation and natural landforms shall be retained to the greatest feasible
extent. Removal of trees with scenic or historic value shall be prohibited
along scenic roadways. New homes shall be setback from watercourses, including
“blue line” seasonal streams, a minimum of one hundred (100) feet. New homes
shall be prohibited on or near the top of ridgelines where the Director
determines it would adversely affect nearby views.
   (vii)   A fifty (50) foot setback is required for all permanent improvements
from the toe of any flood control levee.
   (4)   A fifty (50) foot setback is required for all permanent improvements
from the toe of any flood control levee. Land uses proposed within five hundred
(500) feet of the toe of any flood control levee shall be restricted (or
prohibited) to the items listed below, unless site specific engineering
evidence demonstrates an alternate action that would not jeopardize public
health or safety:
   (i)   Permanent unlined excavations shall be prohibited;
   (ii)   Large underground spaces (such as basements, cellars, swimming pools,
etc.) must be engineered to withstand the uplift forces of shallow groundwater;
   (iii)   Below-grade septic leach systems shall be prohibited;
   (iv)   Engineered specifications for buried utility conduits and wiring
shall be required;
   (v)   New water wells shall be prohibited;
   (vi)   New gas or oil wells shall be prohibited;
   (vii)   Engineered specifications for levee penetrations shall be required;
and
   (viii)   Landscape root barriers within fifty (50) feet of the toe shall be
required.
   (5)   Clustering and siting of ancillary residences. All ancillary
residences in the agricultural zones shall be clustered adjacent to the
existing primary residence in a configuration to minimize the conversion of
agricultural land and to minimize impacts to agricultural operations, as
follows:
   (i)   The following development standards shall apply to new primary homes
on parcels of eighty (80) acres or less that are zoned A-N or A-X. The maximum
separation between the primary and ancillary dwelling units on the same parcel
shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet, as measured from the nearest part of the
primary dwelling. The siting of the ancillary dwelling shall meet the setback
requirements of subsection (3), above, unless a modification of the setbacks is
approved by the Planning Director in order to minimize agricultural impacts.
   (ii)   Any new agricultural residence may be clustered in proximity to an
existing residence(s) on an adjacent lot, if the clustering of the housing
units will facilitate the protection of agricultural land. In such
circumstances, the side lot setbacks for the residences on adjacent lots may be
reduced accordingly, so long as placement of any new residence does not
interfere with spraying operations or other agricultural operations.
   (iii)   Placement of new residential structures shall comply with all
applicable building and fire codes.
   (6)   Exceptions. The Planning Director may modify the setback and other
development standards of this section if any one of the following exceptions
applies to the specific characteristics of the parcel. A Site Plan Review
approval shall be required prior to issuance of any building permit for a new
agricultural residence that is subject to any of the following exceptions:
   (i)   Portions of the property that have poor soils or are not farmable are
more suitable for home site development and support a modification of
standards.
   (ii)   Clustering of an agricultural residence with agricultural buildings
and uses is required for efficiency or security of agricultural operations.
   (iii)   The location of easements for utilities, steep slopes, significant
stands of trees, or watercourses with riparian setbacks supports a modification
of standards.
   (iv)   The location of a floodplain, areas of localized flooding, or other
hazardous area on a portion of the parcel supports a modification of standards.
   (v)   The location of existing agricultural industrial processing
operations, or proximate oil and gas well operations, supports a modification
of standards.
   (vi)   The lack of water availability or the inability to site a leach field
or other related sewerage facility supports a modification of standards.
   (7)   Right to Farm. Construction of a new agricultural residence shall
require recordation of a deed acknowledging the County’s Right-to-Farm
Ordinance, prior to building permit issuance.
   (8)   Variances. In cases other than those included as “exceptions” in (5),
above, where other individual characteristics of the property may warrant
further or significant deviation from the required development standards of
this section, variances to the standards may be considered by the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission based upon adoption of findings, including
a finding that the variance is needed to further the principle of limiting the
impact on agricultural land and operations through the appropriate siting of
residential structures and ancillary uses.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018)
Sec. 8-2.403.   Clustered Agricultural Housing.
   (a)   Purpose. The General Plan includes policies to preserve agriculturally
zoned lands in Yolo County and to maintain and enhance the farm economy. This
section implements those policies by allowing the voluntary concentration of
existing agricultural home sites for an antiquated subdivision and/or
Certificate of Compliance that recognizes a series of contiguous small legal
lots in an agricultural zone, the adjustment (or Parcel Map if more than four
(4) parcels are involved) may be necessary to cluster small home site parcels
of two and one-half (2.5) to four (4.0) acres in one area to reduce impacts to
agricultural operations, while merging the remainder farmland into large tracts
that can be permanently protected for future agricultural use. This reduces the
potential for small and medium sized parcels, an associated rural residential
development that tend to interrupt more efficient and economically feasible
patterns of farming.
   This section establishes a set of regulations that allows for and encourages
clustering of home sites for agricultural family members and for farm workers
on smaller parcels than allowed by the current zoning, while ensuring the long-
term preservation of adjoining agricultural resources in larger parcels that
benefit from economies of scale. This clustering regulation provides an
alternative to existing patterns of legal parcels, many of which were created
prior to modern zoning and planning standards, that can lead to the development
of fragmented farming.
   However, the purpose of the new policies and regulations is not to provide
new opportunities for all existing ag landowners to apply to create new
ranchette lots through Lot Line Adjustment or subdivision, but to address the
infrequent occasions when multiple lots are recognized as legal by the County
and a Lot Line Adjustment will accomplish better site planning.
   (b)   Definitions.
   Antiquated subdivision
   "Antiquated subdivisions" are generally defined as those subdivisions laid
out on “plats” or maps filed with a county or city either prior to 1893, the
year that California's first Subdivision Map Act was adopted, or prior to 1929,
when the Map Act began to regulate the design and improvement of subdivisions.
Many antiquated subdivision maps were drawn without regard to topography or
consideration of fundamental access, safety, and development issues. Neither
California law nor policy supports widespread recognition of the lots shown on
antiquated maps. The State Subdivision Map Act recognizes past subdivisions of
land in only limited circumstances through the Certificate of Compliance
process, set forth in Government Code section 66499.35. Yolo County does not
recognize subdivision maps recorded prior to 1929 unless individual lots have
been conveyed legally to different owners or have otherwise been recognized as
legal by the County through the Certificate of Compliance process.
   Clustered agricultural housing project
   “Clustered agricultural housing project” shall mean a Lot Line Adjustment
(or Parcel Map if more than four (4) parcels are involved) application
involving two (2) or more agricultural parcels recognized as legal parcels by
the County within an antiquated subdivision or other small lot configuration,
that are proposed to be reconfigured to create legal parcels including a
remainder agricultural parcel and adjoining small lot home sites, that meet all
requirements of this section.
   Remainder agricultural parcel
   Concurrent with the Lot Line Adjustment (or Parcel Map if more than four (4)
parcels are involved) of qualifying agricultural lands to create one (1) or
more clustered housing parcels not to exceed four (4) acres each, the remaining
large agricultural parcel(s) are the “remainder agricultural parcel.” The
“remainder agricultural production parcel” shall be no less than fifty (50)
percent in size of the total acreage included in the application, prior to
adjustment or subdivision and shall be more than twenty (20) acres in size.
   Small legal lots
   For the purposes of this ordinance, small legal lots are defined as parcels
that are twenty (20) acres or less and larger than five (5) acres in size.
   (c)   Lands eligible for clustering.
   (1)   This section applies to lands located in the Agricultural Intensive
(A-N) or Agricultural Extensive (A-X) zones, which meet the criteria listed in
(2) and (3), below.
   (2)   Subject to subsection (3), below, contiguous parcels are eligible for
clustering if:
   i.   The parcels are included in an antiquated subdivision where individual
lots have been recognized as legal by the County and/or include a series of
small lots that have been recognized as legal lots by the County through a
Certificate of Compliance process; and
   ii.   A majority of the legal parcels included in the application is smaller
than thirty (30) acres each.
   (3)   Parcels are not eligible for clustering if any of the following
criteria apply:
   i.   The legal parcel(s) are located within an adopted city Sphere of
Influence, Urban Limit Line, or Growth Boundary, unless the City or other
affected agency does not object to the proposal; or
   ii.   The legal parcel(s) are subject to an existing agricultural, habitat,
or other type of conservation easement that restricts use of the land; or
   iii.   The legal parcel(s) are less than five (5) acres in size and are
occupied with an existing home.
   (d)   Permits required.
   (1)   All clustered agricultural housing applications shall be accompanied
by a rezoning application for the proposed housing parcels; and a Lot Line
Adjustment (or Parcel Map if more than four (4) parcels are involved). The
rezoning application shall include a request to rezone the newly created small
lots from A-N or A-X to the Agricultural Residential (A-R) zone. The Tentative
Parcel or Subdivision Map shall include the remainder agricultural production
parcel as a designated parcel of the Map, not as a “remainder parcel” as the
term is used in section 66424.6 of the State Subdivision Map Act.
   (2)   If the parcel(s) to be adjusted or subdivided for clustering are under
an active Williamson Act contract, the following applications must be filed
concurrently with the applications for clustering: a Williamson Act Contract
Cancellation for the portion of the land to be subdivided into smaller two and
one-half (2.5) to four (4.0) acre lots; and an agreement to retain the
remainder agricultural production parcel under a Williamson Act contract.
   (e)   Application content.  The application for a clustered agricultural
housing project shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   (1)   A written explanation by the applicant, accompanied by technical
studies, as needed, to prove compliance with all the development standards
specified in subsection (f) below;
   (2)   All required application materials for a Lot Line Adjustment (or
Parcel Map if more than four (4) parcels are involved), Rezoning, and
Williamson Act cancellation (where appropriate);
   (3)   Detailed description of, or a draft, conservation easement for the
remainder agricultural production parcel, that complies with Section
8-2.404; and
   (4)   Submittal of a hydrogeologic report that demonstrates there are
adequate water resources to support the home sites and continued agricultural
production, unless the Planning or Environmental Health Director has determined
that evidence has shown that no water resource limitations exist in the
vicinity of the project site.
   (f)   Development standards.  The design and development of a clustered
agricultural housing project shall be consistent with the following standards:
   (1)   Type of housing. The following types of housing are allowed in a
clustered agricultural housing project: single family homes subject to any size
limitations set by other sections of this chapter; duplexes; and farm worker
housing projects consistent with State laws and other sections of this chapter.
   (2)   Minimum size of the remainder agricultural production parcel.
Following adjustment and rezoning to create the clustered agricultural housing
project, the resulting remainder agricultural production parcel(s) shall be no
less than fifty (50) percent in size of the total lands prior to adjustment and
shall be no less than twenty (20) acres in size.
   (3)   Merger of remaining substandard parcels. The adjustment (or Parcel Map
if more than four (4) parcels are involved) and rezoning approved to create the
home site(s) or parcel(s) shall include the mandatory merger of any existing
and remaining adjacent parcels under common ownership that are substandard in
size, as defined by the underlying zoning district.
   (4)   Number of parcels allowed. The number of parcels allowed through the
approval of a Parcel Map (if more than four (4) parcels are involved) under
this section must equal or be less than the number of legal parcels prior to
the Parcel Map approval.
   (5)   Number of homes allowed. The maximum number of homes allowed in a
clustered agricultural housing project application shall be no more than one
(1) primary and one (1) ancillary home on each parcel.
   (6)   Home site or parcel size. A clustered agricultural housing site or
parcel shall be a maximum of two and one-half (2.5) acres, to accommodate a
single family home, duplex, or small to medium-sized farm worker housing
project. Larger parcel sizes may be required to accommodate agricultural
buffers or farm worker housing project, with a maximum housing site or parcel
size of four (4) acres.
   (7)   Site design and avoidance of best prime farmland. Clustered
agricultural housing shall be located and clustered to provide the maximum
protection of the best prime productive agricultural land located both on- and
off-site. Clustered agricultural housing should be located on land with the
lowest agricultural viability, as documented by a Storie index rating, to the
maximum feasible extent.
   (8)   Parcel layout. The clustered agricultural housing parcels shall be
configured so that property lines are immediately adjacent and physically
contiguous to each other and located within a single cluster development area.
A maximum of two (2) clustered development areas may be approved if such a
design reduces environmental impacts.
   (9)   Housing development confined. Clustered agricultural housing
development shall be confined to the newly adjusted parcel(s) boundaries.
Housing development components include, but are not limited to, housing units,
accessory structures, roadways and access drives, water and wastewater systems,
agricultural buffers, drainage basins, and any other areas of the project site
that may be removed from agricultural production to accommodate the proposed
clustered housing project. Shared use of existing access roads or driveways,
common or community water and wastewater treatment systems, storm water
drainage, and other common infrastructure shall be encouraged and provided to
the greatest feasible extent.
   (10)   Second or Ancillary Units Allowed. Second or ancillary housing units
may be allowed through issuance of a Use Permit on any small lots created
through Lot Line Adjustment by this ordinance, if the second units meet
environmental health and other standards set forth in the Yolo County Code and
other applicable laws and regulations and are no more than one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet in size, not counting the garage.
   (11)   Access. Clustered developments in compliance with this section shall
be allowed only on properties with access to an existing paved, County or state
maintained road. Home site parcels shall be located as close as possible to
existing access roads, and significant new road or driveway development that
takes farmland out of production shall be avoided to the extent feasible.
   (12)   Interior Road and Utilities. Unless otherwise required by the County,
all interior roads and utilities shall be privately-owned and maintained and
the applicant shall demonstrate through draft Conditions, Covenants and
Restrictions or other means that the project residents shall maintain all
private roads and utilities for the life of the project at their own expense,
without any financial support of the County.
   (13)   Agricultural buffers. Residential building sites and access drives
shall maintain a sufficient buffer separation from adjacent and on-site
agricultural operations and exterior property lines, to reduce any significant
land use compatibility impacts affecting on-site or off-site agricultural
operations, including but not limited to trespass by persons or domestic
animals, vandalism, and complaints about agricultural practices. The width of
buffers shall be consistent with the agricultural buffer policies adopted in
the General Plan. For larger residential lots, housing shall be set back a
minimum of three hundred (300) feet from adjoining agricultural land, to the
extent feasible. Where smaller lots are proposed, that rely upon common well
and/or septic systems, residential setbacks may be reduced to a minimum of one
hundred (100) feet where buffering measures are incorporated, such as solid
fencing, berms, dense landscaping, and/or other design features.
   (14)   Visual resources. Roads and building sites shall be located to
minimize site disturbance and visibility from public roads and viewing areas,
to the extent feasible considering agricultural and environmental factors.
   (15)   Habitat protection. Clustered agricultural housing development shall
be located and designed to ensure maximum protection of sensitive habitats such
as Swainson’s hawk habitat and wetlands.
   (g)   Conservation of remainder agricultural production parcel.  No
clustered agricultural housing development shall be approved without an
easement that assures the permanent conservation for agricultural use of at
least one half (1/2) of the remainder agricultural production parcel that is
created as part of the project. The required conservation easement shall be
maintained in perpetuity, and the terms and minimum requirements for the
conservation easement recorded to satisfy the requirements of this provision
shall be at least as stringent as those set forth in Section
8-2.404 of this chapter. The conservation easement shall be recorded
concurrently with the Lot Line Adjustment and Certificate of Compliance (or
Parcel Map if more than four (4) parcels are involved) for the project.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014, as amended by Ord. 1452, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 8-2.404.   Agricultural Conservation and Mitigation Program.
   (a)   Purpose.
   (1)   The purpose of this section is to implement the agricultural land
conservation policies contained in the Yolo County General Plan with a program
designed to permanently protect agricultural land located within the
unincorporated area.
   (b)   Definitions.
   Agricultural land or farmland
   Those land areas of unincorporated Yolo County, regardless of current
zoning, that are either currently used for agricultural purposes or that are
substantially undeveloped and capable of agricultural production. Land that is
determined to be incapable of supporting the production of agricultural
commodities is excluded from this definition and does not require agricultural
mitigation under this section. Any such determination shall be made by the
deciding authority on a permit (or other) application in consultation with the
Agricultural Commissioner, whose recommendation shall be given substantial
weight unless unsupported by evidence.
   Agricultural mitigation land
   Agricultural land encumbered by a farmland conservation easement.
   Agricultural use
   Those principal, accessory, and conditional uses and structures defined in
Section
8-2.304 of this title, excluding "covered habitat mitigation projects" as
defined in Section
8-2.307 of this title but including other projects involving restoration or
conversion to habitat, so long as the restoration or conversion is incidental
to or ancillary to the agricultural uses on the parcel, and excluding. Medium-
sized, large, and very large solar energy systems, which are subject to Section
8-2.1104 and
8-2.1105 of this Title, are also excluded from this definition unless the
approving authority reasonably determines a medium-sized solar energy project
generates energy solely to offset agricultural equipment demands (e.g.,
irrigation pumps) on the project site and on any contiguous lands of the
applicant or, alternatively, that the project will be implemented in a manner
that does not substantially diminish the agricultural productive capacity of
the project site. Permits issued for surface mining, which are subject to
Section
10-5.525 of Title 10, are also excluded from this definition.
   Farmland conservation easement
   An easement encumbering agricultural land for the purpose of restricting its
use to agricultural activities.
   Predominantly non-agricultural use
   Any use not defined or listed as a principal, accessory, and conditional use
allowed in the agricultural zones, as defined and listed in Sections
8-2.303 and
8-2.304. Predominantly non-agricultural use specifically does not include the
restoration or conversion to habitat, so long as the restoration or conversion
is incidental to or ancillary to the agricultural uses on the parcel, but the
definition does include “covered habitat mitigation projects” as defined in
Section
8-2.307 of this title.
   Prime farmland
   Prime farmland shall generally mean farmland that meets the criteria applied
by the Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program of the United States Department
of Agriculture. Farmland shall also be considered prime farmland for purposes
of this section if it meets the definition of "prime agricultural land" in
Government Code Section 51201. Additionally, land that is not currently in
production shall also be considered prime farmland under this section if, in
the reasonable judgment of the approving authority, it would be considered
prime farmland under either of the foregoing definitions if it was in active
production.
   Qualifying entity
   A nonprofit public benefit 501(c)(3) corporation or other entity eligible to
hold a conservation easement for mitigation purposes under California law,
including but not limited to Government Code Sections 65965-65968, operating in
Yolo County for the purpose of conserving and protecting land in its natural,
rural or agricultural condition. The County will consider the following
criteria when considering a proposed agricultural conservation entity for these
purposes, and when monitoring the performance of qualifying entities over time:
   (1)   Whether the proposed entity is a non-profit organization or other
entity eligible to hold a conservation easement for mitigation purposes under
California law that is either based locally, is statewide, or is a regional
branch of a national non-profit organization whose principal purpose is holding
and administering agricultural conservation easements for the purposes of
conserving and maintaining lands in agricultural production;
   (2)   Whether the entity has a long-term proven and established record for
holding and administering easements for the purposes of conserving and
maintaining lands in agricultural production;
   (3)   Whether the entity has a history of holding and administering
easements in Yolo County for the foregoing purposes;
   (4)   Whether the entity has adopted the Land Trust Alliance's "Standards
and Practices" and is operating in compliance with those Standards and
Practices; and
   (5)   Any other information that the County finds relevant under the
circumstances.
   A local public agency may be an easement co-holder if that agency was the
lead agency during the environmental review process or if otherwise authorized
by the Board of Supervisors to co-hold a conservation easement. The County also
favors that applicants transfer easement rights directly or indirectly (i.e.,
through a transaction involving a third party) to the qualifying entity in
accordance with that entity's procedures. The County retains the discretion to
determine whether the proposed agricultural conservation entity identified by
the applicant has met the criteria delineated above. Qualifying entities may be
approved by the Board of Supervisors from time to time in its reasonable
discretion in accordance with this section.
   Small project
   A development project that is less than twenty (20) acres in size. A small
project does not include one phase or portion of a larger project greater than
twenty (20) acres that is subject to a master, specific, or overall development
plan approved by the County.
   (c)   Mitigation requirements.
   (1)   Agricultural mitigation shall be required for conversion or change
from agricultural use to a predominantly non-agricultural use prior to, or
concurrent with, approval of a zone change from agricultural to urban zoning,
permit, or other discretionary or ministerial approval by the County.
   Except as provided in subsection (d)(2) below, relating to adjustment
factors, for projects that convert prime farmland, a minimum of three (3) acres
of agricultural land shall be preserved in the locations specified in
subsection (d)(1) for each acre of agricultural land changed to a predominantly
non-agricultural use or zoning classification (3:1 ratio). For projects that
convert non-prime farmland, a minimum of two (2) acres of agricultural land
shall be preserved in the locations specified in subsection (d)(1) for each
acre of land changed to a predominantly non-agricultural use or zoning
classification (2:1) ratio. Projects that convert a mix of prime and non-prime
lands shall mitigate at a blended ratio that reflects for the percentage mix of
converted prime and non-prime lands within project site boundaries.
   (2)   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from, and are not
covered by, the Agricultural Conservation and Mitigation Program:
   (i)   Affordable housing projects, where a majority of the units are
affordable to very low or low income households, as defined in Title 8, Chapter
8 of the Yolo County Code (Inclusionary Housing Requirements);
   (ii)   Public uses such as parks, schools, cultural institutions, and other
public agency facilities and infrastructure that do not generate revenue. The
applicability of this exemption to public facilities and infrastructure that
generate revenue shall be evaluated by the approving authority on a case-by-
case basis. The approving authority may partly or entirely deny the exemption
if the approving authority determines the additional cost of complying with
this program does not jeopardize project feasibility and no other circumstances
warrant application of the exemption;
   (iii)   Gravel mining projects regulated under Title 10,
Chapters 3-
5 of the Yolo County Code, pending completion of a comprehensive update of the
gravel mining program (anticipated in January 2017); and
   (iv)   Projects covered by an approved specific plan which includes an
agricultural mitigation program.
   (3)   Applications deemed complete prior to the effective date of the
ordinance shall provide mitigation at a 1:1 ratio in compliance with all other
requirements of this Agricultural Conservation and Mitigation Program.
   (d)   Agricultural Mitigation Implementation. Agricultural mitigation
required by this section shall be implemented as follows:
   (1)   Location, Generally. Mitigation lands shall be located within two (2)
miles of sphere of influence of a city or within two (2) miles of the General
Plan urban growth boundary of the town of Esparto ("Esparto Urban Growth
Boundary"). Mitigation may also occur in any other area designated by the Board
of Supervisors based on substantial evidence demonstrating that the parcel at
issue consists predominantly of prime farmland and/or is subject to conversion
to non-agricultural use in the foreseeable future. Any such designation shall
be made by resolution and shall specify whether the designated area is a
priority conservation area subject to a 1:1 mitigation ratio. For all other
designated areas, the resolution shall specify the mitigation ratio for any
mitigation occurring in the covered area, which may exceed the applicable base
ratio.
   (2)   Adjustment Factors. The following adjustment factors shall be applied,
where relevant, to modify the base ratio:
   (i)   Priority Conservation Areas. Mitigation occurring within a priority
conservation area shall occur at a reduced 1:1 ratio unless otherwise specified
below. The following areas shall be deemed priority conservation areas for
purposes of this section:
   (A)   Parcels partly or entirely within one-quarter (0.25) mile of the
sphere of influence of a city or the Esparto Urban Growth Boundary, or, for
projects that convert primarily non-prime farmland, one (1) mile of the sphere
of influence of a city or the Esparto Urban Growth Boundary. For the purposes
of this subsection, the word "primarily" shall mean greater than fifty (50)
percent.
   (B)   Parcels lying partly or entirely within the area bounded by County
Roads 98 and 102 on the west and east, respectively, and by County Roads 29 and
27 on the north and south, respectively. For mitigation of impacts to prime
farmland, the ratio shall be 2:1 within this area.
   (3)   Other Factors.
   (i)   If the area to be converted is twenty (20) acres or more in size,
subject to the exception in (iii), below, by granting, in perpetuity, a
farmland conservation easement to a qualifying entity with the County as a
third party beneficiary, together with the provision of funds sufficient to
compensate for all administrative costs incurred by the qualifying entity and
the County as well as funds needed to establish an endowment to provide for
monitoring, enforcement, and all other services necessary to ensure that the
conservation purposes of the easement or other restriction are maintained in
perpetuity.
   (ii)   If the area to be converted is a small project less than twenty (20)
acres in size, by granting a farmland conservation easement as described in
subsection (i), above, or payment of the in-lieu fee established by the County
to purchase a farmland conservation easement consistent with the provisions of
this section; and the payment of fees in an amount established by the County to
compensate for all administrative costs incurred by the County inclusive of
endowment funds for the purposes set forth in subsection (i), above. The in-
lieu fee, paid to the County, shall be used for agricultural mitigation
purposes only (i.e. purchases of conservation easements and related transaction
and administrative costs).
   (iii)   If Yolo County or a qualifying entity establishes a local farmland
mitigation bank and sufficient credits are available at a total cost not
exceeding the in lieu fee (and all related transactional and similar costs),
small projects shall satisfy their farmland mitigation requirement by
purchasing credits from the mitigation bank in a quantity sufficient to
discharge the mitigation obligations of the project under this section. Other
local projects converting twenty (20) or more acres of farmland may also
purchase credits to discharge their farmland mitigation requirements, in lieu
of providing an easement under subsection (i), above.
   A farmland mitigation bank must be approved by the Board of Supervisors for
local (i.e., within Yolo County) mitigation needs based upon a determination
that it satisfies all of the farmland mitigation requirements of this section.
   Landowners and project applicants that conserve more farmland than necessary
to satisfy their mitigation obligations may seek approval of a farmland
mitigation bank through an application process to be developed by the Planning,
Public Works, and Environmental Services Department.
   (iv)   Agricultural mitigation shall be completed as a condition of approval
prior to the acceptance of a final parcel or subdivision map, or prior to the
issuance of any building permit or other final approval for development
projects that do not involve a map.
   (e)   Eligible lands.  Land shall meet all of the following criteria in
sections (1) through (6), below, to qualify as agricultural mitigation:
   (1)   Agricultural conservation easements resulting from this program shall
be acquired from willing sellers only;
   (2)   The property is of adequate size, configuration and location to be
viable for continued agricultural use;
   (3)   The equivalent class of soil, based on the revised Storie index or
NRCS soil survey maps, for the agricultural mitigation land shall be comparable
to, or better than, the land which is converted;
   (4)   The land shall have an adequate water supply to maintain the purposes
of the easement, i.e., to irrigate farmland if the converted farmland is
irrigated or capable of irrigation. The water supply shall be sufficient to
support ongoing agricultural uses;
   (5)   The mitigation land shall be located within the County of Yolo in a
location identified for mitigation in accordance with this section;
   (6)   It is the intent of this program to work in a coordinated fashion with
the habitat conservation objectives of the Yolo Habitat Conservancy joint
powers agency and the developing Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Communities
Conservation Plan. The mitigation land may not overlap with existing habitat
conservation easement areas; the intent is to not allow "stacking" of
easements, except for habitat conservation easements protecting riparian
corridors, raptor nesting habitat, wildlife-friendly hedgerows, or other
restored or enhanced habitat areas so long as such areas do not exceed five
percent (5%) of the total area of any particular agricultural conservation
easement.
   (f)   Ineligible lands.  A property is ineligible to serve as agricultural
mitigation land if any of the circumstances below apply:
   (1)   The property is currently encumbered by a conservation, flood, or
other type of easement or deed restriction that legally or practicably prevents
converting the property to a nonagricultural use; or
   (2)   The property is currently under public ownership and will remain so in
the future, except to the extent it is included within a mitigation bank that
may subsequently be established by the County or other public agency; or
   (3)   The property is subject to physical conditions that legally or
practicably prevent converting the property to a nonagricultural use.
   (g)   Minimum conservation requirements.  The following minimum requirements
shall be incorporated into all conservation easements recorded to satisfy the
requirements of this mitigation program. Nothing in this subsection is intended
to prevent the inclusion of requirements that require a higher level of
performance from the parties to a conservation easement or other instrument to
ensure that the goals of this mitigation program are achieved.
   (1)   It is the intent of the County to transfer most, if not all, of the
easements that are received from this program to a qualifying entity, as
defined above, for the purpose of monitoring compliance with easement terms and
taking any necessary enforcement and related actions. Estimated costs of any
such transfer may be recovered from the applicant at the time of easement
acceptance by the County.
   (2)   All farmland conservation easements shall be acceptable to County
Counsel and the qualifying entity that will receive the easement, and signed by
all owners with an interest in the mitigation land.
   (3)   The instrument shall prohibit any uses or activities which
substantially impair or diminish the agricultural productivity of the
mitigation land, except for the restoration or conversion to habitat uses of up
to five percent (5%) of the total easement land, or that are otherwise
inconsistent with the conservation purposes of this mitigation program. The
instrument shall protect the existing water rights and retain them with the
agricultural mitigation land; however, the instrument shall not preclude the
limited transfer of water rights on a temporary basis (i.e., not to exceed two
(2) years in any ten (10) year period) to other agricultural uses within the
County, so long as sufficient water remains available to continue reasonable
and customary agricultural use of the mitigation land.
   (4)   The instrument shall prohibit the presence, construction, or
reconstruction of homes or other non-agricultural uses except within a
development envelope designated in an exhibit accompanying the easement. Any
such development envelope(s) shall not count toward the acreage totals of the
conservation easement for mitigation purposes. The easement shall specify that
ancillary uses must be clearly subordinate to the primary agricultural use.
   (5)   Conservation easements held by a qualifying entity shall name the
County as a third party beneficiary with full enforcement rights.
   (6)   Interests in agricultural mitigation land shall be held in trust by a
qualifying entity and/or the County in perpetuity. The qualifying entity or the
County shall not sell, lease, or convey any interest in agricultural mitigation
land which it shall acquire except in accordance with the terms of the
conservation easement.
   (7)   The conservation easement can only be terminated by judicial
proceedings. Termination shall not be effective until the proceeds from the
sale of the public's interest in the agricultural mitigation land is received
and used or otherwise dedicated to acquire interests in other agricultural
mitigation land in Yolo County, as approved by the County and provided in this
chapter.
   (8)   If any qualifying entity owning an interest in agricultural mitigation
land ceases to exist, the duty to hold, administer, monitor and enforce the
interest shall pass to the County or other qualifying entity as acceptable and
approved by the County.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1456, eff. August 27,
2015; as amended by § 4, Ord. 1468, eff. May 13, 2016; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1486, eff. March 23, 2017)
Sec. 8-2.405.   In-Lieu Agricultural Mitigation Fee.
   (a)   Purpose. This section establishes certain fees that, pursuant to
Section
8-2.404, are required to be paid by new development that converts less than
twenty (20) acres of agricultural lands to nonagricultural uses. The fees
established by this section are estimated to be equal to the cost of conserving
one (1) acre of agricultural land for every acre developed. Specifically, this
section establishes and sets forth regulations relating to the imposition,
collection, and use of fees for the conservation of agricultural lands through
purchase of conservation easements.
   (b)   In-Lieu Agricultural Mitigation Fee.
   (1)   Section
8-2.404, the Agricultural Conservation and Mitigation Program, sets forth the
details and requirements of the Program. The Program requires agricultural
mitigation for the conversion or change from agricultural use to a
predominantly non-agricultural use prior to, or concurrent with, approval of a
permit or other land use entitlement or approval, including but not limited to
zone change, by the County.
   (2)   The Agricultural Conservation and Mitigation Program specifies that
development projects that result in the conversion of less than twenty (20)
acres of agricultural land may pay an in-lieu fee, instead of purchasing a
conservation easement, based on a per acre calculation of the conversion
amount.
   (3)   The formula for determining the amount of the per-acre in-lieu fee to
be paid shall be as follows, and as updated according to Subsection (5), below:
Table 1
In-Lieu Agricultural Mitigation Fee
 
Cost Component            Per Acre Fee
Easement Acquisition Cost $8,400
Transaction Cost          $420
Monitoring Endowment      $880
Administrative Costs      $280
Contingency               $115
Total (rounded)           $10,100
 
   Source: Table 7, Yolo County Agricultural Mitigation Fee Analysis,
   Economic and Planning Systems, August 7, 2007
   (4)   The fees collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be used to pay the
costs associated with acquiring and maintaining agricultural conservation
easements, including the specific costs identified in
Table 1, above.
   (5)   The In-Lieu Agricultural Mitigation Fee may be updated quarterly based
on two (2) separate indices. The non-acquisition related costs may be updated
based on changes in the Consumer Price Index (CPI), a typical measure of
inflation. The acquisition costs may be updated based on changes in the Office
of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO) housing price index for the
Sacramento Metropolitan Statistical Area, which is proxy for land costs. This
index is published four (4) times a year, in early December, March, June, and
September.
   (c)   Payment of Fees. For any development project subject to this
ordinance, fees levied hereunder shall be paid to the County of Yolo prior to
the acceptance of any final subdivision map, issuance of a conditional use
permit or approval of a site plan, or issuance of building permit(s), or such
other ministerial or discretionary approval that triggers the fee requirement,
whichever occurs first. The Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Department shall not accept any final subdivision map, issue any conditional
use permit or approve any site plan, or issue any building permit(s) or any
other ministerial or discretionary approval to any development subject to this
ordinance without first receiving payment of the required fees from the
applicant.
   (d)   Accounting and Register of Payment.
   (1)   The fees collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be placed by the
Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department in a separate
interest bearing account for the In-Lieu Agricultural Fee Program, as further
described in Subsection (f), below.
   (2)   The Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department shall
maintain a register for each account indicating the date of payment of each
fee, the amount paid, Assessor’s Parcel Number and the name of the payor.
   (3)   Pursuant to Government Code section 66006(b)(1), within one hundred
eighty (180) days after the last day of each fiscal year, the Planning, Public
Works and Environmental Services Department shall prepare an accounting of all
fees paid into and withdrawn from the account during the prior fiscal year.
This accounting shall include all of the information required by subdivision
(b)(1) of section 66006, including but not limited to the source and amounts
collected, the beginning and ending balance of the account, the interest earned
during the prior fiscal year, the amounts expended from the account, and the
projects for which such expenditures were made.
   (e)   Independent Fee Calculations.
   (1)   Following a request made by an affected party, if in the judgment of
the Director of the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Department (“Director”) none of the fee amounts set forth in the schedule in
Table 1, above, appears to accurately correspond with the impacts resulting
from issuance of the requested building permit (or certificate of occupancy if
no building permit is required), the applicant shall provide to the Planning,
Public Works and Environmental Services Department for its review and
evaluation an independent fee calculation, prepared by a consultant approved by
the Director. The independent fee calculation shall show the basis upon which
it was made and shall include, at a minimum, the costs of recent easement
transactions in Yolo County. The Director may require, as a condition of the
issuance of the requested permit, payment of an alternative impact fee based on
this calculation. With the independent fee calculation, the applicant shall pay
to the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department an
administrative processing fee of seven hundred and sixty eight ($768) dollars
per calculation or such amount that may be set in the County’s Master Fee
Resolution in effect at the time the project is submitted.
   (2)   While there is a presumption that the calculation set forth in the In-
Lieu Agricultural Mitigation Fee study (as may be adjusted from time to time in
accordance with this ordinance) is correct, the Director shall consider the
documentation submitted by the applicant. The Director is not required to
accept as true the facts contained in such documentation. If the Director
reasonably deems the facts in such documentation to be inaccurate or not
reliable, he or she may require the applicant to submit additional or different
documentation or, alternatively, refuse to accept any further documentation and
apply the formula set forth in Subsection (b), above, to the development at
issue. The Director is authorized to adjust the fee on a case-by-case basis
based on the independent fee calculations or the specific characteristics of
the permit (or certificate of occupancy if no building permit is required),
provided the amount of the adjusted fee is consistent with the criteria set
forth in Government Code section 66001(a)-(b) and other applicable legal
requirements.
   (f)   Establishment of In-Lieu Fee Account.
   (1)   An interest-bearing account shall be established for the fees
collected pursuant to this ordinance and shall be entitled “In-Lieu
Agricultural Mitigation Fee Account”. Impact fees shall be earmarked
specifically and deposited in this account and shall be prudently invested in a
manner consistent with the investment policies of the County. Funds withdrawn
from this account shall be used in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance. Interest earned on impact fees shall be retained in the account and
expended for the purpose for which the impact fees were collected.
   (2)   On an annual basis, the Director shall provide a report to the Board
of Supervisors on the account showing the source and amount of all moneys
collected, earned, or received, and system improvements that were financed in
whole or in part by impact fees. This report may be identical in format and
content with the report or other document prepared pursuant to Subsection (d)
(3), above, and Government Code Section 66006(b)(1).
   (3)   In accordance with Government Code section 66001(d), for the fifth
fiscal year following the first deposit of fees into the account and every five
(5) years thereafter, if some or all of the collected fees have not been
expended, the Board of Supervisors shall make the findings set forth in
Government Code Section 66001(d) or take other measures provided in
Subdivisions (d) and (e) of Section 66001, including a refund of any unexpended
moneys pursuant to Subsection (g), below.
   (g)   Refunds.
   (1)   Except where the Board of Supervisors has timely made the findings set
forth in Government Code Section 66001(d), upon application of the property
owner made pursuant to (3) through (5) of this subsection (g), the County shall
refund that portion of any impact fee which has been on deposit over five (5)
years, whether committed or uncommitted. The refund shall be made to the then-
current owner or owners of lots or units of the development project or
projects, as reflected on the last equalized assessment roll.
   (2)   The County may refund by direct payment, by offsetting the refund
against other impact fees due for development projects by the owner on the same
or other property, or otherwise by agreement with the owner. A person who
receives a refund under this provision shall not commence construction of the
land development for which the refund was made without repaying the required
fees.
   (3)   If the County fails to expend the fees within five (5) years of
payment, or where appropriate findings have been made, such other time periods
pursuant to Section 66000 et seq. of the Government Code, the current owner of
the property for which impact fees have been paid may receive a refund of the
remaining amount of the fee payment. In determining whether fees have been
expended, impact fees shall be considered expended on a first in, first out
basis.
   (4)   The County shall notify potential claimants by first class mail
deposited with the United States Postal Service at the last known address of
such claimants.
   (5)   Property owners seeking a refund of impact fees must submit a written
request for a refund of the fees to the Director of Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services within one (1) year of the date that the right to claim
the refund arises or the date the notice described in Subsection (4) of this
section is given, whichever is later.
   (6)   Any impact fees for which no application for a refund has been made
within the one (1) year period shall be retained by the County and expended on
the appropriate purchases of easements.
   (7)   Refunds of impact fees under this ordinance shall include any interest
earned on the impact fees by the County.
   (8)   When the County terminates the impact fee program established by this
ordinance, all unexpended and unencumbered funds, including interest earned,
shall be refunded pursuant to this ordinance. The County shall publish notice
of the determination and the availability of refunds in a newspaper of general
circulation at least two (2) times and shall notify all potential claimants by
first class mail to the last known address of the claimants. All funds
available for refund shall be retained for a period of one (1) year after the
second publication. At the end of one (1) year, any remaining funds shall be
retained by the County, but must be expended for the appropriate public
facilities. This notice requirement shall not apply if there are not unexpended
or unencumbered balances within the account.
   (9)   The County shall also refund the impact fee paid plus interest to the
current owner of property for which the impact fee had been paid if the
development was never completed or occupied; provided, that if the County
expended or encumbered the impact fee in good faith prior to the application
for a refund, the Director may decline to provide the refund. If within a
period of three (3) years, the same or subsequent owner of the property
proceeds with the same or substantially similar development, the owner can
petition the Director for an offset against the fees previously paid to, and
expended or encumbered by, the County. The petitioner shall provide receipts of
impact fees previously paid for a development of the same or substantially
similar nature on the same property or some portion thereof.
   (h)   Use of Funds.
   (1)   The fees collected pursuant to this ordinance may be spent for the
conservation of agricultural lands through purchase of conservation easements,
including any related administrative, monitoring, stewardship, and legal costs.
   (2)   It is the intent of the County to transfer most, if not all, of the
fees that are collected to a qualifying entity, that will purchase and maintain
easements.
   (3)   In-Lieu fees may be used to recoup costs for conservation easement
purchases previously incurred by the County, provided the costs recouped by the
County were incurred in connection with the Agricultural Conservation and
Mitigation Program.
   (4)   In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been
issued for the advanced purchase of conservation easements, In-Lieu fees may be
used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the
extent that purchases are consistent with the Agricultural Conservation and
Mitigation Program and this section.
   (i)   Protests and Appeals.  Protests shall be filed in accordance with
Sections 66020 and 66021 of the Government Code. At the time any fees are
imposed pursuant to this ordinance, County staff shall provide the project
applicant written notice of the imposition of the fees, a statement of the
amount of the fees, and notification of the commencement of the ninety (90) day
period for filing a protest under Government Code section 66020(d)(1).
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 4, Ord. 1468, eff. May 13,
2016)
Sec. 8-2.406.   Transfer of Development Rights Program. (reserved)
Sec. 8-2.407.   Williamson Act Land Use Contracts.
   See “Yolo County Williamson Act Program and Guidelines,” a separate document
which is not a part of the County Code.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 5: Residential Zones
Sec. 8-2.501.   Purpose.
   The purpose of the Residential Zones shall be to allow for a wide range of
housing types and uses in the unincorporated area of the County. Such uses
shall complement existing residential development within the County’s towns and
be compatible with smart growth policies of the County General Plan.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.502.   Residential Zones.
   Residential land is separated into five (5) zoning districts, with specific
Use Types, minimum lot area, and other requirements, as described below.
   (a)   Rural Residential - 5 acre minimum parcel size (RR-5) Zone. The
purpose of the Rural Residential-5 Zone (RR-5) is to recognize existing rural
residential areas with no public water and sewer systems surrounded by
intensive agriculture, with lot sizes of generally five (5) acres or more. The
RR-5 Zone is notably applied in Monument Hills, an area of poorer quality
soils. The predominant land use in the zone is large lot rural homes, although
attached and/or detached ancillary or second units, and farm worker housing is
allowed. The RR-5 Zone is one of the two (2) zoning districts that is
consistent with the Rural Residential (RR) land use designation set by the 2030
Countywide General Plan. General Plan Policy AG-1.5 states that areas
designated as Agriculture are strongly discouraged from being redesignated to
RR or any other non-Agriculture designation. Thus, it is anticipated that the
RR-5 zoning will not be extended to any additional areas during the 2030
planning period. The minimum lot size for newly created parcels in the RR-
5 Zone is five (5.0) acres.
   (b)   Rural Residential-2 acre minimum parcel size (RR-2) Zone. The Rural
Residential-2 (RR-2) Zone, like the RR-5 Zone, recognizes existing areas in the
County that have been developed with very low density (one (1) to five (5)
acre) large lot homes with no public services such as water or sewer. The RR-
2 Zone allows for a limited variety of agricultural uses, including the keeping
of animals, which is regulated based on the size of the parcel. The RR-2 Zone
is most notably
applied to the Hardwoods area of Dunnigan, which does not currently have public
services but is expected to be connected to public water and sewer within the
2030 planning period. The RR-2 Zone is one of the two (2) zoning districts that
is consistent with the Rural Residential (RR) land use designation set by the
2030 Countywide General Plan. As in the case of the RR-5 Zone, General Plan
policy strongly discourages areas that are now designated as Agriculture from
being redesignated to RR or any other non-Agriculture designation. Thus, it is
anticipated that the RR-2 zoning will not be extended to any additional areas
during the 2030 planning period. The minimum lot size for newly created parcels
in the RR-1 Zone is two (2.0) acres.
   (c)   Low Density Residential (R-L) Zone. The Low Density Residential (R-L)
Zone includes traditionally low density neighborhoods with primarily detached
single family homes located in existing unincorporated towns such as Esparto,
Knights Landing, Clarksburg, Madison, Dunnigan, Yolo, and Zamora. Some of these
areas have public services including water and sewer, while others do not. Lot
sizes in communities zoned R-L with no or limited public services are
restricted in size to no less than two acres, in order to accommodate on-site
wells and leachfields. Along with single family homes, the R-L Zone also allows
duplexes (two family)and small multifamily housing such as “triplexes” (three
family), and “four-plexes” (four family). The R-L Zone is the one zoning
district that is consistent with the Residential Low (RL) land use designation
set by the 2030 Countywide General Plan. The density allowed in the R-L Zone is
between one (1.0) and ten (10.0) housing units per net acre. The minimum lot
size for newly created parcels in the R-L Zone is one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet. The maximum lot size for newly created parcels with water
and sewer services is one (1) acre.
   (d)   Medium Density Residential (R-M) Zone. The Medium Density Residential
(R-M) Zone includes parcels in neighborhoods with a mix of housing densities,
including detached and attached single family homes, condominiums, townhouses,
“garden” apartment complexes, and mobile home parks. The R-M zone is applied
only in unincorporated towns that are served by some public water and/or sewer
system, i.e. Esparto, Knights Landing, Madison, Dunnigan, and Yolo. Certain
small compatible neighborhood-serving retail, office, and service uses are also
allowed within the R-M Zone as “mixed use residential” activities. The R-M Zone
is the one zoning district that is consistent with the Residential Medium (RM)
land use designation set by the 2030 Countywide General Plan. The density
allowed in the R-M Zone is between ten (10.0) and twenty (20.0) housing units
per net acre. The minimum lot size for newly created parcels in the R-M Zone is
one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
   (e)   High Density Residential (R-H) Zone. The High Density Residential (R-
H) Zone includes parcels and neighborhoods planned for the more dense
condominium, townhouse, and apartment projects. The R-H zone is applied only in
unincorporated towns that are served by both public water and sewer systems,
i.e. Esparto, Knights Landing, Madison, and Dunnigan. Mixed uses are encouraged
in the R-H Zone, and a greater variety of neighborhood-serving retail, office,
and service uses are allowed within the R-H Zone than in the R-M Zone. The R-
H Zone is consistent with the Residential High (RH) land use designation set by
the 2030 Countywide General Plan. The density allowed in the R-H Zone is
greater than twenty (20.0) housing units per net acre. The minimum lot size for
newly created parcels in the R-H Zone is one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7,
2018; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1547, eff. March 10, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.503.   Residential Use Types Defined.
   As required by Sec.
8-2.227 in Article 2 of this chapter, a Use Classification System has been
employed to identify residential Use Types. The residential Use Types include
the full range of housing described above, as well as other less traditional
residential uses such as group care homes, group or co-housing, shelters, and
farm labor housing. The descriptions of the Use Types in this chapter also
identify specific activities that are allowed within housing units, or on
residentially zoned parcels, such as child care, home occupations, limited
retail and service activities, accessory structures, and keeping of animals.
These typical Use Types are examples and are not meant to include all uses that
may properly be classified within each Use Type.
   (a)   Single Family Detached and Duplexes. This Use Type includes housing
that consists of detached single and second dwelling units, duplexes (two
attached units), and accessory dwelling units. Manufactured or modular homes
are also included in this Use Type. Single family homes may be found in all the
residential zones, and new detached and attached housing is allowed in all
zones except for the R-H zone, which is reserved for more dense housing types.
Single family homes may be served by either on-site private services (well and
septic) or public services.
   (b)   Small Multifamily Residences (3-4 attached units). This Use Type
includes small attached multi-family housing structures such as "triplexes"
(three attached units), and "four-plexes" (four attached units). Small multi-
family housing is allowed in R-M and R-H zones. Small multifamily residences
are allowed within the R-L zone with a Site Plan Review. Attached homes are
generally served by public water and sewer.
   (c)   Large Multifamily Residences (5+ attached units). This Use Type covers
a wide variety of housing products with five or more attached dwelling units
including larger apartment complexes, condominiums, townhouses, "garden"
apartments, and other forms of housing that share common walls and common open
spaces. The Use Type includes both rental housing units as well as for sale
units. This Use Type does not include group or temporary living situations
(rooming, boarding or lodging houses; fraternities; co-housing; motels/ hotels;
farm labor housing; or shelters). Large multifamily residences are allowed in
the R- M and R-H zones and permitted in the R-L zone with a Site Plan Review.
This Use Type may not be served by on-site private services (well and septic)
and must be connected with public services.
   (d)   Group Homes or Co-Housing. This Use Type includes non-traditional
housing arrangements such as “co-housing,” which are larger groups of unrelated
people who choose to live within an existing or new multi-family housing
project with large common areas for eating and recreating communally. This Use
Type does not include room-mates sharing a house or a traditional apartment,
and does not include group care homes. This Use Type is allowed within all
residential zones, with the requirement that adequate land must be available
for on-site services, e.g., leachfields, to accommodate the number of
residents, if the project is not connected to public services.
   (e)   Farm Labor Housing. This Use Type includes multi-family housing
specifically used by farm workers. This Use Type is regulated and licensed
through the State of California when the structure or structures include twenty
units or twenty employees, or more. Farm labor housing is allowed within all
residential zones with the requirement that adequate land must be available for
on-site services, e.g., leachfields, to accommodate the number of residents, if
the project is not connected to public services.
   (f)   Shelters. Shelters are temporary or transitional housing provided for
homeless families, temporarily displaced individuals, and domestic violence
victims. Shelters are allowed within all commercial and industrial zones with
the requirement that adequate land must be available for on-site services,
e.g., leachfields, to accommodate the number of residents, if the project is
not connected to public services.
   (g)   Home Occupation/Home Care. This Use Type includes home occupations,
group or home care, and child care. Home occupations such as bookkeeping or
Internet sales are regulated through a business license and home occupation
permit. These home-based activities must have no employees on-site other than
the owner and family members, or permanent residents, and must create no
traffic or parking in the neighborhood.
   Group or home care is multi-family living for the main purpose of providing
limited on-site medical and/or assisted home care for elderly or disabled
persons, including small to medium-sized convalescent and group care homes. It
does not include large convalescent complexes or hospitals. This use is
regulated and licensed through the State of California. Child care is also
licensed through the State of California. State law requires that local
agencies allow small group homes and small child care facilities in all
residential zones “by right.” Larger group care and child care, including child
care centers, are allowed within most of the agricultural and residential
zones, with the requirement that adequate land must be available for on-site
services, e.g., leachfields, to accommodate the number of residents, if the
project is not connected to public services.
   (h)   Mixed Residential Commercial. This broad Use Type includes several
quasi-commercial activities that are related to agri-tourism and small local-
serving retail and services. This Use Type is allowed as an “ancillary” use,
which is subordinate to the main residential use of the property or zone. Agri-
tourism uses such as small bed and breakfasts/farm stays, small special event
facilities, and small wineries/olive mills are described in Sec.
8-2.303, Article 3 of this chapter. All of these small agri-tourism uses are
allowed in the RR-5 zone, and some uses are allowed in the RR-2 zone.
   This Use Type also includes mixed residential/commercial uses that are not
directly related to agri-tourism. The 2030 Countywide General Plan recognizes
and encourages the integration of some limited small retail, office, and
service structures and activities within residentially zoned neighborhoods and
projects, in areas that are already connected to public services. These non-
residential uses are limited to businesses that are compatible with, and
provide services to, the local neighborhood and town, and do not cause
unacceptable impacts, such as traffic, parking, and noise, to the nearby
residents. The commercial use must be subordinate to the main residential use.
   The commercial/residential Use Type includes small grocery and retail
stores; small offices which may house accountants, attorneys, real estate
firms, and medical/dental services; and small service businesses such as hair
dressers, dry cleaning and laundromats. Size restrictions apply to these uses.
These limited commercial/residential uses are allowed within all residential
zones, except for the RR-5 and RR-2 zones, which are connected with public
services. The Use Type does not include live-work (other than home occupation),
restaurants, bars, and retail stores that are more appropriately located in a
commercial or downtown district.
   (i)    Animal Keeping. This Use Type includes some of the animal keeping
activities that are described in Sec.
8-2.303, Article 3 of this chapter. Keeping of small domestic pets is allowed
in all residential zones. Large domestic animals may be kept in the RR-5, RR-2,
and R-L zones, with their numbers regulated by how much acreage is available.
Roosters and other wild animals are allowed only in the RR-5 zone. Domestic
fowl may be kept on parcels less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in the
R-L and R-M Zones with special restrictions.
   (j)   Agricultural Uses. This Use Type includes many of the agricultural
activities that are described in Sec.
8-2.303, Article 3 of this chapter. A range of agricultural uses is allowed in
the RR-5, RR-2, and R-L zones. In the Rural Residential zones, residents are
allowed to plant and grow crops, pasture animals, and engage in other forms of
permanent agriculture, including limited agricultural processing. In the R-
L zone, agriculture may be practiced on larger lots that are planned for future
residential growth, but may not be developed for some years.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 6, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018; as amended by § 3, Ord.
1522, eff. August 6, 2020; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1547, eff. March 10, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.504.   Tables of Residential Permit Requirements.
   
Table 8-2.504(a) on the following page lists the permit requirements for each
Use Type within each residential zoning district. Use Types are defined as
“principal,” “ancillary,” or “accessory” uses which are allowed “by right”
(with issuance of only a building permit after zoning clearance), or are
allowed through issuance of a non-discretionary (no public hearing) Site Plan
Review. Additional Use Types are defined as “conditional uses” that are
permitted through the issuance of a discretionary Minor or Major Use Permit,
after a public hearing.
   
Table 8-2.504(b) lists permitting requirements for a detailed list of
“accessory structures” which are allowed in each residential zoning district.
Table 8-2.504(a)
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Zones
A = Allowed use, subject Land Use Permit Required by Zone
to zoning clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                     Specific Use
UP (m) = Minor Use                                        Requirements or
Permit                   RR-5 RR-2 R-L R-M R-H            Performance Standards
UP (M) = Major Use
Permit
N = Use Not Allowed
A = Allowed  Land Use Permit Required by Zone
use, subject
to zoning
clearance*
SP = Site                                                         Specific Use
Plan Review                                                       Requirements
UP (m) =                                                          or
Minor Use    RR-5      RR-2      R-L       R-M       R-H          Performance
Permit                                                            Standards
UP (M) =
Major Use
Permit
N = Use Not
Allowed
Residential Uses
Two single                                                        See
family                                                            Table 8-
homes,       A         A         A         A         N            2.505 and
detached or                                                       Sec.
duplex                                                            8-2.506(a),
                                                                  (m), and (n)
Accessory                                                         Sec.
dwelling     A                                                    8-2.506(b)
unit (ADU)
Junior
accessory    A                                                    Sec.
dwelling                                                          8-2.506(b)
unit (JADU)
Small multi-
family (3-   N         N         SP        A         A
4 attached                                                        See
units)                                                            Table 8-
Large multi-                                                      2.505 and
family 5+    N         N         SP        SP        SP           Sec.
attached                                                          8-2.506(c),
units                                                             (m), and (n)
Group or co- SP        SP        SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)
housing
Farm worker  A/SP      A/SP      A/SP      SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)     See Sec.
housing                                                           8-2.506(d)
Emergency    N         N         N         N         N            See Sec.
shelters                                                          8-2.606(m)
Mobile home  N         N         UP(M)     UP(M)     N            See Sec.
parks                                                             8-2.1014
Home Occupation/Care
Home         A         A         A         A         A            See Sec.
occupation                                                        8-2.506(e)
Group/home
care (6 or   A         A         A         A         A
less beds)                                                        See Sec.
Group/home                                                        8-2.506 (f)
care (7 or   SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  N
more beds)
Child care
(<9          A         A         A         A         A
children)                                                         See Sec.
Child care                                                        8-2.506(g)
(9 to 14     SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)
children)
Child care                                                        See Sec.
centers (>14 SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)     8-2.506(h)
children)
Mixed Residential/Commercial/Public and Quasi-Public Uses
Small
winery/olive SP/UP(m)  UP(m)     UP(m)     N         N            See Sec.
mill (> 1                                                         8-2.306(j)
acre)
Small
special
events       UP(m)     UP(m)     UP(m)     N         N            See Sec.
facility (on                                                      8-2.306(k)
> 1 acre
parcel)
Small/large
bed and      UP(m)/ UP UP(m)/ UP UP(m)/ UP UP(m)/ UP UP(m)/ UP(M) See Sec.
breakfast/   (M)       (M)       (M)       (M)                    8-2.306(l)
lodging
Farm stay    SP/UP(m)  N         N         N         N            See Sec.
                                                                  8-2.306(m)
Rural        N         N         N         N         N
recreation
Small
ancillary    N         N         SP        SP        SP           See Sec.
commercial                                                        8-2.506(i)
uses
Cottage food A         A         A         A         A            See Sec.
operation                                                         8-2.506(k)
Churches,
religious    UP(M)     UP(M)     UP(M)     UP(M)     N
assembly
Vehicle                                                           See
charging     N         N         N         A         A            definition
station                                                           in Sec.
                                                                  8-14.102
Cannabis                                                          See Article
uses, all    N         N         N         N         N            14 for
types,                                                            personal use
prohibited
Agricultural Uses and Animal Keeping
Agricultural A         A         A         A         N
production                                                        See
Agricultural                                                      Table 8-
processing   UP(m)     N         N         N         N            2.304(a)

Small
domestic
animals      A         A         A         A         A
(cats, dogs,
birds),
beekeeping
Large
domestic                                                          See Sec.
animals                                                           8-2.506(j)
(fowl,       A         A         A         A         N
horses,
swine,
goats)
Wild,
exotic,      A         N         N         N         N
dangerous
animals
Kennels/                                                          See
animal       UP(m)     N         N         N         N            definition
boarding                                                          in Sec.
                                                                  8-2.307
 
*   An “allowed use” does not require a land use permit, but is still subject
to permit requirements of other Yolo County divisions such as Building,
Environmental Health, and Public Works.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 6, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1494, eff. January 11, 2018; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018; as amended by §§ 2- 3, Ord. 1522, eff. August 6,
2020; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1545, eff. January 6, 2022; as amended by § 3,
Ord. 1547, eff. March 10, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.505.   Table of Residential Development Requirements.
   The following
Table 8-2.505 identifies the development requirements, including minimum parcel
sizes, building setbacks, and other standards that allowed and permitted uses
in the residential zones must meet as a standard or condition of any issued
building permit, Site Plan Review, or Use Permit. Setback requirements for
accessory structures may be different; see Section
8-2.506(a) and (b).
Table 8-2.505(3)
Development Requirements in Residential Zones
 
     Minimum   Front Yard Rear     Side     Height       Other
R    Lot Area  Setback    Yard     Yard     Limits(3)    Building  Density (dwellings per
ZONE (acres/   (feet)     Setback  Setback  (feet)       Standards acre) 4 
     sf) (1)              (feet)   (feet)
RR-5 5.0 acres 20 feet                                   No limit
               from                         35 feet for  on
               property                     residential  primary
               line, or                     uses; no     dwelling;
               50 feet    25 feet  10 feet  limit for    second
               from       from     from     agricultural dwelling  One primary dwelling plus
RR-2 2.0 acres centerline property property uses, except no        one second dwelling per
               of         line     line     for          greater   parcel
               roadway,                     accessory or than
               whichever                    conditional  2,500
               is greater                   uses         square
               (2)                                       feet

     1,200     10 feet             5 feet
     square    from                from     35 feet      No size
     feet      property   20 feet  property max./two     limit;
     (minimum  line or    from     line/    stories, or  open      1.0 – 9.9 units per net
R-L  of 2.0    curb       property less     40 feet      space of  acre
     acres if  strip/ 20  line     than 5   max./three   600 sf
     no        feet for a          feet     stories with per unit
     services) garage              with Use Use Permit
                                   Permit
               10 feet             5 feet   40 feet max/
               from                from     three        No size
               property            property stories, or  limit;
     1,200     line or             line/    50 feet      open      10.0 – 19.9 units per net
R-M  square    curb                less     max./four    space of  acre
     feet      strip/ 20           than 5   stories,     300 sf
               feet for a          feet     with Use     per unit
               garage     15 feet  with Use Permit
                          from     Permit
                          property 10 feet
                          line     from
               10 feet             property 50 feet/four Open
     1,500     from                line/    stories, or  space of  20.0 or more units per net
R-H  square    property            less     60 feet/five 200 sf    acre
     feet      line or             than 10  stories with per unit
               curb strip          feet     Use Permit
                                   with Use
                                   Permit
 
Notes:   1.   Parcels in rural areas with no access to public water and/or
wastewater services are subject to a 2.0 acre minimum parcel size for new
building permits, see Section
8-2.1002(a).
      2.   The yard abutting a County road is considered the front yard.
Properties abutting a major arterial require a 30-foot front yard setback, as
measured from the edge of road right-of-way.
      3.   Appropriate findings for discretionary projects, and ministerial
residential projects, located within the floodplain are required, see Section
8-2.306(ae),
      4.   New development within the R-L, R-M, and R-H zones is recommended to
meet minimum densities; if not, Site Plan Review or Use Permit is required, at
the discretion of the Planning Director, excepting parcels without existing or
planned public water and sewer service.
      5.   Development near the toe of any levee is restricted, see Section
8-2.306(ad). Residential, accessory and other structures shall comply with Sec.
8-2.402(d)(vi) (100-foot setback from streams), unless the size or
configuration of the lot makes this requirement infeasible.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 681.229, eff. October 29,
2015; as amended by § 6, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24, 2016; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1522, eff. August 6,
2020; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1547, eff. March 10, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.506.   Specific Use Requirements or Performance Standards.
   The following specific use requirements or performance standards may be
applicable to some of the specific uses identified in the previous
Table 8-2.504(a), and shall be applied to any issued building permits, Site
Plan Reviews, or Use Permits for uses in the residential zones.
   (a)   Accessory structures.
   (1)   All habitable accessory structures require issuance of a Building
Permit. Certified manufactured homes attached to a foundation system that meets
CHSC standards shall be considered a permanent residence. See section 8-2.506
(b) for Accessory and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units.
   (2)   Accessory non-dwelling structures require issuance of a Building
Permit if over 120 square feet in size or if the structure has water,
wastewater, or electrical service.
   (3)   The following setback requirements shall apply for detached accessory
non-dwelling structures:
   (i)   Building separation. Detached accessory structures subject to a
Building Permit shall be separated from principal structures and other detached
accessory structures subject to a Building Permit by a minimum of ten feet or
the minimum distance specified by applicable building or fire codes.
   (ii)   Front yard: Accessory non-dwelling structures subject to a Building
Permit shall comply with the front yard setback regulations for principal uses
as set forth in the applicable regulations for each zone district.
   (iii)   Corner lot setbacks: Accessory non-housing structures on a corner
lot shall be located no closer to the street right-of-way than the principal
structure on the lot.
   (iv)   Side and rear yards: Those accessory structures not requiring a
Building Permit, such as a storage shed of less than 120 square feet, may be
allowed to locate in the side and/or rear yard setback areas. Accessory non-
dwelling structures requiring a Building Permit may be within the required side
and/or rear yard, but at least three feet from the side property lines if
Building Code standards (such as use of improved fire retardant materials) are
met.
   (4)   Except in the Agricultural (A) Zones, accessory structures subject to
a Building Permit shall not be erected on a lot until construction of the
principal structure has started, and an accessory structure shall not be used
unless the principal structure has received a certificate of occupancy.
   (b)   Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU) and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units
(JADU).
   (1)   Accessory dwelling units (ADU) in residential zones are a permitted
use only subject to the requirements set forth separately below and in no case
shall an ADU that meets the minimum requirements be subject to discretionary
review. A ministerial permit for an ADU may be disapproved only if the Planning
Director finds that the ADU would be detrimental to the public health and
safety or would introduce unreasonable privacy impacts to the immediate
neighbors. A building permit application for an ADU shall be approved or
disapproved within 120 days of receipt.
   (2)   The maximum height of an ADU within a required setback shall be 16
feet.
   (3)   The following setback requirements for ADUs shall apply:
   (i)   Setbacks for existing structures or conversion of structures. No
setback shall be required for an existing living area or accessory structure,
or a structure constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions as
an existing structure that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit or a
portion of an accessory dwelling unit.
   (ii)   New construction. Newly constructed ADUs that do not result from the
conversion of an existing structure shall require a setback of four feet from
the side and rear property lines.
   (iii)   Building separation. Detached accessory structures subject to a
Building Permit shall be separated from principal structures by a minimum of
ten (10) feet and from other detached accessory structures subject to a
Building Permit by a minimum distance specified by applicable building or fire
codes.
   (4)   The following parking standards shall be required of all accessory
housing structures except as noted for an ADU:
   (i)   One parking space shall be provided per accessory dwelling unit.
Parking for an ADU may be provided as tandem parking on an existing driveway.
Parking lost through the conversion of a garage, carport, or covered parking
structure is not required to be replaced. Additional parking for an ADU is not
required if the ADU is located:
   1.   within one-half mile walking distance of public transit;
   2.   within an architecturally and historically significant historic
district;
   3.   within an existing primary residence or an existing accessory
structure; when on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the
occupant of the accessory dwelling unit; or
   4.   when there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the
accessory dwelling unit.
   (ii)   On-site parking for an ADU may be included within the required rear
or side yard areas, provided that the parking is set back at least five feet
from the property line and appropriate fencing or landscaping is provided to
buffer any adjacent residences.
   (iii)   Parking spaces shall be otherwise consistent with the design
standards provided in Article 13.
Table 8-2.506
Specific Requirements and Performance Standards for Accessory Structures
Type of Structure Specific Requirements or Performance Standards
Type of      Specific Requirements or Performance Standards
Structure
Accessory agricultural support structures
             Allowed in A and RR zones only. Primary place of employment. No height limit. No
Farm office  kitchen facilities are allowed. May include bath and shower, and a wet bar that
or barn with meets the following standards: comprised of a counter area and overhead cabinets
office       that encompass no more than 20 square feet (sf), and not configured in a manner
             that facilitates conversion into a kitchen.
Barn without Allowed in A and RR zones only. Limited to toilets and wash basins, no shower
office       facilities are allowed. No height limit.
Roadside     Located minimum of 20 feet from edge of road right-of-way. Adequate ingress/
stand        egress, and parking area for a minimum of five cars must be provided.
Greenhouse,  Allowed, with no height limit, in all A (Agricultural) zones, and in the RR-
agricultural 5 and RR-2 zones.
Accessory dwelling structures
             Attached to an existing dwelling shall not exceed 50 percent of the existing
Accessory    living area, with a maximum increase in floor area of 1,200 square feet. ADU’s
dwelling     in detached buildings shall not exceed 1,200 square feet in floor area. See
unit (ADU)   definition in Sec.
             8-2.507 and additional requirements in Sec.
             8-2.506(b).
Accessory non-dwelling structures
Accessory    Include garages, workshops, studios, cabanas, sheds, and other structures
non-dwelling without kitchens or bedrooms. Must meet setback standards, see Sec.
structures   8-2.506(a).
Storage or   Allowed in A and I zones. Up to two containers allowed in RR-5 and RR-2 zones
shipping     only, more than two by Site Plan Review. Not allowed in other R zones. Allowed
container    in C zones with Site Plan Review.
Miscellaneous accessory structures
             May encroach into rear and side yards, with a minimum setback of five feet from
             property lines. Filter and heating systems may be located within three feet of a
Pools and    property line, but may not be located within ten feet of any living area of any
Spas         dwelling unit on an adjacent parcel. Must meet fencing and barrier requirements
             in Article 10, Section
             8-2.1011.
             Includes patio covers, breezeways, sunshades, and gazebos. Structure must be
Attached/    unenclosed on three sides except for vertical supports, insect screening, and
unattached   maximum one-foot kickboards. May be attached, or within ten feet, of the
shade        principal structure and other accessory structures. May encroach into rear and
structure,   side yards, with a minimum setback of five feet from property lines, unless it
trellis/     meets Building Code standards to allow a closer three foot setback, e.g., flame
arbor        retardant construction materials. May not be located less than five feet from
             the nearest side window located on the adjacent parcel.
Animal       Must meet setback standards, see Sec.
enclosures   8-2.506(a) and
             8-2.506(j)(4).
Vehicle      Must meet setback standards, see Sec.
covers/      8-2.506(a). May not be located in a side driveway that is less than five feet
carports     from the nearest side window located on the adjacent parcel.
Greenhouse,  Allowed in all R zones, height limit of 15 feet.
household
Solar        Freestanding household solar panel not to exceed 10 feet in height in R zones,
arrays,      see Sec.
ground       8-2.1104.
mounted
Small solar,
wind, cell   See Article 11.
facility
Temporary accessory buildings
Temporary    Allowed in residential zones appurtenant to the construction of a nearby
sales office subdivision or housing development. Must meet setback standards, see Sec
             8-2.506(a).
 
   (c)   Multifamily residential including group or co-housing.
   (1)   Small multifamily structures, consisting of 3-4 attached units, and
group or co-housing projects, are allowed with the issuance of a Site Plan
Review in the R-L and R-M zones, provided that the project meets development
standards. At the discretion of the Planning Director, a Minor Use Permit may
be required if setbacks or other development standards are not met. Four-plexes
are allowed in the R-H zone with the same requirements, provided the project
meets the minimum density of 20 units per acre.
   (2)   Large multifamily projects that consist of five or more attached
dwelling units of condominiums, townhouses, apartments per structure, or
similar housing, are allowed with the issuance of a Site Plan Review in the R-
L, R-M, and R-H zones, provided that development standards are met. At the
discretion of the Planning Director, a Minor Use Permit may be required if
there are any compatibility issues, or if setbacks or any other development
standards are not met.
   (3)   Group or co-housing projects are allowed with the issuance of a Site
Plan Review in the R-L, R-M, and RH zones, provided that the project meets
development standards. At the discretion of the Planning Director, a Minor Use
Permit may be required if setbacks or other development standards are not met.
   (d)   Farm worker housing. As required by State law (Health and Safety Code
Sec. 17021.5), small farm labor housing projects of no more than six (6)
farmworkers are allowed with the issuance of a building permit. A project with
more than six (6) farmworkers requires a Minor or Major Use Permit, at the
discretion of the Planning Director. A Site Plan Review (or Minor Use Permit in
the R-M and R-H zones) may be required for small projects that do not meet any
of the following development standards:
   (1)   The project is designed to be compatible with any adjoining single
family residences, including appropriate setbacks, landscaping, and parking.
   (2)   Adequate land area is available for the provision of on-site services,
e.g., leachfields, to accommodate the number of farm employees, if the project
is not connected to public services.
   (3)   The project meets any State regulatory requirements and has received,
or will receive in the near future, all necessary State operating permits,
including certificates from the Department of Housing and Community
Development.
   (e)   Home occupation. A residential home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling, which use:
   (1)   Is confined completely within the dwelling and occupies not more than
fifty (50%) percent of the gross area of one (1) floor;
   (2)   Is operated by the members of the family occupying the dwelling;
   (3)   Produces no evidence of its existence in the external appearance of
the dwelling or premises or in the creation of noise, odors, smoke, or other
nuisances to a degree greater than that normal for the neighborhood in which
such use is located;
   (4)   Does not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that normal
in the neighborhood in which the use is located;
   (5)   Meets the requirements of the Chief Building Official and the fire
district of the jurisdiction;
   (6)   Requires no additions or extensions to the dwelling; and
   (7)   Includes no more than one (1) outdoor sign attached to the dwelling,
not freestanding, that is smaller than two (2) square feet in area.
   (f)   Group/home care. Group or home care in single family and multi-family
homes is for the main purpose of providing limited on-site medical and home
care for elderly or disabled persons. Home care is an allowed use in all zones
if six (6) or less beds, as required by State law. Home care with seven (7) or
more beds is allowed with the issuance of a Site Plan Review in the A-N, A-X,
RR-5, RR-2, R-L and R-M zones, and in specified agricultural, commercial, and
industrial zones, provided that the project is designed to be compatible with
any adjoining single family residences. At the discretion of the Planning
Director, a Minor Use Permit may be required if there are any compatibility
issues, or if any of the following development standards are not met:
   (1)   The project is a small to medium-sized convalescent and care home with
no more than twenty (20) beds.
   (2)   The project is designed to be compatible with any adjoining single
family residences, including appropriate setbacks, landscaping, and parking.
   (3)   Adequate land area is available for the provision of on-site services,
e.g., leachfields, to accommodate the number of residents, if the project is
not connected to public services.
   (4)   The project meets State regulatory requirements and has received, or
will receive in the near future, all necessary State operating permits.
   (5)   The project is not located on agricultural land under an active
Williamson Act contract.
   (g)   Child care. Home child care is an allowed “by right” use in all zones
if the facility cares for eight (8) children or less, as required by State law
(California Health and Safety Code Section 1597.45). Large child care
facilities in a residence with more than eight (8) children and up to fourteen
(14) children are allowed with the issuance of a Site Plan Review in the A-N,
A-X, RR-5, RR-2, R-L and R-M, and in specified commercial zones, provided that
the project is designed to address impacts related to density, traffic,
parking, and noise. At the discretion of the Planning Director, and as allowed
under State law, a Minor Use Permit may be required if there are impacts with
the proposed large child care facility that must be addressed through
conditions of approval related to the four (4) impact areas cited above.
   (h)   Child care centers. Child care centers are non-residential facilities
that typically provide care for more than fourteen (14) children. They include
infant centers, child care centers, daycare centers, preschools, nursery
schools, and after-school programs. Child care centers are allowed with the
issuance of a Site Plan Review in the RR-5, RR-2, R-M and R-H zones, and in
specified commercial zones, provided that the project is designed to be
compatible with any adjoining single family residences. At the discretion of
the Planning Director, a Minor Use Permit may be required for a project under
twenty (20) children, or a Major Use Permit may be required for a project
larger than twenty (20) children, if there are any compatibility issues, or if
any of the following development standards are not met:
   (1)   The project is designed to be compatible with any adjoining single
family residences, including appropriate setbacks, landscaping, and parking.
   (2)   Adequate land area is available for the provision of on-site services,
e.g., leachfields, to accommodate the number of children and employees, if the
project is not connected to public services.
   (3)   The project meets any State regulatory requirements and has received,
or will receive in the near future, all necessary State operating permits.
   (i)   Mixed residential/commercial use.  Small mixed commercial activities
of less than two thousand (2,000) square feet per business are allowed as an
“ancillary” use, subordinate to the main residential use within the residential
zones, except for the RR-5 and RR-2 zones, provided public services (water and
sewer) are available. These non-residential uses are limited to businesses that
are compatible with, and provide services to, the local neighborhood and town,
and do not cause unacceptable impacts, such as traffic, parking, and noise, to
the nearby residents. Mixed use residential uses include small grocery and
retail stores; small offices which may house accountants, attorneys, real
estate firms, and medical/dental services; and small service businesses such as
hair dressers, dry cleaning and laundromats. These uses do not include live-
work (other than home occupation), restaurants, bars, and retail stores that
are more appropriately located in a general commercial or downtown district.
   (j)   Animal keeping.
   (1)   The keeping of up to four (4) small domestic animals is allowed in all
residential zones, except for the RR-2 and RR-5 zones, where up to nine (9)
small domestic animals may be kept without need for a kennel permit. For
parcels that exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet, up to six (6) small
domestic animals and up to seven (7) domestic fowl or poultry may be kept.
Immature animals not yet at the age of sexual maturity shall not count against
the total number of animals allowed. The fencing and enclosure requirements set
forth in subsection (4) of this subsection shall apply to small domestic
animals and domestic fowl or poultry.
   (2)   For parcels less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in the R-L and
R-M Zones, a total of not more than four (4) domestic fowl or poultry, such as
chicken hens, may be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary pen or
structure, no part of which shall be located less than twenty-five (25) feet
from any residence, other than a residence owned and occupied by the person
owning or in possession of such animals. The keeping of such animals shall not
create a health or nuisance problem.
   (3)   The keeping of large domestic animals is allowed on lots of one-half
(0.5) acre or more in the A-R, RR-5, RR-2, and RL zones. Animals may be kept in
numbers not exceeding the allotment of Animal Density Points, as defined below,
unless authorized by the Zoning Administrator through the issuance of a Site
Plan Review application. A property between one-half (0.5) and one (1) acre in
size shall receive seven (7) Animal Density Points. A property one (1) acre in
size shall receive twenty-five (25) Animal Density Points and shall receive
five (5) additional points for each additional one-fifth (1/5) of an acre.
Immature animals not yet at the age of sexual maturity shall not count against
the total number of animals allowed. Any combination of the following points
may be applied:
   (i)   Beef cows and all similar cattle shall count for twenty (20) points
each.
   (ii)   Horses shall count for fifteen (15) points each, except that
miniature horses not exceeding two hundred (200) pounds shall count for seven
(7) points.
   (iii)   Mules, donkeys, burros or pigs shall count for ten (10) points each,
except that miniature animals not exceeding two hundred (200) pounds shall
count for seven (7) points.
   (iv)   Sheep, goats, alpacas and similar small hoofed animals shall count
for four (4) points each.
   (v)   Fowl, including chickens, turkeys and ducks, but excluding roosters,
and geese and peacocks (which constitute wild, exotic, dangerous, or prohibited
animals), shall count for one (1) point each.
   (vi)   Roosters shall count for four (4) points on lots greater than five
(5) acres in size. Roosters are not allowed in RL and RR-2 zones unless the lot
is greater than five (5) acres in size.
   (vii)   Wild, dangerous, exotic, or prohibited animals, such as geese and
peacocks, shall not be permitted in any residential zone, except for the RR-
5 zone, and except that roosters may be allowed on large lots (5 acres or more)
in the RR-2 and R-L zones.
   (4)   Fencing, enclosure, and sanitation shall be required as follows:
   (i)   All animals, except household pets (domestic dogs and cats) kept
outdoors, shall be kept in an area which is fenced so as to prevent such
animals from roaming beyond the property line.
   (ii)   Within the fenced area, an enclosure or shed shall be provided of
sufficient size to provide cover for the animals kept on the parcel.
   (iii)   No part of an enclosure for one (1) or more large animals shall be
located within twenty-five (25) feet of any neighboring dwelling.
   (iv)   Animal fecal matter in excess of that which can be safely and
sanitarily utilized on the premises shall be removed and shall not be allowed
to accumulate.
   (k)   Beekeeping.
   (1)   Commercial beekeeping used as “pollinators” is allowed in all of the
agricultural zones, and in the Rural Residential (RR-2 and RR-5) zones. The
hive(s) owner must maintain current registration status of the bee colony(s)
with the Yolo County Agricultural Commissioner in compliance with applicable
State Statutes, including required hive movement notices. Any colony that is
not properly registered shall be removed from the property and may not be
returned to the property for at least six (6) weeks from the date of
registering the colony at another site.
   (2)   Non-commercial urban beekeeping is allowed in all of the agricultural,
residential, commercial, and industrial zones as a use allowed “by right.”
However, non-commercial urban beekeeping is allowed in the R-L, R-M, and the R-
H zones only if all of the following conditions are met and maintained:
   (i)   The hive(s) owner must be a resident in a dwelling that is located on
the same parcel of land on which hive(s) is registered at all times.
   (ii)   There shall be no more than two (2) bee colonies established on the
property, except two (2) additional temporary colonies are allowed for hive
separation or new swarm establishment purposes. Such temporary colonies shall
be removed from the property within two (2) weeks.
   (iii)   Colonies shall be placed in the rear yard of the property and in no
case shall the hives be closer than twenty-five (25) feet from a public or
private street or fifteen (15) feet from abutting property. A barrier
consisting of a wood or other fence, at least four (4) feet high, must be
placed between the hives and the nearest adjacent neighbors.
   (iv)   A permanent fresh water source shall be maintained within fifteen
(15) feet of the hives.
   (3)   For non-commercial urban beekeeping in the R-L, R-M, and R-H zones,
nuisance behavior by bees may require the hive owner to take remedial actions
upon notice by Yolo County, as set forth below. Failure to comply with
specified remedial actions order by the Zoning Administrator will constitute a
violation of the Zoning Code for enforcement purposes.
   (i)   Urban beekeeping is allowed only on property which has not been
declared as a location where bee hives are potentially a hazard to public
health and safety. Those procedures may require removal of all bee colonies
from the property through no direct fault of the beekeeper but because a health
or safety situation has been shown to exist. Once property has been declared
unsafe for urban beekeeping, it shall not be legal to maintain bees on that
property until such status is removed from the property in writing.
   (ii)   Urban beekeeping privileges may be withdrawn from any property by
written notification to the property owner by the Yolo County Zoning
Administrator. Withdrawal must be done with cause, however the cause need not
be the fault of the beekeeper, nor be a factor that is under the control of the
beekeeper. Any condition or combination of circumstances which, in the opinion
of the Zoning Administrator jeopardizes, endangers or otherwise constitutes an
actual, potential or perceived menace to public health or safety will
constitute valid cause to withdraw license to keep bee colonies on the
property. Such withdrawal may be appealed to the Planning Commission. Once any
property owner has been noticed of withdrawal of privilege to keep bee colony
(s) on a particular property, such privilege may be reestablished only upon
written request and approval of the Zoning Administrator.
   (iii)   Written documentation over a medical doctor’s signature certifying
that the medical condition caused by beestings to a resident of abutting
property would constitute a higher than normal death threatening or
hospitalization event will constitute sufficient cause to withdraw the
privilege of urban beekeeping from any specific property.
   (iv)   Abnormally aggressive behavior by bees toward defending their hive
beyond the property lines may constitute sufficient cause to withdraw the
privilege of urban beekeeping from any specific property. Failure to provide
on-site water so as to encourage bees to seek water from swimming pools or
other water sources on adjacent properties shall constitute sufficient cause to
withdraw the privilege of urban beekeeping from any specific property.
   (l)   Cottage food operations. Cottage food operations involve the
preparation of low risk food products in a private home. Such operations are
subject to standards set by the Environmental Health Division according to the
requirements of State law (AB 1616, the California Homemade Food Act).
   (m)   Fireplaces. Wood-burning fireplaces are prohibited in all new
residential developments.
   (n)   Energy Star appliances. Energy Star certified appliances, such as
water heaters, swimming pool heaters, cooking equipment, refrigerators,
furnaces and boiler units, are required in all new residential subdivisions.
   (o)   Approval of all residential projects and permits within the
floodplain. Approvals of all residential projects and permits within the 100-
year and 200-year floodplain must meet FEMA and local flood requirements.
Appropriate findings for discretionary projects, or ministerial residential
projects, located within the floodplain are required, see Section
8-2.306(ae).
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 681.229, eff. October 29,
2015; as amended by § 6, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24, 2016; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1522, eff. August 6,
2020; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1547, eff. March 10, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.507.   Definitions.
   Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)
   "Accessory dwelling unit" (ADU) means an attached or a detached residential
dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or
more persons, and is located on a lot with a proposed or existing primary
residence. An ADU shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the primary residence is
or will be situated. An ADU attached to an existing dwelling shall not exceed
fifty (50) percent of the existing living area of the primary residence. A
detached ADU shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in
floor area. An ADU also includes the following: (a) An efficiency unit, as
defined in Section 17958.1 of Health and Safety Code; and (b) a manufactured
home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code.
   Accessory non-dwelling building
   “Accessory non-dwelling building” shall mean an uninhabited non-residential
building that is incidental and accessory to the primary residential use of the
subject property. Such structures include, but are not limited to, the
following: detached garage, detached workshop, pool house or cabanas, game
room/exercise studio, artist studio, and storage building.
   Accessory structure
   “Accessory structure” shall mean a detached subordinate structure or
building located on the same parcel as the main building and designed and
intended for a use which is subordinate to the use of the main building.
   Accessory structure conversion
   Conversion of an existing accessory structure from a non-habitable and non-
work use, such as a garage or storage shed, to a habitable or work use such as
a second unit or artist studio.
   Accessory use
   “Accessory use” shall mean a use lawfully permitted in the zone, which use
is incidental to, and subordinate to, the principal use of the site or of a
main building on the site and serving a purpose which does not change the
character of the principal use, and which is compatible with other principal
uses in the same zone and with the purpose of such zone.
   Animal keeping
   The keeping, feeding or raising of animals as a commercial agricultural
venture, avocation, hobby or school project, either as a principal land use or
subordinate to a residential use. Includes the keeping of common farm animals,
small-animal specialties, bee farms, aviaries, worm farms, household pets, etc.
   Bed and Breakfast (B&B)
   See definition in Section
8-2.307.
   Cabana or pool house
   A building that is located adjacent to a swimming pool and is designed for
the dressing and showering of pool users.
   Cottage food operation
   Cottage food operations involve the preparation of low risk food products in
a private home, as defined and regulated by the Environmental Health Division
according to the requirements of State law (AB 1616, 2012, the California
Homemade Food Act).
   Dwelling
   “Dwelling” shall mean any building, or portion thereof, containing one (1)
or more dwelling units designed or used exclusively as a residence or sleeping
place for one or more families, but not including a tent, cabin, boat, trailer,
recreational vehicle, dormitory, labor camp, hotel, or motel.
   Dwelling, multiple-family
   “Multiple-family dwelling” shall mean a building, or portion thereof,
containing three (3) or more dwelling units, including apartments and flats,
but excluding rooming houses, boardinghouses, lodging houses, motels, mobile
home parks, hotels, fraternity and sorority houses, and private residence
clubs.
   Dwelling, single-family
   “Single-family dwelling” shall mean a building containing exclusively one
(1) dwelling unit.
   Dwelling, two-family or duplex
   “Two-family or duplex dwelling” shall mean a building containing exclusively
two (2) dwelling units under a common roof.
   Dwelling unit
   “Dwelling unit” shall mean one (1) room or a suite of two (2) or more rooms
designed for, intended for, or used by one (1) family, which family lives,
sleeps, and cooks therein, and which unit has at least one (1) kitchen or
kitchenette.
   Efficiency Unit
   "Efficiency Unit" means a unit that has a living area of not less than two
hundred twenty (220) square feet of floor area with an additional one hundred
(100) square feet provided for each occupant of the unit in excess of two (2).
The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance,
refrigeration facilities, a separate closet, and a separate bathroom containing
a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower.
   Game/exercise/play room
   A building separate from the primary structure that is designed to provide
indoor recreation for the occupants of the primary structure.
   Garage, private
   An accessory building or portion of a main building designed for the storage
of self-propelled passenger vehicles, camping trailers, or boats belonging to
the owners or occupants of the site and their guests, or an enclosed area for
the same use as a private parking area. “Detached garage” shall mean a building
separate from the primary structure that is designed for the storage of
passenger vehicles, utility or recreational trailers, or boats.
   Gazebo
   A stand-alone unenclosed shade structure, with a solid or trellis roof,
usually open on the sides, used for outdoor living and not for storage
purposes.
   Greenhouse
   “Greenhouse” shall mean an agricultural structure, with transparent or
translucent roof and/or wall panels intended for the raising of agricultural
plants. “Greenhouse” shall also mean a residential accessory structure, with
transparent or translucent roof and/or wall panels intended for the raising of
household plants.
   Group or Co-housing
   “Group or co-housing” shall mean a cooperative or similar collaborative
housing development, featuring housing units clustered around a common area and
shared kitchen, with additional small meal preparation areas.
   Home Occupation
   A use which is customarily carried on within a dwelling or manufactured/
modular home by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and
secondary to the residential use of the dwelling or manufactured/modular home,
and which meets the criteria of Sec.
8-2.506(e).
   Junior accessory dwelling unit
   "Junior accessory dwelling unit" (JADU) means a unit that is no more than
five hundred (500) square feet in size and contained entirely within a single-
family residence. A junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate
sanitation facilities, or may share sanitation facilities with the [primary]
structure.
   Kitchen or kitchenette
   Any space used or intended or designed to be used for cooking and preparing
food, whether the cooking unit is permanent or temporary and portable.
   Large domestic animals or fowl
   “Large domestic animals or fowl” shall mean and include domestic horses,
burros, and mules (family Equidac), domestic swine (family Suidac); domestic
cattle, sheep, and goats (family Bovidac), and all fowl, such as chickens,
ducks, and turkeys, that do not constitute wild, exotic, dangerous, or
prohibited animals; and American bison.
   Living quarters
   “Living quarters” shall mean one (1) or more rooms in a building designed
for, intended for, or used by, one or more individuals for living or sleeping
purposes but which does not have cooking facilities.
   Miscellaneous accessory structure
   An uninhabited building or facility that is incidental and accessory to the
primary residential use of the subject property, other than accessory housing
or accessory non-dwelling structures. Such structures include, but are not
limited to, the following: pool/spa, attached patio cover, gazebo, animal
enclosure, and automobile cover.
   Office, temporary sales
   A temporary structure erected or a mobile home parked on a residentially-
zoned parcel and used to facilitate the sale of homes within the same
subdivision or an adjacent subdivision.
   Patio cover or sunshade, attached or unattached
   An unenclosed roof structure attached or unattached to a principal dwelling
and intended to provide shade to a patio deck or other area.
   Play house
   “Play house” shall mean a structure with no electrical or plumbing
connections that is enclosed (either with solid material, screening, cloth, or
other material) on the three (3) or more sides for the use of children’s play
and that is not be used for storage.
   Second or outdoor kitchen
   An outdoor space that contains (singly or in any combination) or has
electrical and/or plumbing outlets sufficient to support a stove, range, oven,
sink, or dishwasher.
   Second unit, attached
   “Second unit, attached” shall mean a separate, self-contained dwelling unit
that shares at least one (1) common wall with a primary residential structure
allowed in addition to the primary dwelling on residentially-zoned parcels as
provided by Section 65852.2 of the California Government Code.
   Second unit, detached
   “Second unit, detached” shall mean a separate, self-contained dwelling unit
allowed in addition to the primary dwelling on residentially-zoned parcels as
provided by Section 65852.2 of the California Government Code.
   Small domestic animal
   “Small domestic animal” shall mean and include all dogs, cats, domesticated
rabbits, pot-bellied pigs under twenty-two (22) inches in size at the shoulder
and the following types of birds: macaws, eclectus, cockatoos and amazons.
   Storage building
   A building separate from the primary structure that is designed for the
storage of miscellaneous household goods and materials including, but not
limited to, food, lumber, construction materials, household chemicals, personal
records, furniture, pet supplies, and books.
   Supportive Housing
   “Supportive Housing” shall mean housing with no limit on length of stay,
that is occupied by the target population and that is linked to onsite or
offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the
housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability
to live and, when possible, work in the community, as defined in Section
50675.14 of the California Health and Safety Code. Supportive housing units are
residential uses subject only to those requirements and restrictions that apply
to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
   Temporary accessory building
   A structure erected on a non-permanent foundation that would remain on the
subject property for a specified purpose and time period. Such structures
include, but are not limited to, the following: temporary sales office.
   Transitional Housing
   “Transitional Housing” shall mean rental housing operated under program
requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of
the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined
future point in time, which shall be no less than six (6) months, and in no
case more than two (2) years, as defined in Section 50675.2 of the California
Health and Safety Code. Transitional housing units are residential uses subject
only to those requirements and restrictions that apply to other residential
uses of the same type in the same zone.
   Vehicle cover or carport
   A structure composed of wood, metal, concrete, stucco, canvas, heavy
plastic, or other material, supported by columns or poles, that is erected on a
permanent or non-permanent foundation for the purpose of covering a vehicle and
protecting it from sun and rain.
   Wild, dangerous, exotic, or prohibited animal
   “Wild, dangerous, exotic, or prohibited animal” shall mean and include all
animals, the keeping of which requires a permit from the Department of Fish and
Game of the State pursuant to Section 2118 of the Fish and Game Code of the
State, and shall also include roosters, peacocks, geese, stallions, and bulls.
“Wild, exotic, dangerous, or prohibited animal” shall not include any animal
which is accessory to a circus or carnival for which a use permit has been
issued pursuant to other sections of the County Code.
   Workshop, detached
   A building separate from the primary structure designed for the storage and
use of tools associated with handicrafts such as carpentry, welding,
electronics assembly, or other similar activities.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 6, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018; as amended by § 3, Ord.
1522, eff. August 6, 2020; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1547, eff. March 10, 2022)
Article 6: Commercial Zones
Sec. 8-2.601.   Purpose.
   The purpose of the commercial zones is to provide for areas that support and
enhance a wide range of retail businesses and services for County residents,
visitors, and travelers. The purpose of the zones is also to encourage job
development and sales tax revenues.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.602.   Commercial Zones.
   Commercial areas are separated into four (4) zoning districts, with specific
Use Types, minimum lot area, and other requirements, as described below.
   (a)   Local Commercial (C-L) Zone. The purpose of the Local Commercial (C-L)
zone is to allow for retail, service, and office uses that meet the daily needs
of nearby residents and workers. Residential uses are also allowed on upper
floors as an ancillary use. Standards for the C-L zone are intended to reduce
the need to drive by providing everyday goods and services close to where
people live and work, and by allowing for centers of neighborhood activity that
support small, locally-owned businesses. Permitted uses in the C-L zone are
similar to the General Commercial (C-G) zone, except that regional-serving
uses, large stores, and more intensive commercial uses such as vehicle repair,
light manufacturing, and warehousing and storage uses, are not allowed.
   The development intensity in C-L zones will be dependent on whether public
services (sewer, water) are available. The maximum permitted floor area ratio
in the C-L zone is 0.5 (1.0 for mixed commercial and residential) and the
maximum allowable “floor plate” (the space occupied) for individual uses is
forty thousand (40,000) square feet of ground floor space. The C-L zone
implements the Commercial Local (CL) land use designation in the 2030
Countywide General Plan.
   (b)   General Commercial (C-G) Zone. The purpose of the General Commercial
(C-G) zone is to allow for a full range of retail, service, and office uses in
proximity to residents in rural areas of the County, to reduce the need for
residents of remote communities to drive long distances to meet basic needs.
Permitted uses include general retail, personal services, professional offices,
restaurants, gas and service stations, hotels and motels, and other similar
commercial uses. Research and development parks with office and service support
are also allowed. Heavier uses such as vehicle repair, light manufacturing, and
warehousing and storage are conditionally permitted in the C-G zone with the
approval of a Use Permit. Residential uses are allowed on upper floors as an
ancillary use.
   The development intensity in C-G zones will be dependent on whether public
services (sewer, water) are available. The maximum permitted floor area ratio
in the C-G zone is 1.0 (2.0 for mixed commercial and residential). The C-G zone
implements the Commercial General (CG) land use designation in the 2030
Countywide General Plan.
   (c)   Downtown Mixed Use (DMX) Zone. The Downtown Mixed Use (DMX) zone is to
be applied to unincorporated downtown areas that are planned for development or
redevelopment of a mixture of primarily commercial, retail, office and
residential uses that are designed to be pedestrian-friendly. The DMX zone may
only be applied in downtown areas that are connected to public services (sewer
and water).
   The purposes of the DMX District are to create a village-like main street
similar to commercial areas of older cities, and to encourage mixed use
development projects with neighborhood and community-serving retail, service,
and other uses on the ground floor and residential and live/work units above
the nonresidential space. The DMX regulations allow for a mixture of
residential and commercial land uses located close to one another, either
within a single building, on the same parcel, or on adjacent parcels. Standards
in the DMX zone are intended to reduce reliance on the automobile and create a
pedestrian-oriented shopping environment. Specific standards are applied to
parking, setbacks, and signs, and to encourage certain architectural facades
and features.
   Permitted commercial uses include all of the general retail, personal
services, restaurants, professional offices, and other similar uses that are
allowed in the C-G zone. Live-work uses that involve the manufacturing of
artisan-related products for sale are also allowed. Permitted residential
density in the DMX zone for new buildings ranges from a minimum of ten (10) to
a maximum of twenty (20) dwelling units per net acre. The maximum permitted
floor area ratio in the DMX zone is 1.0 (2.0 for mixed commercial and
residential). The DMX zone implements the Commercial General (CG) land use
designation in the 2030 Countywide General Plan.
   (d)   Highway Services Commercial (C-H) Zone. The purpose of the Highway
Services Commercial (C-H) zone is to provide for retail, commercial, amusement,
and transient residential (hotel/motel) uses which are appropriate to highway
locations and dependent upon highway travel. Permitted uses include auto and
truck service stations and repair, vehicle and boat equipment sales, hotels/
motels, restaurants, small retail sales. The C-H zones are applied on parcels
of two (2) acres or more and are located only in the vicinity of highways or
major arterials. The maximum permitted floor area ratio in the C-G zone is 1.0.
The C-H zone implements the Commercial General (CG) land use designation in the
2030 Countywide General Plan.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.603.   Commercial Use Types defined.
   As required by Sec.
8-2.227 in Article 2 of this chapter, a Use Classification System has been
employed to identify commercial Use Types. The most prevalent uses identified
for each commercial zone district are “principal” uses allowed by right, as
well as “accessory” or “ancillary” uses allowed by right or with the issuance
of a Site Plan Review. A smaller number of uses are “conditional” uses
permitted through the issuance of a Minor or Major Use Permit.
   The commercial Use Types include a full range of retail sales, personal and
business services, eating and drinking establishments, offices, limited
wholesale and warehouse activities, some public and quasi-public uses, crafts,
and mixed-use residential uses. The descriptions of the Use Types in this
chapter contain individual specific uses that are classified within the Use
Type. These lists of specific typical uses are examples and are not meant to
include all uses that may properly be classified within the Use Type. If a
specific use is not included under a Use Type, the Planning Director has the
discretion of finding that the specific use is similar or consistent with
another listed use, and may be allowed as a principal, accessory, or
conditional use or, conversely, may find that the use is not an allowed use
within the zone.
   (a)   Retail Uses. This Use Type includes stores and shops of all sizes that
sell a wide range of retail goods. Typical uses include drugstores; florist
shops; bakeries; grocery stores; hardware stores; antique stores; arts and
crafts, “boutiques” and specialty shops; sales of automobiles, household
appliances, and furniture; and all other similar retail businesses that sell
goods to members of the public. Cannabis retail uses, including storefront and
non-storefront, and microbusiness, require the issuance of a Major Use Permit
as regulated by Article 14 of this Chapter.
   (b)   Eating and Drinking Uses. This Use Type includes all “sit down,” as
well as drive-through or fast food, restaurants; bars and cocktail lounges;
breweries and wine tasting bars; night clubs, dance halls, bowling alleys; and
other establishments that sell food and/or alcohol.
   (c)   Service Uses. This Use Type includes all personal and business
services, such as barbers and hairdressers; pet grooming; small and large
appliance and furniture repair; auto repair and gasoline service stations;
accountants and attorneys that rely on “walk in” traffic; Laundromats; plumbing
services; and all other similar businesses that sell services to members of the
public. Some of these business services may also be classified under the
“Office” Use Type.
   (d)   Office Uses. This Use Type includes private offices that house
professional firms and services that do not rely on “walk in” customers, such
as administrative offices, as well as banks/financial institutions and medical
professionals.
   (e)   Live/work, Light Manufacturing and Storage. This Use Type includes
“live/work” activities that are involved in light manufacturing and sales of
artisan crafts, such as jewelry and pottery. The Use Type also includes limited
wholesale and warehouse/storage uses. Cannabis uses, including processing,
manufacturing, and distribution, require the issuance of a Major Use Permit as
regulated by Article 14 of this Chapter.
   (f)   Residential Uses. This Use Type includes some high density single-
family, and a wide range of multi-family, residential uses that may be combined
with commercial uses in the same building, on the same lot, or on adjacent
lots. Examples of housing that is allowed and encouraged in the commercial
zones are apartments other located on upper floors of commercial buildings,
live/work residences on upper or ground floors in commercial districts, and
dense stand-alone single family homes that meet a minimum density of ten (10)
units per net acre.
   (g)   Public/Quasi-Public and Recreation Uses. This Use Type includes
public/quasi-public uses such as schools, museums, libraries, fraternal
organizations, and also private uses that attract large numbers of customers
such as theaters and sports event venues. Public uses would normally be
required to locate on lands that have been re-zoned “Public and Quasi-Public”
(PQP); however, smaller uses may be permitted to locate in the commercial zones
without a rezoning to PQP.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1545, eff. January 6,
2022)
Sec. 8-2.604.   Tables of Commercial Permit Requirements.
   The following
Table 8-2.604 lists the permit requirements for examples of each Use Type in
each commercial zoning district. Examples of Use Types are defined as
“principal,” “ancillary,” or “accessory” uses which are allowed “by right”
(with issuance of only a building permit after zoning clearance), or are
allowed through issuance of a non-discretionary (no public hearing) Site Plan
Review. Additional examples of Use Types are defined as “conditional uses” that
are permitted through the issuance of a discretionary Minor or Major Use
Permit, after a public hearing.
Table 8-2.604
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial Uses
A = Allowed use, subject Land Use Permit Required by Zone
to zoning clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                     Specific Use
UP (m) = Minor Use                                        Requirements or
Permit                   C-L(1) C-G DMX(2) C-H            Performance Standards
UP (M) = Major Use
Permit
N = Use Not Allowed
A = Allowed use,    Land Use Permit Required by Zone
subject to zoning
clearance*
SP = Site Plan                                              Specific Use
Review                                                      Requirements or
UP (m) = Minor Use  C-L(1)    C-G       DMX(2)    C-H       Performance
Permit                                                      Standards
UP (M) = Major Use
Permit
N = Use Not Allowed
Retail Uses
Retail sales,
specialty stores,   A         A         A         A
small                                                       Must meet DMX size
Retail sales,                                               and design
specialty store,                                            standards, see Sec.
over 3,000 and less SP        A         SP        SP        8-2.606(a)
than 10,000 square
feet
Large retail sales,
specialty store,    UP(M)     UP(m)     UP(m)     N         See Sec.
over 10,000 square                                          8-2.606(b)
feet
Grocery stores      SP        A         SP        SP        See Sec.
Convenience, food   SP        A         A         A         8-2.606(c)
and beverage stores
Fruit/vegetable,
farmers market,     SP        SP        SP        SP
stands
Cannabis storefront UP(M)     UP(M)     UP(M)     UP(M)     See Article 14
retail (3)
Cannabis non-
storefront delivery N         UP(M)     N         UP(M)     See Article 14
(3)
Small appliance,    SP        A         SP        N
hardware stores
Large furniture,
large equipment     N         SP        UP(m)     SP
sales
Auto, boats, farm   N         SP        N         SP
equipment sales
Nurseries           SP        SP        SP        SP
Cannabis nurseries, N         N         N         N         See Article 14
prohibited (3)
Wine, beer,
spirits, olive oil  UP(m)     SP        SP        SP
tasting, sales
Adult business      N         UP(M)     N         UP(M)     See
                                                            Chapter 7 
Eating and Drinking Uses
Restaurant, fast    SP        SP        UP(m)     SP
food
Restaurant, sit     SP        SP        SP        SP        See Sec.
down                                                        8-2.606(c),(d)
Bar, cocktail       UP(M)     UP(m)     UP(m)     UP(m)     See Sec.
lounge, club                                                8-2.606(c),(d)
Drive-through       UP(m)     UP(m)     N         SP
facility
Outdoor eating and  SP        A         SP        A         See Sec.
drinking                                                    8-2.606(e)
Services
Animal shelter/     N         SP        N         SP
kennel
Animal grooming     A         A         A         N
Barber/beauty salon A         A         A         N         Must meet DMX size
Other personal      A         A         A         A         and design
services                                                    standards, see Sec.
Small appliance,    A         A         A         N         8-2.606(a)
shoe repair
Laundry, Laundromat A         A         SP        A
Health/fitness      UP(m)     A         SP        N
clubs
Auto service/gas    UP(m)     SP        UP(m)     A
station
Auto/vehicle        SP        SP        SP        A         See definitions
repair, minor
Auto/vehicle        N         SP        N         A
repair, major
Truck stops, sales  N         N         N         UP(m)
and service
Bed and breakfast,  SP        SP        UP(m)     SP
small                                                       See Sec.
Bed and breakfast,  UP(m)     UP(m)     UP(m)     UP(m)     8-2.306(l)
large
Hotel/motel, less   N         UP(m)     UP(m)     SP
than 60 rooms
Hotel/motel, large, N         UP(m)     UP(M)     UP(m)
conference rooms
Office uses
Financial or
professional        A/SP      A         A/SP      N         Must meet DMX size,
offices                                                     design standards,
Banks/financial     A/SP      A         SP/ UP(m) N         see Sec.
institutions                                                8-2.606(a) and (f)
Medical/dental      SP        SP        SP        N
office
Urgent care clinic  N         UP(m)     UP(m)     N
Veterinary/animal   N         SP        UP(m)     N
hospital
Research and        N         UP(M)     N         N         See Sec.
development park                                            8-2.606(g)
Live/work, light manufacturing, and storage uses
Live/work           A/SP      A/SP      A/SP      N         See Sec.
                                                            8-2.606(h)
Light manufacturing A/SP      A/SP      A/SP      A/SP      See Sec.
of artisan crafts                                           8-2.606(i)
Wineries,
breweries, olive                                            See Sec.
mills, processing,  SP/UP (m) SP/UP (m) SP/UP (m) SP/UP (m) 8-2.606(j)
storage,
distribution
Personal storage    N         UP(m)     N         UP(m)
facilities
Wholesale,          N         SP/UP (m) SP/UP (m) UP(m)     See Sec.
accessory storage                                           8-2.606(j)
Warehouses          N         SP/UP(m)  N         UP(m)     See Sec.
                                                            8-2.606(k)
Cannabis
cultivation and     N         UP(M)     N         UP(M)
processing, indoor/
mixed-light only(3)
Cannabis
cultivation and
processing,         N         N         N         N
outdoors,
prohibited (3)
Cannabis
manufacturing,      N         UP(M)     N         UP(M)
packaging and                                               See Article 14
labeling (3)
Cannabis
manufacturing, non-
volatile, volatile, N         N         N         N
infusion,
prohibited (3)
Cannabis            N         UP(M)     N         UP(M)
microbusiness (3)
Cannabis            N         UP(M)     N         UP(M)
distribution (3)
Cannabis testing,   N         N         N         N
lab, prohibited (3)
                    See Article 11, Sec.
Small solar, wind,  8-2.1102,
cell tower facility 8-2.1103, and
                    8-2.1104 
Residential uses
Detached single     N         N         UP(m)     N
family units
Attached single     N         SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)
family units
Multiple family     SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  See Sec.
units (apartments)                                          8-2.606(l)
Single room         N         SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)
occupancy hotel
Group/home care (<6 A         A         A         A
beds)                                                       See Sec.
Group/home care (6  UP(m)     SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  N         8-2.506(f)
beds or more)
Emergency shelters  N         SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  UP(m)     See Sec.
                                                            8-2.606(m)
Farm labor housing  UP(m)     SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  N         See Sec.
                                                            8-2.306(aa)
Child care (<9      SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)
children)                                                   See Sec.
Child care (9 to 14 SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  N         8-2.506(g)
children)
Child care center   UP(m)     SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  N         See Sec.
(over 14 children)                                          8-2.506(h)
Public/quasi-public and recreation uses
Entertainment and   N         UP(m)     UP(m)     /UP(m)
spectator sports
Hospital            N         UP(M)     UP(M)     N
Fraternal                                                   See Sec.
organization, non-  P/UP(m)   SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)  N         8-2.606(n)
profit club
Church, religious   UP(m)     UP(m)     UP(m)     N
assembly
Government, civic   UP(m)     UP(m)     UP(m)     N         See Sec.
building, library                                           8-2.606(o)
School, public and  UP(m)     UP(m)     UP(m)     N
private
Recreational        N         N         N         UP(m)
vehicle parks
Utilities and       UP(m)     SP        UP(m)     N
services
Parks               UP(m)     UP(m)     UP(m)     N         See Sec.
                                                            8-2.606(o)
Vehicle charging                                            See definition in
station             A         A         A         A         Sec.
                                                            8-14.102
Parking lot,        N         SP        UP(m)     N
commercial
 
*   An “allowed use” does not require a zoning or land use permit, but is still
subject to permit requirements of other Yolo County division such as Building,
Environmental Health, and Public Works.
Notes:
(1)   No individual uses with floorplates larger than 40,000 square feet are
allowed in the C-L zone.
(2)   In addition to permit requirements in the DMX zone, all new uses and
construction must meet design and other requirements as specified in Section
8-2.606(a).
(3)   Cannabis uses require the issuance of a Use Permit pursuant to the
Cannabis Land Use Ordinance in Article 14.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 7, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1522, eff. August 6, 2020; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1545, eff. January 6, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.605.   Table of Development Requirements.
   The following
Table 8-2.605 identifies the development requirements, including minimum parcel
sizes, setbacks, and other standards that allowed and permitted uses in the
commercial zones must meet as a standard or condition of any issued building
permit, Site Plan Review, or Use Permit.
Table 8-2.605
Development Requirements in Commercial Zones(3)
 
       Minimum Front    Rear Yard   Side Yard   Height  Maximum      Maximum
C ZONE Lot     Yard     Setback     Setback     Limits  Floor Area   Impervious
       Area    Setback  (feet)      (feet)      (3)     Ratio        Lot
       (1)     (feet)                           (feet)               Coverage
       3,500                                            0.5 (1.0 for
C-L    square                                   35 feet mixed        85%
       feet                                             commercial/
                        None, except 15 feet if         residential)
               None (6) abutting residential    Maximum
       5,000            zone (6)                of 50
C-G    square                                   feet or              90%
       feet                                     four
                                                stories
               Maximum                          Minimum 1.0 (2.0 for
               of 10                            of 22   mixed
               feet     10 feet,    None,       feet    commercial/
       3,500   from     except 20   except 20   (4),    residential)
DMX(2) square  property feet if     feet if     maximum              90%
       feet    line or  abutting    abutting    of 50
               sidewalk residential residential feet or
               (see                             four
               Sec. 8-                          stories
               2.606(a)
               15 feet  None,       None,
               from     except 20   except 15
       10,000  property feet if     feet if
C-H    square  line or  abutting    abutting    40 feet 1.0          90%
       feet    curb     residential residential
               strip    (6)         (6)
               (6)
 
Notes:   1.   Parcels in rural areas with no access to public water and/or
wastewater services are subject to 2.0 acre minimum parcel sizes for new
building permits, see Section
8-2.1002(a).
   2.   In addition to these development requirements in the DMX zone, new uses
and construction must meet design and other requirements as specified in
Section
8-2.606(a).
   3. Appropriate findings for discretionary projects, and ministerial
residential projects, located within the floodplain are required, see Section
8-2.306(ae). Structures built in the 100-year flood plain to comply with FEMA
and local requirements will be measured from the top of the bottom floor, which
may include a basement, crawlspace, or enclosed floor.
   4.   Minimum height limit along Yolo Avenue and Woodland Avenue only.
   5.   Development near the toe of any levee is restricted, see Section
8-2.306(ad).
   6. For cannabis uses, see Article 14 (Cannabis Land Use Ordinance) for
setbacks and buffer requirements.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 681.229, eff. October 29,
2015; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1545, eff. January 6, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.606.   Specific Use Requirements or Performance Standards.
   The following specific use requirements may be applicable to some of the
specific uses or zones identified in the previous
Table 8-2.604, and shall be applied to any issued building permits, Site Plan
Review, or Use Permit for uses in the commercial zones.
   (a)   Downtown Mixed Use (DMX) zone. The following additional requirements
and regulations shall be applied to all proposed projects in the Esparto DMX
area:
   (1)   For projects proposed on vacant lands of more than one (1) acre in
size, the following regulations apply:
   (i)   Projects are encouraged to include a mix of residential and non-
residential uses (a mixed use development project), integrated either
vertically or horizontally. Retail uses are strongly encouraged on the ground
floor of buildings fronting along the main streets, and other nonresidential
uses (e.g., offices or services) or housing are encouraged on the upper floors
and behind the retail frontage.
   (ii)   Projects that are predominantly one single commercial use (e.g.,
large retail or service establishments such as a hardware store, or a motel/
hotel) that are proposed for construction on eighty-five percent (85%) or more
of the gross acreage of the vacant parcel are also encouraged to be accompanied
by one or more significant community benefits, such as a public plaza, park, or
other public use.
   (iii)   Projects that are predominantly (sixty percent (60%) or more of the
gross acreage) single or multiple family residential use are prohibited.
   (iv)   All projects should include some public amenities such as public open
areas, public art, public meeting rooms, pedestrian walkways, etc.
   (v)   All projects must be designed with a grid circulation pattern that
connects with the existing community.
   (vi)   The architecture and design of buildings must be coordinated
throughout the site and must be harmonious with the adjacent community.
   (vii)   All projects shall conform with all other regulations in this
article, and should be consistent with the Design Review Guidelines of the
Esparto General Plan.
   (2)   The following residential uses and densities apply in the DMX zone:
   (i)   The minimum residential density allowed in new buildings in the DMX
zone is ten (10) dwelling units per net acre for new residential structures,
and for large projects proposed on vacant lands of more than one (1) acre in
size.
   (ii)   The maximum and minimum residential density standards in (i), above,
shall not be applied to new, converted, or expanded residential uses proposed
within existing urban buildings located in the historic downtown along Yolo
Avenue and Woodland Avenue.
   (iii)   The maximum building height shall be fifty (50) feet, or four (4)
stories, whichever is greater, for all buildings.
   (iv)   The minimum height for new or renovated mixed-use buildings located
in the historic downtown along Yolo Avenue and Woodland Avenue shall be twenty-
two (22) feet.
   (v)   The gross floor area of individual commercial establishments in the
DMX district shall not exceed twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet, or
thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet if it is selling or serving multiple
lines of merchandise.
   (vi)   The ground floor frontage space of new or renovated mixed-use
buildings located along Yolo Avenue, Woodland Avenue, and County Road 87 shall
not include apartments and shall contain the following minimum retail (non-
residential) space:
   A.   At least eight hundred (800) square feet or twenty-five (25) percent of
the ground floor area (whichever is greater) on lots with street frontage of
less than fifty (50) feet; or
   B.   At least twenty (20) percent of the ground floor area on lots with
fifty (50) feet of street frontage or more.
   (3)   The following setbacks apply in the DMX zone:
   (i)   The entire building façade of new or renovated buildings located along
Yolo Avenue, Woodland Avenue, and County Road 87 shall generally abut front and
street side property lines or be located within ten (10) feet of such property
lines. An exception may be made for the “train station” property (APN: 049-240-
017), if the existing structure is retained. However, a portion of new or
renovated buildings may be set back from the maximum setback line in order to
provide a specific feature or to reflect the prevailing setbacks of existing
buildings along the block or the street. Specific features include an
articulated façade, or to accommodate a building entrance feature or an outdoor
eating area.
   (ii)   Special architectural features such as balconies, bay windows,
arcades, and awnings may project into front setbacks and public street right-
of-ways (but not extend past the curb line) provided they meet minimum required
clearance above the sidewalk and leave a minimum five (5) foot wide
unobstructed sidewalk. Prior to new encroachment into the public right-of-way,
a permit shall be obtained from the County Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department, or Caltrans.
   (iii)   The minimum rear setback is ten (10) feet, except when DMX zoned
property abuts R-zoned property, in which case the minimum rear setback
required is twenty (20) feet.
   (iv)   No interior side setbacks are required in the DMX district, except
when DMX zoned property abuts R-zoned property, in which case the minimum side
setback required is twenty (20) feet.
   (4)   The following other building regulations apply in the DMX zone:
   (i)   All permitted uses in the DMX district must be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise expressly authorized. This
requirement does not apply to off-street parking or loading areas, automated
teller machines, kiosks, mailboxes, farmers markets, or outdoor eating or
drinking areas.
   (ii)   Building frontage of new or renovated buildings shall be eighty
percent (80%) to one hundred percent (100%) of the frontage measured from side
property line to side property line at front property line.
   (iii)   A minimum of forty percent (40%), and a maximum of seventy-five
percent (75%), of the street-facing building façade of new or renovated
commercial buildings along Yolo Avenue and Woodland Avenue shall be comprised
of clear windows that allow views of indoor space or product display areas
between two (2) feet and eight (8) feet in height. The bottom of any window or
product display window used to satisfy this transparency standard shall not be
more than three (3) feet above the adjacent sidewalk, and product display
windows used to satisfy this requirement must have a minimum height of four (4)
feet and be internally lighted.
   (iv)   No more than thirty (30) feet of horizontal distance of a wall on any
floor shall be provided without architectural relief, such as windows, for
building walls and frontage walls facing the street.
   (v)   Commercial buildings shall have a primary entrance door facing a
public sidewalk. Entrances at building corners may be used to satisfy this
requirement. Building entrances may include doors to individual shops or
businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-oriented plazas, or
courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses.
   (5)   The following building design regulations apply in the DMX zone:
   (i)   New and renovated buildings should be designed consistent with this
section and with the Design Review Guidelines of the Esparto General Plan.
Historical buildings may be exempted from some of these individual guidelines,
at the discretion of the Director of Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services or the Planning Commission, sitting as the Historic Preservation
Commission.
   (ii)   Building surface variation should be incorporated in new buildings
through the placement of windows and entries, planar changes (where the
building surface recedes or projects), significant color changes, material
changes, or other elements that add variation along the length of a building.
   (iii)   Structures should be designed with articulation at entries, bases,
and tops. The organization used shall break up the mass into smaller elements.
Buildings shall provide as much visual interest as possible without creating a
chaotic image.
   (iv)   New and renovated buildings shall utilize at least three (3) of the
following design features to provide architectural relief along all elevations
of the building:
   A.   Divisions or breaks in materials and color (materials should be drawn
from a common palette)
   B.   Window bays
   C.   Separate entrances and entry treatments
   D.   Variation in roof lines
   E.   Projecting architectural elements (porches, awnings, balconies, etc.)
   F.   Recessed entries (at least three (3) feet from the primary façade)
   G.   Protruding entries (at least three (3) feet from the primary façade)
   H.   Cupolas
   (v)   Buildings shall include a clear visual division (e.g., a cornice or
awning) between the first and upper floors.
   (vi)   Variable roof forms shall be incorporated into the building design.
Long, uninterrupted horizontal lines of parapet are discouraged. Generally it
is preferred to break up the parapet, eaves, or ridge line by vertical or
horizontal off-sets or changing the roof forms.
   (vii)   Commercial and mixed-use buildings shall express a “storefront
character,” by including corner building entrances on corner lots, and
including regularly spaced and similar-shaped windows with window hoods or trim
(all building stories).
   (viii)   All proposed motel/motel projects shall be required to meet minimum
design criteria outlined in this section and in the Design Review Guidelines of
the Esparto General Plan, including requirements for extensive landscaping to
buffer structures and parking areas.
   (6)   The following notice requirements apply in the DMX:
   (i)   Purchasers of residential lots or homes in the DMX zone shall be
notified that they are purchasing property within a mixed use zone and that
adjacent residential uses could be changed to nonresidential uses over time.
   (ii)   Residential neighbors within the DMX zone shall be notified of any
proposed change of use from residential to a nonresidential use of adjacent
lots or homes within one hundred (100) feet, regardless whether the new use is
permitted by right or by Conditional Use Permit.
   (b)   Large retail sales, specialty store, over 10,000 square feet. Large
retail sales, specialty store, over ten thousand (10,000) square feet must be
served by public utilities (water, sewer).
   (c)   Alcohol sales. The sale of alcohol requires the issuance of a Use
Permit, as described in
Chapter 6 of this title.
   (d)   Live entertainment. Artists performing activities within or outside a
structure that meet the definition of “live entertainment” (see Sec.
8-2.607) requires the issuance of a Site Plan Review or Use Permit, at the
discretion of the Planning Director.
   (e)   Outdoor eating spaces. Outdoor dining is permitted and may occur
within the public right-of-way with issuance of an encroachment permit. A
minimum of five (5) feet of clear sidewalk access for pedestrians shall be
maintained, if feasible, otherwise three (3) feet shall be maintained.
   (f)   Professional offices. Professional offices are allowed by right if
located above the ground floor of a building in the C-L and DMX zones, or if
they meet the definition of a “walk in business.” Professional offices on the
ground floor that are not a “walk in business” are permitted through a Site
Plan Review in the C-L and DMX zones.
   (g)   Research and development parks. A research and development park is
permitted in the C-G zone provided that the project meets the following
development and performance standards:
   (1)   Minimum lot size of one and one-half (1.5) acres.
   (2)   The project submits and receives approval of a Planned Development
(PD) rezoning.
   (3)   The PD rezoning includes development and performance standards that
are generally consistent with, but exceed in quality, the requirements of the
C-G zone.
   (4)   The PD rezoning requires offices and service support as the primary
use (more than fifty (50) percent of total square footage).
   (5)   The PD rezoning requires architectural design and landscaping of a
high quality that enhances the commercial district.
   (h)   Live/work uses.
   (1)   Live/work units are allowed in the C-L, C-G, and DMX zones by right
provided that the commercial use or activity within the unit is allowed by
right in the respective zone and the following development standards are met:
   (i)   Live/work units at the street and/or adjacent to a sidewalk level meet
the development and transparency standards of ground-floor retail or commercial
establishments of the DMX zone (see Sec.
8-2.606(a), above), and the living area does not exceed one-third (1/3) of the
total floor area of the unit.
   (ii)   At least one resident in each live/work unit maintains a valid
business license and other required permits for a business on the premises.
   (2)   Live/work units that do not meet the standards in (1), above, may be
permitted with the issuance of a Site Plan Review.
   (i)   Light manufacturing of artisan crafts. Light manufacturing of artisan
crafts, associated with live/work space and/or retail/specialty stores, is
allowed by right if the use meets the definition of “Artisan crafts production,
small scale.” “Artisan crafts production, large scale or mechanized” activities
are permitted with the issuance of a Site Plan Review. See definitions in Sec.
8-2.607.
   (j)   Wholesale, accessory storage activities. Wholesale uses and accessory
storage are permitted in the indicated zones with the issuance of a Site Plan
Review if the use meets all development and performance standards for the zone
and is less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. Otherwise, the use may be
permitted through the issuance of a Minor Use Permit.
   (k)   Warehouses. Warehouse uses and structures are permitted in the
indicated zones if the use is incidental or accessory to an allowed or
permitted commercial use. Warehouse uses and structures are permitted with the
issuance of a Site Plan Review in the C-G zone if the use meets all development
and performance standards for the zone and is less than five thousand (5,000)
square feet. Otherwise, the use may be permitted through the issuance of a
Minor Use Permit.
   (l)   Attached single and multi-family residential/single room occupancy.
Attached single and multiple family units and single room occupancy hotels are
allowed with the issuance of a Site Plan Review in the C-G, DMX, and C-H zones,
provided that the project is designed to be compatible with adjacent commercial
uses and any adjoining single family residences, and meets development
standards. At the discretion of the Planning Director, a Minor Use Permit may
be required if there are any compatibility issues or if setbacks or other
development standards are not met.
   (m)   Emergency shelters. Emergency shelters for the homeless or displaced,
fewer than twenty (20) beds in size, are allowed with the issuance of a Site
Plan Review in commercial zones, provided that the project is served by public
water and wastewater facilities, is designed to be compatible with any
adjoining single family residences, and meets the other development standards
listed below. Projects larger than twenty (20) beds are subject to a Minor Use
Permit. At the discretion of the Planning Director, a Minor Use Permit may be
required for a project under twenty (20) beds, or a Major Use Permit may be
required for a project larger than twenty (20) beds, if there are any
compatibility issues, or if any of the following development standards are not
met:
   (1)   The project is designed to be compatible with any adjoining single
family residences, including appropriate setbacks, landscaping, and parking.
   (2)   The site is connected to public services, including a public water and
wastewater system.
   (3)   The project provides at least one (1) off-site parking space for each
ten (10) residents, plus one (1) space for the manager.
   (4)   The project meets any State regulatory requirements and has received,
or will receive in the near future, all necessary State operating permits.
   (n)   Fraternal organization, non-profit private club. Fraternal
organizations and non-profit private clubs are permitted through a Site Plan
Review if located above the ground floor of a building in the C-L, C-G and DMX
zones, or if they are less than one thousand (1,000) square feet on the ground
floor. Fraternal organizations and private clubs on the ground floor or larger
than one thousand (1,000) square feet are permitted through a Minor Use Permit
in the C-L, C-G and DMX zones, and in specified industrial zones.
   (o)   Public/quasi-public uses. Public/quasi-public uses such as churches
and other religious assembly, government/civic buildings, libraries, public
schools, and parks would normally be required to locate on lands that have been
zoned “Public/Quasi-Public” (PQP); however, smaller uses of less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet of total building space, or one (1) acre in size
for a park, may be permitted to locate in the commercial, and specified
industrial, zones without a rezoning to PQP, with the issuance of a Minor Use
Permit.
   (p)   Approval of discretionary projects and permits within the floodplain.
Approvals of all discretionary projects and permits within the 100-year and
200-year floodplain must meet FEMA, State and local flood requirements.
Appropriate findings for discretionary projects, or ministerial residential
projects, located within the floodplain are required, see Section
8-2.306(ae).
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 681.229, eff. October 29,
2015)
Sec. 8-2.607.   Definitions.
   Adult business
   See
Chapter 7 of this title.
   Artisan crafts production, large scale or mechanized
   “Artisan crafts production, large scale or mechanized” means the creation of
unique arts and crafts products using heavy mechanical or industrial tools,
e.g., welding, glass blowing, or any production process involving hazardous
materials, excluding art paint.
   Artisan crafts production, small scale
   “Artisan crafts production, small scale” means the creation of unique arts
and crafts products using hand operated or light mechanized tools only, e.g.,
jewelry or ceramics.
   Artist live/work space
   “Artist live/work space” means a building or spaces within a building used
jointly for commercial and residential purposes where the residential use of
the space is secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work.
“Live-work unit” is further defined as a structure or portion of a structure:
   (1)   That combines a commercial or manufacturing activity allowed in the
zone with a residential living space for the owner of the commercial or
manufacturing business, or the owner’s employee, and that person’s household;
   (2)   Where the resident owner, occupant, or employee of the business is
responsible for the commercial or manufacturing activity performed; and
   (3)   Where the commercial or manufacturing activity conducted takes place
subject to a valid business license associated with the premises.
   Auto/vehicle repair, major
   “Auto/vehicle repair, major” means the general repair, rebuilding, or
reconditioning of engines, including the removal of the same; motor vehicle,
truck, or trailer collision services, including body, frame, or fender
straightening or repair; and overall painting or paint shops.
   Auto/vehicle repair, minor
   “Auto/vehicle repair, minor” means upholstering, replacement of parts, and
motor service, not including the removal of the motor, to passenger cars and
trucks not exceeding one and one-half (1/2) tons’ capacity, but not including
any operation set forth in the definition of “automobile repair, major” or any
other use similar thereto.
   Auto service/gas station
   “Auto service/gas station” means a place which provides for the servicing,
washing, and fueling of operating motor vehicles, including minor repairs and
the sale of merchandise and supplies incidental thereto.
   Emergency shelter
   “Emergency shelter” shall mean housing with minimal supportive services for
homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six (6) months or less by a
homeless person, as defined in Section 50801(b) of the California Health and
Safety Code.
   Floor area ratio (FAR)
   The ratio of a building’s total floor area to the size of the parcel of land
upon which it is built. Thus, an FAR of 2.0 would indicate that the total floor
area of a building is two (2) times the gross area of the plot on which it is
constructed, as would be found in a multiple-story building.
   Floor plate
   The total space taken up by a single company, tenant, or user on a single
floor.
   Gross floor area
   “Gross floor area” is the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of
a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings. Gross floor area does not
include basements when at least one half the floor-to-ceiling height is below
grade, accessory parking (i.e., parking that is available on or off-site that
is not part of the use’s minimum parking standard), attic space having a floor-
to-ceiling height less than seven (7) feet, exterior balconies, uncovered
steps, or inner courts.
   Hotel
   “Hotel” shall mean any building, or portion thereof, containing living
quarters or dwelling units without kitchen facilities and designed for, or
intended to be used by, six (6) or more transient guests, but not including
motels, mobile home parks, boarding houses, dormitories, or farm labor housing.
   Live entertainment
   “Live entertainment” includes the following:
   • Music or vocals provided by one or more professional or amateur musicians
or vocalists;
   • Dancing performed by one or more professional or amateur dancers or
performers;
   • Acting or drama provided by one or more professional or amateur actors or
players;
   • Acrobatics or stunts provided by one or more professional or amateur
acrobats, performers or stunt persons;
   • Athletic or sporting contests, events or exhibitions provided by one or
more professional or amateur athletes or sportsmen;
   • Comedy or magic provided by one or more professional or amateur comedians,
magicians, illusionists, entertainers or performers;
   • A show, production, or performance involving any combination of the
activities described above; or
   • A performance involving one or more of the activities described above by a
disc jockey who presents recorded music.
   Live entertainment excludes the following:
   • Instrumental or vocal music in a restaurant, lounge or similar area if
such music does not routinely rise to the volume that interferes with casual
conversation and if such music would not generally cause patrons to watch as
well as listen;
   • Occasional performances by employees whose primary job function is that of
preparing or serving food, refreshments or beverages to patrons, or by other
non-professional artists, if such performances are not advertised as
entertainment to the public; and
   • Television, radio, closed circuit or Internet broadcasts of live
entertainment.
   Mixed use development project
   “Mixed use development project” means a development project of one or more
buildings that includes a mixture of uses, i.e., residential, retail, office,
service, industrial, or public, either vertically integrated (a mixture of uses
on separate floors of a single building) or horizontally integrated (a mixture
of uses in more than one building spread over a large parcel, e.g., retail,
office, and upstairs apartments in a building along a main frontage arterial,
with residential uses behind).
   Motel
   “Motel” shall mean a building or group of buildings comprising individual
living quarters or dwelling units for the accommodation of transient guests,
which building or group of buildings is so designed that parking is on the same
building site and is conveniently accessible from the living units without
having to pass through a lobby, and where luggage is moved between the parking
area and living unit without necessarily having to pass through a lobby or
interior court.
   “Motel” shall include the terms “auto court”, “tourist court”, and “motor
hotel” but shall not include accommodations for mobile homes.
   Office, medical/dental
   “Medical office” shall mean a place for the practice of physiotherapy or
medical, dental, optical, psychoanalytical, osteopathic, or chiropractic
professions.
   Office, professional
   “Professional office” shall mean an office from which, and at which, a
doctor, attorney, engineer, architect, accountant, or similar professional
person may offer services.
   Retail sales, specialty stores
   “Retail sales, specialty stores” means stores and shops supplying a
commodity such as bakeries, florist shops, hardware stores, antique and other
specialty shops. “Stores, shops, retail sales” does not include sales or
services related to large or heavy commodities such as building materials,
furniture manufacturing, electrical and plumbing services, wholesale business
and accessory storage, and other similar uses.
   Walk in business
   “Walk in business” means a professional service or office use that relies on
some pedestrian foot traffic to thrive, and which contributes to, and does not
detract from, a pedestrian-oriented retail/services shopping environment.
   Vacant land
   “Vacant land” means land that is currently undeveloped with urban
structures, but may be occupied by a rural residence or structure, and is
designated for future urban growth.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 7: Industrial Zones
Sec. 8-2.701.   Purpose.
   The purpose of the industrial zones is to provide for areas that allow a
wide range of heavy to light manufacturing, repair, wholesaling, business,
professional, and research and development uses, that produce goods and
services, and create jobs for County residents.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.702.   Industrial Zones.
   Industrial areas are separated into three zoning districts, with specific
Use Types, minimum lot area, and other requirements, as described below.
   (a)   Light Industrial (I-L) Zone. The purpose of the Light Industrial (I-L)
zone is to accommodate a limited group of light manufacturing and service uses
that have little potential to generate noise, odor, vibrations, or similar
impacts to adjacent neighbors. Such uses include equipment sales and repair
services, light manufacturing and processing involving non-toxic materials,
warehousing and storage, wholesaling, and distribution. Limited amounts of
retail, personal services, and food-related uses are permitted to serve area
workers and to allow sales of products manufactured on-site.
   The development intensity in the I-L zone will be dependent on whether
public services (sewer, water) are available. The maximum permitted floor area
ratio in the I-L zone is 0.5. The I-L zone implements the Industrial (IN) land
use designation in the 2030 Countywide General Plan.
   (b)   Heavy Industrial (I-H) Zone. The purpose of the Heavy Industrial (I-H)
zone is to allow all heavy manufacturing and industrial uses that may create
objectionable impacts such as noise, odor, vibrations, and use of hazardous
materials. Such uses could include the processing, fabrication, manufacture,
and storage of metals, cement, chemicals, agricultural products, animal
carcasses, wood, grain, furniture, heavy equipment, automobiles and trucks,
building materials, etc. All uses that are allowed in the Light Industrial
zones are also allowed in the I-H zones, except where noted in
Table 8-2.704. Limited amounts of retail, personal services, and food-related
uses are also permitted to serve area workers and to allow sales of products
manufactured on-site.
   The development intensity in the I-H zone will be dependent on whether
public services (sewer, water) are available. The maximum permitted floor area
ratio in the I-H zone is 0.5. The I-H zone implements the Industrial (IN) land
use designation in the 2030 Countywide General Plan.
   (c)   Office Park/Research and Development (OPRD) Zone. The purpose of the
Office Park/Research and Development (OPRD) zone is to provide an area for
large employment, research and development (R&D) centers that are subject to
high development and architectural standards. Office parks and R&D projects are
often developed under a comprehensive plan that integrates a range of office,
light industrial, warehouse, and commercial activities in a series of buildings
with amenities set in a "campus" setting. Uses that are allowed in the OPRD
zone include research, biotechnology, light manufacturing of high technology
products, associated offices and laboratories, and limited amounts of retail,
personal services, and food-related uses. The regulation of uses is often
defined in an overlaying Planned Development District that is unique to the
project.
   The OPRD zone may be applied on parcels of three (3) or more acres in a town
or unincorporated area that provides a full range of public services. The
maximum permitted floor area ratio in the OPRD zone is 1.0. The OPRD zone
implements the Industrial (IN) land use designation in the 2030 Countywide
General Plan.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.703.   Industrial Use Types Defined.
   As required by Sec.
8-2.227 in Article 2 of this chapter, a Use Classification System has been
employed to identify industrial Use Types. The most prevalent uses identified
for each industrial zone district are "principal" uses allowed by right, as
well as "accessory" or "ancillary" uses allowed by right or with the issuance
of a Site Plan Review. A smaller number of uses are "conditional" uses
permitted through the issuance of a Minor or Major Use Permit.
   The industrial Use Types include a full range of manufacturing, processing,
research, testing, and office uses. The descriptions of the Use Types in this
chapter contain individual specific uses that are classified within the Use
Type. These lists of specific typical uses are examples and are not meant to
include all uses that may properly be classified within the Use Type. If a
specific use is not included under a Use Type, the Planning Director has the
discretion of finding that the specific use is similar or consistent with
another listed use, and may be allowed as a principal, accessory or
conditional, use or, conversely, may find that the use is not an allowed use
within the zone.
   (a)   Light Manufacturing or Processing. This Use Type includes
manufacturing and processing of materials and related activities that do not
generally result in noise, odor, vibrations, or similar impacts to adjacent
neighbors. All activities are conducted within enclosed structures, unless
there is additional staff review. Typical uses include light manufacturing and
processing involving non-toxic materials such as electrical equipment,
instruments, furniture and other household goods, clothing, glass products from
previously manufactured glass, and numerous other consumer and technical
products. Cannabis uses require the issuance of a Major Use Permit as regulated
by Article 14 of this Chapter.
   (b)   General Manufacturing or Processing. This Use type includes
manufacturing processes where the intensity or scale of operations is greater
than those classified under "Light Manufacturing" but where impacts on
surrounding land uses or the community can typically be mitigated to acceptable
levels. Examples of General Manufacturing uses include establishments that make
or process raw materials into finished machines or parts for machines; the
manufacturing of motor vehicles, transportation equipment, and large
appliances; establishments that cut, shape, and finish marble, granite, slate,
and other stone; and establishments that produce brick and structural clay
products. Also included in this Use Type are agricultural processing operations
such as almond hullers, dehydrators, canneries and packing houses, and grain
refining. Cannabis uses, including indoor cultivation, processing, nurseries,
microbusiness, and manufacturing, require the issuance of a Major Use Permit as
regulated by Article 14 of this Chapter.
   (c)   Heavy Manufacturing or Processing. This Use Type includes the heaviest
or most noxious forms of manufacturing and processing, including use of outdoor
areas for storage and processing. Such uses traditionally include manufacturing
of vehicles and other large equipment; processing of acid, metals, cement,
explosives, fireworks, fertilizer, gypsum and plastics; animal feed, sales,
stockyards, and slaughtering; recycling and waste disposal; inflammable,
explosive, and poisonous liquid or gas storage; junk yards, automobile wrecking
yards, building materials and scrap metal yards; oil and gas well drilling and
operations; refining of petroleum and its products; tanneries. This Use Type
also includes agricultural processing such as large wineries, canneries, and
food processing. Cannabis manufacturing uses, including volatile, non-volatile,
and infusion, require the issuance of a Major Use Permit as regulated by
Article 14 of this Chapter.
   (d)   Warehousing, Wholesaling, Distribution. This Use Type includes storage
of manufactured goods inside enclosed warehouse structures and in outdoor
yards. Cannabis distribution facilities require the issuance of a Major Use
Permit as regulated by Article 14 of this Chapter.
   (e)   Research and Development, and Office Uses. This Use Type includes the
activities that are found in typical office parks including research
laboratories; data processing and computer operations; other professional
offices; light manufacturing and storage of high technology instruments; and
biotechnology. Cannabis testing and laboratory uses require the issuance of a
Major Use Permit as regulated by Article 14 of this Chapter.
   (f)   Commercial and Service Uses. These uses are small retail, personal
services, and food-related activities that serve area workers and allow sales
of products manufactured on-site. Typical uses include convenience stores and
markets; barbers and dry cleaners; fast food and small sit down restaurants;
and retail or outlet stores for products created on-site or in the immediate
zone. Cannabis retail uses, including store front and non-store front, and
microbusiness, require the issuance of a Major Use Permit as regulated by
Article 14 of this Chapter.
   (g)   Live/work and Residential Uses. This Use Type includes "live/work"
activities that are involved in light manufacturing and sales of artisan
crafts, such as jewelry and pottery; and loft-type residences.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7,
2018; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1545, eff. January 6, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.704.   Tables of Industrial Permit Requirements.
   The following
Table 8-2.704 lists the permit requirements for examples of each Use Type in
each commercial zoning district. Examples of Use Types are defined as
"principal," "ancillary," or "accessory" uses which are allowed "by right"
(with issuance of only a building permit after zoning clearance), or are
allowed through issuance of a non-discretionary (no public hearing) Site Plan
Review. Additional examples of Use Types are defined as "conditional uses" that
are permitted through the issuance of a discretionary Minor or Major Use
Permit, after a public hearing.
Table 8-2.704
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Industrial Uses
A = Allowed use, subject Land Use Permit Required by Zone
to zoning clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                     Specific Use
UP (m) = Minor Use                                        Requirements or
Permit                   I-L I-H OPRD (1)                 Performance Standards
UP (M) = Major Use
Permit
N = Use Not Allowed
A = Allowed use,       Land Use Permit Required by Zone
subject to zoning
clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                   Specific Use
UP (m) = Minor Use     I-L   I-H       OPRD (1)         Requirements or
Permit                                                  Performance Standards
UP (M) = Major Use
Permit
N = Use Not Allowed
Light Manufacturing and Processing
Light manufacturing of                                  See definition in Sec.
household and other    SP    A         UP(m)            8-2.707
finished goods
Repair and sales of    SP    A         SP
household products
Outdoor storage of     SP    A         SP
light materials
General Manufacturing and Processing
General manufacturing  SP    A         N                See definition in Sec.
of goods                                                8-2.707
Wine, beer, spirits,
and olive processing,  A/SP  A/SP      A/SP             See Sec.
storage, and                                            8-2.306(j)
distribution
Agricultural                                            SP if over 50,000
processing             SP    SP        N                square feet and/or
                                                        hazardous materials
Cannabis cultivation,
outdoors, prohibited   N     N         N                See Article 14
(2)
Cannabis cultivation   UP(M) UP(M)     N
and processing (2)
Cannabis nurseries,
outdoor/indoor/        UP(M) UP(M)     N
mixed-light (2)                                         See Article 14
Cannabis
manufacturing,         UP(M) UP(M)     N
volatile, non-
volatile, infusion (2)
Repair and sales of    SP    A         N
products
Outdoor storage of     SP    A         N
general materials
Heavy Manufacturing and Processing
Processing/storage of  N     SP/ UP(m) N                See Sec.
hazardous materials                                     8-2.706(a)
Heavy manufacturing of                                  See definition in Sec.
equipment and other    N     A/SP      N                8-2.707
large goods
Repair and sales of    UP(m) A         N
heavy equipment
Outdoor storage of     SP    A         N
heavy materials
Warehousing, Wholesaling, Distribution
Trucking companies,    SP    A         UP(m)
distribution
Indoor storage of      A/SP  A/SP      A/SP
materials
Cannabis distribution  UP(M) UP(M)     N                See Article 14
(2)
Outdoor storage of     SP    SP        N
materials
Research and Development, and Office Uses
Research and                                            See definition in Sec.
development park uses  SP    SP        SP               8-2.707 and
                                                        8-2.606(g)
Laboratories           SP    SP        SP
Cannabis testing/      UP(M) UP(M)     N                See Article 14
laboratories (2)
Biotechnology          SP    SP        SP
Data storage and       SP    N         SP
computer operations
Professional offices
ancillary to           SP    N         SP
processing
Financial or
professional offices,  N     N         SP               See Sec.
not ancillary to                                        8-2.706(b)
processing
Energy and Telecommunications
Small and medium solar
and small wind         See Article 11, Sec.
                       8-2.1102 (cell tower),
Cell tower             8-2.1103 (wind), and
                       8-2.1104 (solar)

Co-generation facility UP(M) UP(M)     N                See Sec.
                                                        8-2.1101
Vehicle charging       A     A         A                See definition in Sec.
station                                                 8-14.102
Commercial and Service Uses
Retail sales, less     A     A         A
than 3,000 square feet                                  See Sec.
Convenience, food and  A/SP  A         A/SP             8-2.706(b) and (c)
beverage stores
Winery tasting and     A     A         SP
sales
Cannabis retail,
storefront and non-    UP(M) UP(M)     N                See Article 14
storefront, and
microbusiness (2)
Restaurant, fast food  N     SP        UP(m)            See Sec.
Restaurant, sit down,  UP(m) UP(m)     UP(m)            8-2.706(b)
small (< 3,000 sf)
Drive-through facility UP(m) UP(m)     N
Outdoor eating and     SP    A/SP      A/SP             See Sec.
drinking                                                8-2.606(e)
Bar, cocktail lounge,  N     N         N
club
Barber/hairdresser/    A     A         A
nail parlor
Other personal         A     A         A                See Sec.
services                                                8-2.706(b)
Small appliance, shoe  A     A         A
repair
Laundry, Laundromat    A     A         SP
Health/fitness clubs   SP    A         SP
Gas sales and service  UP(m) SP        UP(m)
stations, auto
Auto repair, minor     SP    SP        SP               See definition in Sec.
Auto repair, major     N     SP        N                8-2.607

Truck stops, sales and N     N         N
service
Personal storage       UP(m) N         N
facilities
Utilities and services SP    SP        UP(m)
Parking lot,           SP    SP        UP(m)
commercial
Hotel and motel        N     N         N
Recycling center       SP    SP        SP
Live/work and Residential Uses
Live/work              A/SP  A/SP      A/SP             See Sec.
                                                        8-2.606(h)
Attached/detached      N     N         N
single family units
Multiple family units  N     N         N
Group/home care        N     N         N
Shelters,
transitional,          N     N         N
supportive housing
Farm labor housing     N     N         N
Child care             N     N         N
Child care center      N     N         N
(over 14 children)
Church, religious      UP(m) UP(m)     UP(m)            See Sec.
assembly                                                8-2.606(o)
School, private        N     N         N
Recreational vehicle   UP(m) N         N
parks
 
*   An "Allowed" use does not require a zoning or land use permit, but is still
subject to permit requirements of other Yolo County divisions such as Building,
Environmental Health, and Public Works.
Note:
(1)   The regulation of uses in the OPRD zone may be defined in an overlaying
Planned Development Zoning district that is unique to the project. The PD
zoning would be inserted in place of these regulations.
(2)   Cannabis uses require the issuance of a Use Permit pursuant to the
Cannabis Land Use Ordinance in Article 14.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 8, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1522, eff. August 6, 2020; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1545, eff. January 6, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.705.   Table of Development Requirements.
   The following
Table 8-2.705 identifies the development requirements, including minimum parcel
sizes, setbacks, and other standards that allowed and permitted uses in the
industrial zones must meet as a standard or condition of any issued building
permit, Site Plan Review, or Use Permit.
Table 8-2.705
Development Requirements in Industrial Zones(2)
 
       Minimum                                              Maximum
       Lot Area Front Yard  Rear Yard   Side Yard   Height  Floor   Maximum
I ZONE (acres   Setback     Setback     Setback     Limits  Area    Impervious
       or       (feet)      (feet)      (feet)      (2)     Ratio   Lot
       square                                       (feet)  (3)     Coverage
       ft) (1)
       5,000                None, except 25 feet if
I-L    square               abutting residential    Maximum
       feet                 zone (5)                of 45
                None (5)                            feet or 0.5     90%
       5,000                None, except 50 feet if four
I-H    square               abutting residential    stories
       feet                 zone (5)

                10 feet or
                according   10 feet,    None,       Maximum
       1.5      to an       except 20   except 20   of 65
OPRD   acres    approved    feet if     feet if     feet or 1.0     75%
                Planned     abutting    abutting    five
                Development residential residential stories
                Ordinance
 
Notes:
(1)   Parcels in rural areas with no access to public water and/or wastewater
services are subject to 2.0 acre minimum parcel sizes for new building permits,
see Section
8-2.1002(a).
(2)   Appropriate findings for discretionary projects, and ministerial
residential projects, located within the floodplain are required, see Section
8-2.306(ae). Structures built in the 100-year flood plain to comply with FEMA
and local requirements will be measured from the top of the bottom floor, which
may include a basement, crawlspace, or enclosed floor.
(3)   See definition in Sec.
8-2.607.
(4)   Development near the toe of any levee is restricted, see Section
8-2.306(ad).
(5)   For cannabis uses, see Article 14 (Cannabis Land Use Ordinance) for
setbacks and buffer requirements.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 681.229, eff. October 29,
2015; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1545, eff. January 6, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.706.   Specific Use Requirements or Performance Standards.
   The following specific use requirements may be applicable to some of the
specific uses or zones identified in the previous
Tables 8-2.704, and shall be applied to any issued building permits, Site Plan
Review, or Use Permit for uses in the industrial zones.
   (a)   Processing and/or Storage of Hazardous Materials. Industrial
processing activities that involve hazardous materials require the issuance of
a Site Plan Review or a Use Permit, at the discretion of the Planning Director,
following recommendation from the Environmental Health Division.
   (b)   Retail sales, professional services, and food service. Retail sales,
professional services, and food services less than three thousand (3,000)
square feet in size are allowed in industrial areas if the products are
produced on-site or within the industrial area, or offer products and services
that are used by employees in the industrial area. Food services are limited to
fast food restaurants and small sit down restaurants.
   (c)   Alcohol sales. The sale of alcohol requires the issuance of a Use
Permit, as described in
Chapter 6 of this title.
   (d)   Approval of discretionary projects and permits within the floodplain.
Approvals of all discretionary projects and permits within the 100-year and
200-year floodplain must meet FEMA, State and local flood requirements.
Appropriate findings for discretionary projects, or ministerial residential
projects, located within the floodplain are required, see Section
8-2.306(ae).
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 681.229, eff. October 29,
2015)
Sec. 8-2.707.   Definitions.
   Automobile wrecking
   “Automobile wrecking” shall mean the commercial dismantling or disassembling
of used motor vehicles, trailers, tractors, and self-propelling farm or road
machinery or the storage, sale, or dumping of the same, when dismantled,
partially dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked, or the parts thereof.
   General Manufacturing
   A facility accommodating manufacturing processes where the intensity or
scale of operations is greater than those classified under "Light
Manufacturing" but where impacts on surrounding land uses or the community can
typically be mitigated to acceptable levels. Examples of General Manufacturing
uses include establishments that make or process raw materials into finished
machines or parts for machines; the manufacturing of motor vehicles,
transportation equipment, and large appliances; establishments that cut, shape,
and finish marble, granite, slate, and other stone; establishments that produce
brick and structural clay products; woodworking, including cabinet making and
furniture manufacturing; and metal products fabrication, including machine,
sheet metal and welding shops.
   Hazardous Materials
   Materials that are defined as “hazardous” by the State of California or U.S.
Government.
   Heavy Manufacturing
   Manufacturing or processing operations that necessitate the storage of large
volumes of hazardous or unsightly materials, or which produce dust, smoke,
fumes, odors or noise at levels that would affect surrounding uses. Examples of
Heavy Manufacturing uses and activities include the manufacturing of chemical
products; the manufacturing of concrete, gypsum, and plaster products; glass
product manufacturing; paving and roofing materials manufacturing; petroleum
refining and related industries; plastics, other synthetics, and rubber product
manufacturing; primary metal industries including the smelting and refining of
ferrous and nonferrous metals from ore, pig, or scrap; asphalt and concrete
plants; medical waste processing/incineration; paint removal and sandblasting;
hazardous or low-level nuclear material disposal; wrecking, junk or salvage
yards; and pulp and pulp product manufacturing, including paper mills.
   Junk yard
   “Junk yard” shall mean the use of more than two hundred (200) square feet of
area of any parcel, lot, or contiguous lots as a place where imported waste,
discarded or salvaged materials, or junk or salvaged materials are
disassembled, handled, baled, packed, processed, or stored. “Junk yard” shall
include auto wrecking yards, scrap metal yards, wrecking yards, used lumber
yards, and places or yards for the storage of salvaged house wrecking and
structural steel materials and equipment. “Junk yard” shall not include such
activities when conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, nor
pawnshops and establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of used
furniture and household equipment when conducted entirely within a completely
enclosed building, nor the sale of used cars, tractors, farm machinery, house
trailers, or boats in operable condition, nor the salvage of materials
incidental to manufacturing or farming operations.
   Light Manufacturing
   The manufacturing and assembly of finished products or parts, primarily
using previously prepared materials. Examples of Light Manufacturing uses and
activities include clothing and fabric product manufacturing; electronics,
small equipment, and appliance manufacturing; food and beverage product
manufacturing, including catering operations and wholesale bakeries; laundry,
dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants; establishments manufacturing and
assembling small products primarily by hand, including jewelry, pottery and
other ceramics; printing, publishing and lithography; establishments that
convert pre-manufactured paper or paperboard into boxes, envelopes, paper bags,
wallpaper, and that coat or glaze pre-manufactured paper; and photo/film
processing labs.
   Research and Development
   A business that engages in research, testing, and development of products
and/or services in all technology-intensive fields. Research and Development
uses do not involve the mass manufacture, fabrication, processing, or sale of
consumer products, and do not produce dust, smoke, fumes, odors or noise at
levels that would affect surrounding uses. Prototype development and product
testing may be included as part of a Research and Development use. Examples of
Research and Development uses include bio-technology laboratories, alternative
energy technology development, agricultural research, and aviation and
aerospace technology development.
   Warehousing, Wholesaling, and Distribution
   An establishment used primarily for the storage, selling or distributing of
goods to retailers, contractors, commercial purchasers or other wholesalers, or
to the branch or local offices of a company or organization. Examples of
Warehousing, Wholesaling, and Distribution uses includes vehicle storage,
moving services, general delivery services, minor waste tire storage
facilities, fuel yards and house boat storage yards where no maintenance of
house boats occurs. The storage of flammables, explosives, or materials that
create dust, odors or fumes is excluded from this definition.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 8: Public and Open Space Zones
Sec. 8-2.801.   Purpose.
   The purpose of the public and open space zones is to provide for areas that
support and enhance a wide range of open space, recreation, and public uses.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.802.   Public and Open Space Zones.
   Public and open space areas are separated into three (3) zoning districts,
with specific Use Types, minimum lot area, and other requirements, as described
below.
   (a)   Parks and Recreation (P-R) Zone. The purpose of the Parks and
Recreation (P-R) zone is to identify lands that are developed as existing
County parks and to designate lands for future parks, including privately owned
facilities offering recreation to the greater region. Permitted uses in the P-
R zone include a wide range of active recreational activities, whether located
outdoors or within recreational or community buildings. Typical development in
the P-R zone includes sports fields, tot lots, and public pools. Some P-R zones
serve as agricultural buffer areas. Detention basins are an allowed ancillary
use in the P-R zone when designed with recreation or sports features. The only
retail and service activities allowed in the P-R zone are those that are
operated by park personnel or under a concession arrangement (gift stores,
restaurants, guides, etc.).
   The P-R zone is not usually applied to undeveloped lands that support only
passive recreational activities such as hiking or bicycling. These latter lands
are zoned Public Open Space (see below). Note that most park uses would
normally be required to locate on lands that have been zoned PQP; however,
smaller uses of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of total building
space, or one (1) acre in size for a park, may be permitted to locate in other
zones, such as commercial and some industrial zones, without a rezoning to PQP.
The P-R zone implements the Parks and Recreation (PR) land use designation in
the 2030 Countywide General Plan.
   (b)   Public Open Space (POS) Zone. The purpose of the Public Open Space
(POS) zone is to recognize major publicly-owned open space lands, major natural
water bodies, agricultural buffer areas, and habitat preserves. The POS lands
are characterized by passive or low management uses. Detention basins are
allowed in the POS zone if they are designed with naturalized features and
native landscaping. The POS zone implements the Open Space (OS) land use
designation in the 2030 Countywide General Plan.
   (c)   Public and Quasi-Public (PQP) Zone. The Public and Quasi-Public (PQP)
zone is applied to lands that are occupied or used for public and governmental
offices, places of worship, schools, libraries, and civic uses. Other typical
uses include airports, water and wastewater treatment plants, drainage basins,
and sanitary landfills. As with park facilities, smaller public/quasi-public
uses involving less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of building space
may be permitted in commercial and some industrial zones. The PQP zone
implements the Public and Quasi-Public (PQ) land use designation in the 2030
Countywide General Plan.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.803.   Public and Open Space Use Types Defined.
   As with the other zone districts, a Use Classification System has been
employed to identify public and open space Use Types, as defined in Sec.
8-2.227 of this chapter. "Principal" uses are allowed by right. "Accessory" or
"ancillary" uses are allowed by right or with the issuance of a Site Plan
Review. A smaller number of uses are "conditional" uses permitted through the
issuance of a Minor or Major Use Permit.
   The Use Types include a wide range of passive and active recreational uses,
and public-oriented activities. The descriptions of the Use Types in this
chapter contain individual specific uses that are classified within the Use
Type. These lists of specific typical uses are examples and are not meant to
include all uses that may properly be classified within the Use Type. If a
specific use is not included under a Use Type, the Planning Director has the
discretion of finding that the specific use is similar or consistent with
another listed use, and may be allowed as a principal, accessory, or
conditional use or, conversely, may find that the use is not an allowed use
within the zone.
   (a)   Passive Recreation Uses. This Use Type includes low intensity outdoor
activities enjoyed by the public such as walking, hiking, bicycling, boating
and water sports, picnicking, nature education, and bird watching.
   (b)   Active Recreation Uses. This Use Type includes all of the typical
recreational activities that are offered in a developed County park, from
outdoor recreation such as sports fields (baseball, football, soccer),
swimming, camping/RV parks, marinas, health resorts and retreat centers to
indoor activities in park buildings and community centers.
   This Use Type also includes privately owned facilities, such as golf courses
with country clubs, upscale campgrounds, RV Parks, and health resorts or
retreat centers that draw clientele from a greater regional area.
   (c)   Public and Civic Uses. This Use Type covers a wide range of uses
including governmental offices, libraries, public schools, landfills, the
County airport, treatment plants, and other official County or city functions.
   (d)   Quasi-Public Uses. This Use Type includes activities conducted in
privately-owned facilities such as schools, museums, and fraternal
organizations, and also private uses that attract large numbers of customers
such as theaters and sports event venues.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.804.   Tables of Public and Open Space Permit Requirements.
   The following
Table 8-2.804 lists the permit requirements for examples of Use Types in each
public or open space zoning district. Examples of Use Types are defined as
"principal," "ancillary," or "accessory" uses which are allowed "by right"
(with issuance of a building permit after zoning clearance), or are allowed
through issuance of a non-discretionary (no public hearing) Site Plan Review.
Additional examples of Use Types are defined as "conditional uses" that are
permitted through the issuance of a discretionary Minor or Major Use Permit,
after a public hearing.
Table 8-2.804
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Public and Open Space Uses
A = Allowed use, subject Land Use Permit Required by Zone
to zoning clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                     Specific Use
UP (m) = Minor Use                                        Requirements or
Permit                   P-R POS PQP(1)                   Performance Standards
UP (M) = Major Use
Permit
N = Use Not Allowed
A = Allowed use,       Land Use Permit Required by Zone
subject to zoning
clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                   Specific Use
UP (m) = Minor Use     P-R   POS   PQP(1)               Requirements or
Permit                                                  Performance Standards
UP (M) = Major Use
Permit
N = Use Not Allowed
Passive Recreation
Walking, hiking,       A     A     A
bicycling, kayaking
Nature center, museum  UP(m) UP(m) UP(m)
                                                        See Sec.
Other rural recreation UP(m) UP(m) N                    8-2.806(a),
                                                        8-2.807
Active Recreation
Sports fields
(baseball, soccer,     UP(m) UP(m) UP(m)
etc.)
Swimming pool, aquatic UP(m) UP(m) UP(m)
center, boating
Campground or                                           See Sec.
primitive campground   UP(m) UP(m) UP(m)                8-2.806(a),
                                                        8-2.307
Recreational vehicle   UP(M) N     N
parks
                                                        See Sec.
Rural recreation       UP(m) UP(m) UP(m)                8-2.806(a),
                                                        8-2.807
Commercial riding                                       See Sec.
stables, rodeos        UP(m) N     UP(M)                8-2.306(i),
                                                        8-2.307
Golf courses, country  UP(m) N     UP(m)
clubs
Public and Quasi-public Uses
Government, civic      SP    SP    SP
building, library
Public landfill,
treatment plant,       SP    SP    SP
airport
School, public         SP    SP    SP                   Not subject to County
                                                        zoning
Fraternal
organization, non-     N     N     UP(m)
profit club
Church, religious      N     N     UP(m)
assembly, priv. school
Utilities and services N     N     UP(m)
Entertainment and      N     N     UP(m)
spectator sports
Private aviation uses  N     N     SP                   See Sec.
in airport                                              8-2.806(b)
Other Uses
Agricultural           A     A     A
production
Cannabis uses, all     N     N     N                    See Article 14
types, prohibited
                                                        See Sec.
Covered habitat        UP(m) or UP(M)                   8-2.306(a),
mitigation project                                      8-2.307 and
                                                        Title 10, Chapter 10
Agricultural           SP    SP    N                    See definition in Sec.
processing                                              8-2.307
Retail or service uses SP    SP    SP
Restaurant, fast food  SP    SP    SP
or sit down                                             See Sec.
Outdoor eating and     SP    SP    SP                   8-2.806(c)
drinking
Professional offices   SP    N     SP
Residential uses,      N     N     N
except caretaker
Caretaker residence    SP    SP    SP                   See Sec.
                                                        8-2.806(d)
Cemeteries, mausoleums N     N     UP(m)
Industrial and storage N     N     UP(m)
uses, except corp
Corporation yard       SP    N     SP
                       See Article 11, Sec.
Solar, wind, cell      8-2.1102 (cell), Sec.
tower facility         8-2.1103 (wind), and Sec.
                       8-2.1104 (solar)
Gas well explor.,      N     SP    N                    See Sec.
drilling, extraction                                    8-2.306(s)
 
*   An "allowed use" does not require a zoning or land use permit, but is still
subject to permit requirements of other Yolo County divisions such as Building,
Environmental Health, and Public Works.
   (1)   Uses on the County Airport, Watts-Woodland, and Borges airport
properties must be consistent with the Comprehensive Land Use Plans (CLUPs) and
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 9, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 4, Ord. 1522, eff. August 6, 2020; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1545, eff. January 6, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.805.   Table of Development Requirements.
   The following
Table 8-2.805 identifies the development requirements, including minimum parcel
sizes, setbacks, and other standards that allowed and permitted uses in the
commercial zones must meet as a standard or condition of any issued building
permit, Site Plan Review, or Use Permit.
Table 8-2.805
Development Requirements in Public and Open Space Zones(4)
 
       Minimum Lot Front Yard  Rear Yard   Side Yard    Height       Maximum
ZONE   Area (acres Setback     Setback     Setback      Limits(4)    Floor Area
       or square   (feet)      (feet)      (feet)       (feet)       Ratio
       ft)
P-R                            None, except 15 feet if  35 feet      0.025
POS                None        abutting residential     35 feet      0.001
                               zone
                   5 feet or
                   match the   10 feet,    None, except
       None(1)     prevailing  except 20   10 feet if   Maximum of
PQP(2)             setback on  feet if     abutting     50 feet or   0.5
                   the         abutting    residential  four stories
                   adjacent    residential (3)
                   properties  (3)
                   (3)
 
Notes:
(1)   Parcels in rural areas with no access to public water and/or wastewater
services are subject to 2.0 acre minimum parcel sizes for new building permits,
see Section
8-2.1002(a).
(2)   Small uses of less than 5,000 square feet of total building space, or one
acre in size for a park, may be permitted in other zones, such as commercial
and some industrial zones, without a rezoning to PQP.
(3)   Setbacks for hangars and other structures within the County Airport
property, not along a County Road (where standard setbacks within the PQP zones
apply), may be reduced to 0 feet by the Building Official.
(4)   Appropriate findings for discretionary projects, and ministerial
residential projects, located within the floodplain are required, see Section
8-2.306(ae). Structures built in the 100-year flood plain to comply with FEMA
and local requirements will be measured from the top of the bottom floor, which
may include a basement, crawlspace, or enclosed floor.
(5)   Development near the toe of any levee is restricted, see Section
8-2.306(ad).
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 681.229, eff. October 29,
2015; as amended by § 9, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24, 2016; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018)
Sec. 8-2.806.   Specific Use Requirements or Performance Standards.
   The following specific use requirements may be applicable to some of the
specific uses or zones identified in the previous
Table 8-2.804, and shall be applied to any issued building permits, Site Plan
Review, or Use Permit for uses in the public and open space zones.
   (a)   Rural recreational facilities.
   (1)   Activities on land in the P-R and POS zones shall require issuance of
a Major Use Permit for any rural recreational uses requiring new construction
and/or generating in excess of one hundred (100) vehicle trips per use or per
day. Such uses shall be found to meet the following standards:
   (i)   The use will not substantially modify the land's natural
characteristics or change them beyond those modifications already related to
current or previous open space or agricultural uses;
   (ii)   The use will not be detrimental to surrounding open space and
agricultural uses in the area.
   (2)   In addition to the above findings, proposed uses such as health
resorts, spas, and retreat centers must be found to benefit from locating in a
quiet, sparsely-populated, natural environment. In addition, any proposed uses
such as health resorts, spas, and retreat centers must operate under a
concession arrangement with a public or non-profit organization.
   (b)   Aviation uses. Aviation uses allowed as principal permitted uses on
the County Airport, Watts-Woodland, and Borges airport properties include
accessory structures and facilities including aircraft and aviation accessory
sales; aircraft fueling stations; aircraft storage, service, and repair
hangers; lighting, radio, and radar facilities; runways, taxiways, landing
strips, and aprons, grassed or paved; and terminal facilities for passengers
and freight.
   (c)   Retail, service, or office uses. Any retail, service or office uses
(gift stores, restaurants, guide services, horseback riding, etc.) must be
operated by park personnel or operate under a concession arrangement with a
public or non-profit organization.
   (d)   Caretaker residence. Regional parks and campgrounds are allowed one
(1) caretaker unit. No allowed residential uses for community and neighborhood
parks and similar facilities. Public open space is allowed one (1) caretaker
unit.
   (e)   Approval of discretionary projects and permits within the floodplain.
Approvals of all discretionary projects and permits within the 100-year and
200-year floodplain must meet FEMA, State and local flood requirements.
Appropriate findings for discretionary projects, or ministerial residential
projects, located within the floodplain are required, see Section
8-2.306(ae).
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 681.229, eff. October 29,
2015; as amended by § 9, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24, 2016)
Sec. 8-2.807.   Definitions.
   Rural recreation.
   Outdoor sporting or leisure activities that require large open space areas
and do not have any significant detrimental impact on agricultural use of lands
that are in the general vicinity of the rural recreation activity. Rural
recreation activities shall include, but are not limited to: the shooting of
skeet, trap, and sporting clays; archery; gun, hunting, or fishing clubs; sport
parachuting; riding; picnicking; nature study; viewing or enjoying historical,
archaeological, scenic, natural or scientific sites; health resorts, rafting,
hiking, backpacking, bicycling, or touring excursions; or camping.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 9: Specific Plan and Overlay Zones
Sec. 8-2.901.   Purpose.
   The purpose of the Specific Plan and the Overlay zones is to implement the
2030 Yolo Countywide General Plan policies by adopting additional zoning tools
that enhance and protect a range of land uses. The overlay zones described in
this article establish standards and regulations that apply to specified areas
that are in addition to the requirements established by the underlying base
zone district. If a requirement of an overlay zone should conflict with the
underlying base zone, the overlay zone requirements shall control.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.902.   Specific Plan Zone.
   The Specific Plan is not an overlay zone, but is a base zone similar to
agricultural, residential, commercial, and industrial base zoning.
   (a)   Specific Plan (S-P) Zone. The purpose of the Specific Plan (S-P) zone
is to identify lands that are planned for future urban growth but which cannot
be developed until detailed development standards as outlined in a "specific
plan" are adopted. The required contents of a specific plan are defined under
State law (Government Code 64540 et seq). In addition, the 2030 Yolo Countywide
General Plan includes policies that set parameters or requirements for
development in each specific plan area, including approximate acres of planned
uses and ranges of residential and commercial unit counts. These policies and
development parameters are cited in Table 8-2.905.
   The area identified for preparation of a specific plan in the 2030
Countywide General Plan includes Covell/Pole Line Road in north Davis (
Table 8-2.902-1).
Table 8-2.902-1
Specific Plan (S-P) Areas
 
Specific Plan Area   Acreage
Covell/Pole Line Rd. 384
Total                384
 
Source: 2030 Countywide General Plan, 2009
   The Specific Plan (S-P) zoning allows agricultural uses in the zoned area to
continue temporarily until such time as a specific plan has been adopted, or
until the zoning or land use designation is otherwise amended. Ultimate land
uses must be consistent with the adopted Specific Plan. Capital intensive
agricultural uses are discouraged in lands that are zoned S-P so as not to
preclude later planned urban uses.
   The S-P zone implements the Specific Plan (SP) land use designation in the
2030 Yolo Countywide General Plan.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1486, eff. March 23,
2017; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1490, eff. August 17, 2017)
Sec. 8-2.903.   Overlay Zones.
   Policy LU-1.1 and Table LU-4 in the 2030 Yolo Countywide General Plan
establish and define six (6) overlay land use designations, which correspond to
five (5) new overlay zoning districts listed below. The Mineral Resource
Overlay defined in the General Plan is implemented by the existing Sand and
Gravel, and Sand and Gravel Reserve, zones. A seventh overlay, the Airport
Overlay (A-O), is not identified in the General Plan, but has been added to
protect properties around the County Airport. An eighth overlay zone
incorporates some of the existing Planned Development (PD) zones approved by
the County which have been retained for certain development projects.
   Overlay zones are added to, or on top of, a base zone, augmenting the base
zone regulations with additional regulations related to the unique location or
character of the parcels that are subject to the overlay zoning. If there are
any inconsistencies between the overlay and the base zoning regulations, the
overlay regulations prevail. When referring to an overlay zone, the overlay
name is added to the base zoning, following it separated by a slash marking ("/
"), e.g., A-N/A-O (except for the Planned Development overlay zones, which are
designated with the number of the original approved zone, e.g., PD-45).
   The overlay zones, excluding the PD zones, are identified with their
corresponding total acreage in
Table 8-2.903-1, below.
Table 8-2.903-1
Overlay Zone Areas
 
Overlay Zone                       Acreage
Natural Heritage                   n/a
Agricultural District (Clarksburg) 35,171
Delta Protection                   73,053
Sand and Gravel (Mineral Resource) 18,452
Tribal Trust                       483
Airport                            n/a
 
Source: 2030 Countywide General Plan, 2009
   (a)   Natural Heritage Overlay (NH-O) Zone. The Natural Heritage Overlay
(NH-O) applies to focused conservation areas identified in the Yolo Natural
Heritage Program (the Yolo County Habitat Conservation/ Natural Communities
Conservation Plan). Allowed land uses are limited to those consistent with the
adopted Yolo Natural Heritage Program and HCP/NCCP.
   (b)   Agricultural District Overlay (AD-O) Zone. The Agricultural District
Overlay (AD-O) applies to designated agricultural districts. Land uses
consistent with the base designation and the district specifications are
allowed. At the current time only one (1) agricultural district has been
adopted in the Clarksburg area. The zoning regulations for the Clarksburg
Agricultural District are included in Section
8-2.401 in Article 4 of this chapter.
   (c)   Delta Protection Overlay (DP-O) Zone. The Delta Protection Overlay
(DP-O) applies to the State designated "primary zone" of the Sacramento-San
Joaquin Delta, as defined in the Delta Protection Act. Land uses consistent
with the base designation and the Delta Protection Commission's Land Use and
Resource Management Plan are allowed.
   (d)   Sand and Gravel and Sand and Gravel Reserve Overlay (SG-O and SGR-O)
Zones. The Sand and Gravel and Sand and Gravel Reserve Overlays (SG-O and SGR-
O) apply to State designated mineral resource zones (MRZ-2) containing critical
geological deposits needed for economic use in the future, as well as applying
to existing mining operations.
   (e)   Tribal Trust Overlay (TT-O) Zone. The Tribal Trust Overlay (TT-O)
applies to tribal trust lands held by the Federal government for recognized
tribal governments.
   (f)   Airport Overlay (A-O) Zone. The Airport Overlay (A-O) zone is applied
to the properties within a ten thousand (10,000) foot radius around the Yolo
County Airport and included within the identified "safety zones" of the
airport. The purpose of the overlay zone is to regulate uses and structural
heights to ensure aviation safety as required by the Comprehensive Land Use
Plan (CLUP) for the County Airport. The regulations specifically advise private
property owners of the restrictions related to vegetation and height of
structures.
   (g)   Planned Development (PD) Overlay Zone. The purpose of the Planned
Development (PD) overlay zone is to encourage a more flexible and efficient use
of land for larger urban development projects that include an excellence in
site design greater than that which could be achieved through the application
of established zoning standards. Use of a PD zone process requires the rezoning
of a parcel or parcels from the existing base zone to the base zone overlain
with a uniquely defined PD zone with its own number identification (such as PD-
45). A PD zone must be generally consistent with its associated base, e.g.,
residential or commercial. PD zoning is not intended for agricultural zones or
uses.
   Many of the Planned Development projects in Yolo County were approved
decades ago and have since been developed. These completed projects have been
rezoned to their appropriate base zones, based on developed densities and uses,
and the PD regulations have been rescinded, unless they are still relevant. The
relevant PD zones that have been retained in their individual PD zoning,
including recently approved subdivisions in Esparto that have not yet been
constructed, are identified in
Table 8-2.903-2, below.
Table 8-2.903-2
Planned Development Zone Areas
Planned Development No. /Name Associated Zone Location
Planned Development No. /Name          Associated Zone Location
PD-9 Hilltop Estates                   A-N/RR-5        Monument Hills
PD-25 Binning Farms                    R-L             North Davis
PD-42 Country West I                   R-L             Esparto
PD-45 Wild Wings                       R-L             Wild Wings
PD-47 North Davis Meadows II           R-L             North Davis
PD-48 Country West II                  R-L             Esparto
PD-49 Parker Place                     R-L             Esparto
PD-49 Snow Subdivision                 R-L             Knights Landing
PD-53 Esperanza Estates                R-L             Esparto
PD-56 Dunnigan Truck and Travel Center C-H             Dunnigan
PD-57 Lopez Subdivision/Ryland         R-L             Esparto
PD-58 White/Castle Subdivision         R-L             Knights Landing
PD-59 Orciuoli/Castle Subdivision      R-L             Esparto
PD-60 E. Parker Subdivision/Emerald    R-L             Esparto
PD-61 Story Subdivision/Emerald        R-L             Esparto
PD-62 Capay Cottages Subdivision       R-L             Esparto
PD-64 Jensen Parcel Map                I-L             Clarksburg
PD-65 Willowbank                       R-L             Davis
PD-66 El Macero                        R-L             Davis
PD-67 Patwin Road                      RR-2            Davis
PD-68 El Macero                        R-M             Davis
 
   (h)   Special Building Overlay (B) Zone. The "B" overlay is a Special
Building overlay zone that is applied to areas zoned for development where the
lack of public facilities and utilities indicates a need for new building sites
of larger acreage than otherwise permitted in the zone. The County
Environmental Health Division is responsible for setting these minimum parcel
size restrictions in compliance with State laws that set standards for on-site
sewage disposal and private water wells. The B overlay zone sets a minimum
parcel size of two (2) acres for newly created parcels zoned for development
that do not have access to public water and public wastewater treatment
services. The two (2) acre minimum parcel size to build a house does not apply
to existing lots, only newly created lots. There are numerous areas within the
unincorporated area where homes and businesses must rely on private wells and
private septic/ leachfield systems. In these areas, such as Capay Valley, the
Hardwoods in Dunnigan, and Patwin Road in Davis, the Rural Residential (RR-2)
or Residential Low Density (R-L) zoning regulations include a B overlay zone
that sets a minimum parcel size of two (2) acres for purposes of creating new
lots and issuing building permits for homes.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014, as amended by Ord. 1453, eff. April 9, 2015;
as amended by § 3, Ord. 1486, eff. March 23, 2017; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1490, eff. August 17, 2017; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018)
Sec. 8-2.904.   Use Types Defined.
   In contrast to the other zone districts, a detailed Use Classification
System has not been employed to identify uses allowed in the S-P, PD, and the
eight (8) overlay zones. Instead, allowed and permitted uses are defined based
on the Use Types that have already been established for base zones in the
previous articles of this chapter.
   Rather than repeat the individual examples of specific uses that are
classified within the various Use Types for agricultural, residential,
commercial, industrial, and open space uses, the following tables simply refer
back to the broad Use Type categories and applicable development standards
identified in the previous articles of the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.905.   Table of Permit Requirements.
   The following
Tables 8-2.905-1 and
8-2.905-2 lists the permit requirements for examples of each Use Type in each
zoning district. Examples of Use Types are defined as "principal," "ancillary,"
or "accessory" uses which are allowed "by right" (with issuance of only a
building permit after zoning clearance), or are allowed through issuance of a
non-discretionary (no public hearing) Site Plan Review. Additional examples of
Use Types are defined as "conditional uses" that are permitted through the
issuance of a discretionary Minor or Major Use Permit, after a public hearing.
   Note that the tables do not include permit requirements for the Tribal Trust
Overlay (TT-O) zone, since these lands are not subject to the zoning
jurisdiction of Yolo County. Additionally, as already noted above, the tables
do not include the Agricultural District Overlay (AD-O) zone, since the
regulations for the one AD-O zone that has been adopted for the Clarksburg
area, are included in Section
8-2.401 in Article 4 of this chapter. The tables also do not include permit
requirements for the Special Building (B) overlay zone, since that overlay zone
only affects minimum parcel size, not permitted uses.
Table 8-2.905-1
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for S-P, PD, and NH-O Zones
A = Allowed use, subject Land Use Permit Required by Zone
to zoning clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                     Specific Use
UP (m) = Minor Use                                        Requirements or
Permit                   S-P (1) PD (2) NH-O(3)           Performance Standards
UP (M) = Major Use
Permit
N = Use Not Allowed
A = Allowed use,        Land Use Permit Required by Zone
subject to zoning
clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                    Specific Use
UP (m) = Minor Use      S-P (1) PD (2) NH-O(3)           Requirements or
Permit                                                   Performance Standards
UP (M) = Major Use
Permit
N = Use Not Allowed
USE TYPES
Agricultural Production
Agricultural production A       A      A                 See Sec.
                                                         8-2.906(c)
Covered habitat,        UP(m)/         UP(m)/            See Sec.
mitigation projects     UP(M)   N      UP(M)             8-2.306(a) and Title
                                                         10, Chap. 10
Agricultural Processing
Agricultural processing UP(m)   N      UP(m)             See Sec.
                                                         8-2.906(c)
Animal Facilities Uses
Feedlots, dairies, etc. N       N      UP(M)             See Sec.
                                                         8-2.306(c) thru (e)
Kennels, stables, etc.  N       N      UP(m)             See Sec.
                                                         8-2.306(f) thru (i)
Agricultural Accessary Structures/Uses
Barns, storage sheds    A       A      A                 Interim uses allowed
Coolers, dehydrators,   UP(m)   N      UP(m)
silos                                                    See Sec.
Greenhouses, commercial UP(m)   N      UP(m)             8-2.906(c)
Reservoirs, ponds       UP(m)   N      UP(m)
Agricultural Commercial and Rural Recreation
Large wineries, olive
oil, stables, special   N       N      UP(m)             See Sec.
events, B&Bs                                             8-2.906(c) and Sec.
All other ag commercial                                  8-2.306(i) thru (m)
uses                    UP(m)   N      UP(m)

Game preserves and hunt
clubs, over 50 persons/ UP(M)   N      UP(M)             See Sec.
day                                                      8-2.906(c) and Sec.
All other rural                                          8-2.306(o)
recreation              N       N      UP(M)

Agricultural Industrial, Resource Extraction, and Utilities Uses
Solar, wind energy      --      --     --
system                                                   See Sec.
                                                         8-2.906(c) and
                                                         Article 11 for permit
Wireless communications UP(M)   UP(M)  UP(M)             requirements and
                                                         standards

All other ag                                             See Sec.
industrial, resource,   N       N      UP(m)             8-2.906(c)
utilities uses
Residential Uses
Residential uses        --      --     --                See Sec.
                                                         8-2.906(d)
Home and Child Care Uses
Group/home care <6 beds                                  See Sec.
and child care <9       A       A      A                 8-2.506(f) and (g)
children
All other related care  UP(m)   UP(m)  UP(m)             See Sec.
uses                                                     8-2.906(d)
Commercial Uses
All commercial uses     -       -      -                 See Sec.
                                                         8-2.906(e)
Industrial Uses
All industrial uses     -       -      -                 See Sec.
                                                         8-2.906(e)
Public and Open Space Uses
Public and open space   -       -      -                 See Sec.
uses                                                     8-2.906(e)
 
*   An “allowed use” does not require a zoning or land use permit, but is still
subject to permit requirements of other Yolo County divisions such as Building,
Environmental Health, and Public Works.
Notes:
(1)   In the S-P zones, permit requirements in this table are for interim uses
allowed prior to adoption of a Specific Plan, after which all proposed uses and
permit requirements must be consistent with the adopted plan. See Sec.
8-2.906(c).
(2)   Additional requirements for a rezoning to a PD zone are included in Sec.
8-2.906(a). For PD zones, permit requirements in this table are for interim
agricultural uses allowed prior to urban development or completion of urban
development. All proposed non-agricultural uses and permit requirements must be
consistent with the individual adopted PD regulations. See Sec.
8-2.906(c).
(3)   In the NH-O zones, prior to adoption of a Natural Heritage Plan,
agricultural uses are allowed according to the underlying base zone. After
adoption of a Natural Heritage Plan, all proposed uses and permit requirements
must be consistent with the adopted plan.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1490, eff. August 17,
2017)
Table 8-2.905-2
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for DP-O, SG-O and SGR-O, and A-
O Overlay Zones
A = Allowed use,      Land Use Permit Required by Zone
subject to zoning
clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                    Specific Use
UP (m) = Minor Use    DP-O (1) SG-O and SGR-O (2) A-O(3) Requirements or
Permit                                                   Performance Standards
UP (M) = Major Use
Permit
N = Use Not Allowed
A = Allowed use,      Land Use Permit Required by Zone
subject to zoning
clearance*
SP = Site Plan Review                                    Specific Use
UP (m) = Minor Use    DP-O (1) SG-O and SGR-O (2) A-O(3) Requirements or
Permit                                                   Performance Standards
UP (M) = Major Use
Permit
N = Use Not Allowed
USE TYPES
Agricultural Production
Agricultural          A        A                  A
production
Covered habitat,                                         See Sec.
mitigation projects   UP(m) or UP(M)                     8-2.306(a) and Title
                                                         10, Chap. 10
Agricultural Processing
                                                         See
                                                         Table 8-2.304(a).
Agricultural          A        A                  A      Large, regional-
processing                                               serving operations may
                                                         require a Site Plan
                                                         Review or Use Permit
Animal Facilities Uses
Animal facilities     --       --                 --     See
uses                                                     Table 8-2.304(b)
Agricultural Accessory Structures/Uses
Accessory structures  --       --                 --     See
                                                         Table 8-2.304(a)
Agricultural Commercial and Rural Recreation
Agricultural          --       --                 --     See
commercial uses                                          Table 8-2.304(c)
Rural recreation      --       --                 --     See
                                                         Table 8-2.304(c)
Agricultural Industrial, Resource Extraction, and Utilities Uses
Solar, wind energy    --       --                 --
system                                                   See Sec.
                                                         8-2.906(c) and Article
Wireless              UP(M)    UP(M)              UP(M)  11 for requirements
communications                                           and standards

                                                         See Sec.
Surface mining        UP(M)    UP(M)              UP(M)  8-2.906(g), 8-2.306
                                                         (q), and Title 10
All other ag                                             See
industrial, resource, --       --                 --     Table 8-2.304(d)
utilities uses
Residential Uses
Residential uses      --       --                 --     See Sec.
                                                         8-2.906(f)
Home and Child Care Uses
Group/home care <6                                       See Sec.
beds and child care   A        A                  A      8-2.506(e) and (f)
<9 children
All other related     --       --                 --     See Sec.
home uses                                                8-2.906(f)
Commercial Uses
All commercial uses   --       --                 --     See Sec.
                                                         8-2.906(f).
Industrial Uses
All industrial uses   --       --                 --     See Sec.
                                                         8-2.906(f).
Public and Open Space Uses
Public and open space --       --                 --     See Sec.
uses                                                     8-2.906(f).
 
*   An "allowed use" does not require a zoning or land use permit, but is still
subject to permit requirements of other Yolo County divisions such as Building,
Environmental Health, and Public Works.
Notes:
(1)   See Sec.
8-2.906(f). All uses must be consistent with the Land Use and Resource
Management Plan adopted by the Delta Protection Commission.
(2)   See Sec.
8-2.906(g). All uses must be consistent with the Cache Creek Specific Plan and
associated policies and regulations. Also see Sec.
8-2.906(f) and Title 10.
(3)   See Sec.
8-2.906(h). All uses must be consistent with the Comprehensive Land Use Plans
(CLUPs) for the County Airport, Watts-Woodland, or Borges Airports. California
Public Utilities Code Section 21659 governs the allowable height of structures
and vegetation in the A-O zone.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 11, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-2.906.   Specific Use Requirements or Performance Standards.
   The following specific use requirements may be applicable to some of the
specific uses or zones identified in the previous
Tables 8-2.905-1 and
8-2.905-2, and shall be applied to any issued building permits, Site Plan
Review, or Use Permit for uses in the specific plan and overlay zones.
   (a)   Planned Development (PD) overlay zone requirements.
   (1)   The Planned Development overlay zone is to be applied to parcels for
which detailed written development plans have been submitted and are approved
concurrent with the rezoning to a specific PD. The minimum size for a proposed
PD zone shall be two (2) acres.
   (2)   Principal uses permitted in a PD overlay zone shall be any uses or
combination of uses which are so arranged and/or designed as to result in an
overall development which is found to be in general conformity with the
standards, regulations, intent, and purposes of the General Plan and the
associated zoning district, e.g., R-L or C-G.
   (3)   All uses in an approved PD overlay zone shall conform to the height,
lot, yard, and area regulations normally required for such uses in the
associated base zone district, except where the total development will be
improved by a deviation from such regulations. In any event, each subsequent
structure approved shall conform to the precise development plan which is a
part of the approved PD rezoning and associated regulations.
   (4)   In addition to the general application requirements identified in Sec.
8-2.209 of this chapter, the following materials shall be submitted when making
an application for a Planned Development overlay rezoning:
   (i)   An ordinance that includes a detailed set of development standards
which govern development within the zone, including the requirement of the
approval of detailed Site Plans or Use Permits by the Director, the Zoning
Administrator, or the Planning Commission prior to the commencement of
construction. Such standards may regulate the density, placement, setbacks,
height, advertising signs, parking, and similar aspects of development within
the zone. Such ordinance may be submitted by the applicant or by the Director.
All development in the overlay zone shall be consistent with, and governed by,
such standards, once approved.
   (ii)   The proposed access, traffic and pedestrian ways, easements, and lot
design;
   (iii)   The areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways,
playgrounds, school sites, public or quasi-public buildings, and other such
uses;
   (iv)   The areas proposed for commercial uses, off-street parking, multiple-
family and single family dwellings, and all other uses proposed to be
established within the zone;
   (v)   The proposed locations of buildings on the land, including all
dimensions necessary to indicate the size of structures, setbacks, and yard
areas;
   (vi)   The proposed landscaping, fencing, and screening; and
   (vii)   Detailed elevation drawings; construction, improvement, utility, and
drainage plans; and any other information the Director deems necessary to
adequately consider the proposed development.
   (5)   When land has been rezoned to a PD overlay, it shall be designated on
the official zoning maps by an identifying serial number following the symbol
"PD-." Such identifying serial numbers shall refer to the precise plans and
detailed written development standards or regulations which apply to the
numbered Planned Development zone.
   (b)   Special Building (B) overlay zone requirements. The Special Building
("B") overlay zone is applied to areas zoned for development that rely on
private wells and private septic/leachfield systems. In these areas, such as
Capay Valley, the Hardwoods in Dunnigan, and Patwin Road in Davis, the existing
Rural Residential (RR-2) or Residential Low Density (R-L) zoning regulations
include a "B" overlay zone that sets a minimum parcel size of two (2) acres for
purposes of creating new lots and issuing building permits for homes. The two
(2) acre minimum parcel size to build a house does not apply to existing lots,
only newly created lots. The two (2) acre minimum parcel size for newly created
rural lots is represented by a "B87" overlay zone (the figure 87 refers to the
two (2) acre minimum parcel size measured in thousands of square feet).
   (c)   Interim agricultural uses in the S-P, PD, and NH-O zones.  
   (1)   In the S-P, PD, and NH-O zones a range of agricultural uses is allowed
as interim uses until a Specific Plan or Natural Heritage Plan is adopted, or
until an existing PD zone is developed with urban uses, provided that the
interim agricultural use is consistent with any underlying base zone. In the
interim, capital intensive agricultural uses such as processing facilities,
animal facilities uses, large accessory structures, and agricultural
commercial, rural recreation, and agricultural industrial uses are prohibited
in the PD zones, and are discouraged in the S-P zones, unless the findings in
subsection (2), below, can be made.
   (2)   Capital intensive agricultural uses such as processing facilities,
animal facilities uses, large accessory structures, and agricultural
commercial, rural recreation, and agricultural industrial uses may be permitted
in the S-P and NH-O zones, prior to adoption of a Specific Plan or Natural
Heritage Plan, through the issuance of a Minor Use Permit, provided that the
interim agricultural use is consistent with any underlying base zone and
provided the Zoning Administrator can make the following findings based on
evidence in the record:
   (i)   Approval of the project will not significantly hinder the adoption of
a future Specific Plan or create an insurmountable obstacle to urban
development of the future planned land uses on the parcel or parcels; or
   (ii)   Approval of the project is consistent with the goals and policies of
an adopted or pending Natural Heritage Plan.
   (d)   Residential, group/home and child care uses in the PD and S-P zones.
   (1)   In existing but not fully developed PD zones one (1) rural residence
is allowed per undeveloped rural parcel as an interim use only, excluding
undeveloped lots in an approved but incomplete subdivision. All other proposed
residential uses in a PD zone must be consistent with the permit requirements,
densities, and other applicable development standards of the specific adopted
PD ordinance for the project.
   (2)   In vacant or underdeveloped SP zones one (1) rural residence is
allowed per undeveloped rural parcel as an interim use only. Accessory
structures and all other proposed residential uses in a SP zone, including
group/home or child care uses must be consistent with the permit requirements,
densities, and other applicable development standards of the underlying base
zone, or for any agricultural zone if there is no underlying base zone.
   (e)   Commercial, industrial, and public and open space uses in the S-P, PD,
and NH-O zones.
   (1)   In the S-P and PD zones commercial, industrial, and public and open
space uses are prohibited as interim uses prior to the adoption of a Specific
Plan or completion of a PD project. All proposed commercial, industrial, and
public and open space uses shall be consistent with the adopted Specific Plan
and/or PD zoning.
   (2)   In the NH-O zones commercial, industrial, and public and open space
uses are permitted provided that the use is consistent with the underlying base
zone, and provided that the project is consistent with the goals and policies
of an adopted or pending Natural Heritage Plan.
   (f)   Commercial, industrial, and public and open space uses in the DP-O,
SG-O/SGR-O, and A-O zones.
   (1)   In the DP-O zone, which is the State-designated "primary zone" of the
Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, all proposed uses and permit requirements must be
consistent with the regulations for the underlying base zone district and with
the policies of the Land Use and Resource Management Plan adopted by the Delta
Protection Commission.
   (2)   In the SG-O and the SGR-O zones, which are the State-designated
"mineral resource area" (MRZ-2) along Cache Creek, all proposed uses and permit
requirements must be consistent with the regulations for the underlying base
zone district and with Section
8-2.906(g), below.
   (3)   Commercial mining is prohibited in, and adjoining, Putah Creek.
   (4)   In the A-O zone, which is the designated “airport runway protection
zone” around the County Airport, all proposed uses and permit requirements must
be consistent with the regulations for the underlying base zone district and
with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan (CLUP) for the County Airport. The height
of structures and vegetation shall comply with California Public Utilities Code
Section 21659. The Airport Overlay Zone will provide an effective and efficient
means for notifying current and future landowners of the potential nuisances
associated with the County Airport.
   (5)   In the A-O zone, discretionary applications that propose the following
uses shall be subject to a CLUP consistency analysis:
   (i)   Uses that would cause electrical interference with aircraft operation
or instrumentation, including: electrical and electronic equipment; industrial,
commercial, and computer equipment; radio, TV, and telephone; electrical and
natural gas generation and switching; and
   (ii)   Uses that would include a water area that may cause ground fog or
result in a bird hazard, including: water and sewer treatment plants, sanitary
landfills, recycling and transfer, and hazardous materials facilities; open
space and natural areas; natural water areas; row and field crops, tree crops,
nursery products; intensive livestock, poultry, pasture and grazing; animal
services; mining and quarrying.
   (g)   All uses in the SG-O and SGR-O zones.
   (1)   The Sand and Gravel Overlay zone (SG-O) is intended to be combined
with the A-N and A-X zones within the boundaries of the Cache Creek Off-Channel
Mining Plan, as defined by
Chapter 4 of Title 10 of this Code, so as to indicate land areas in which
surface mining operations may be conducted.
   (2)   The Sand and Gravel Reserve Overlay zone (SGR-O) is intended to be
combined with the A-N and A-X Zones located within the boundaries of the Off-
Channel Mining Plan as defined by
Chapter 4 of Title 10 of this Code, so as to indicate land areas in which
future surface mining operations shall be considered after 2026. The SGR
Overlay is an indication to surrounding property owners and lead agencies of
areas that are targeted by the County for future extraction after 2026. No
commercial surface mining operations shall be conducted on lands classified
with the SGR Zone. Commercial surface mining operations shall only be permitted
in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 4 of Title 10 of this Code.
   (3)   No use permit for commercial surface mining operations shall be issued
for any land which is not zoned A-N/SG-O or A-X/SG-O pursuant to this section.
All mining permits for lands zoned SG-O shall be issued in accordance with the
requirements of
Chapters 4 and
5 of Title 10 of this Code.
   (4)   Land uses incompatible with commercial surface mining operations shall
be discouraged on properties adjoining land within the SGR-O zone. Potentially
incompatible land uses include high-density residential development, low-
density residential development with high unit value, public facilities, and
intensive industrial and commercial uses. Future plans and permit approvals for
properties adjoining land within the SGR-O zone shall assess the compatibility
of the proposed use with surface mining operations and provide mitigation to
reduce potential areas of conflict, if appropriate.
   (h)   Development near the toe of any levee. Development near the toe of any
levee is restricted, see Section
8-2.306(ad).
   (i)   Approval of discretionary projects and permits within the floodplain.
Approvals of all discretionary projects and permits within the 100-year and
200-year floodplain must meet FEMA, State and local flood requirements.
Appropriate findings for discretionary projects, or ministerial residential
projects, located within the floodplain are required, see Section
8-2.306(ae).
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 681.229, eff. October 29,
2015; as amended by § 11, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24, 2016; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1490, eff. August 17, 2017; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7,
2018)
Sec. 8-2.907.   Definitions.
   See definitions of Use Types and specific examples of uses in Articles 3, 5,
6, 7, and 8.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 10: General and Special Development Standards
Sec. 8-2.1001.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for the necessary special
provisions and regulations which are not otherwise set forth in this chapter,
as well as to provide for exceptions and modifications to the provisions of
this chapter where necessary for the practical and uniform application of the
regulations of this chapter. If conflicts occur between the provisions of this
article and other provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this article
shall apply.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1002.   Area of lots.
   The minimum lot size and building site size regulations set forth in this
chapter for each particular zone shall be modified as follows:
   (a)   Where a public water supply and/or public sanitary sewer is not
accessible, the Environmental Health Services Division may establish minimum
lot size or lot area requirements for home site or new development in excess
of, or less restrictive than, those otherwise set forth in this chapter, which
requirements shall be based upon the area the Division determines to be
necessary for the adequate provision of water and sewerage in the location and
for the use requested. Under the provisions of Section 19 (Onsite Wastewater
Treatment Systems) of Title 6 (Sanitation and Health) of the County Code, the
Division has set a minimum parcel size of two acres for land use projects
located on lands that rely upon an onsite wastewater treatment system. The
Director of Environmental Health has the authority to issue variances to
provisions set forth in the ordinance.
   (b)   Any lot or parcel of land in an agricultural or residential zone
containing an area or dimension smaller than that required by the provisions of
this chapter, which lot or parcel was of record in the office of the Clerk-
Recorder on December 18, 1963, may be used as follows: one (1) single-family
dwelling may be constructed on a parcel containing less than the minimum parcel
size of the zone provided such structure complies with all the other
regulations of the zone in which it is situated and regulations of other County
departments, including water and sewerage requirements, and regulations of
State or Federal agencies that have jurisdiction over the development.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7,
2018)
Sec. 8-2.1003.   Front yards.
   The following modifications shall apply to the front yard regulations set
forth in this chapter for each particular zone:
   (a)   On a lot in any residential zone which adjoins a developed lot on
which the front yard is less than that required for the particular zone, the
required front yard may be reduced to the average of the established front yard
on the adjoining lot and the front yard otherwise required in such zone.
   (b)   On a lot in any residential zone which has frontage on the turnaround
portion of a cul-de-sac street, the front yard need not exceed twenty (20’)
feet on the portion of such frontage which is radial to the center point of the
turnaround.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1004.   Height regulations.
   The maximum height limitation regulations set forth in this chapter for each
particular zone shall be modified as follows:
   (a)   In any zone, other than the Agricultural Intensive Zone (A-N), the
Agricultural Extensive Zone (A-X), the Agricultural Commercial Zone (A-C), the
Agricultural Industrial Zone (A-I), the Agricultural Residential Zone (A-R),
the Airport Overlay Zone (A-O), and other than properties adjacent to an A-
O zone within a designated aviation safety zone and/or which are regulated by
an applicable airport master or land use plan, the following structures may
extend not more than thirty (30) feet above the height limits set forth in such
zone; provided, however, applicable State and Federal regulations shall govern
wherever conflicts occur: chimneys, church spires, flagpoles, monuments,
windmill water pumps under 35 feet in height, water towers, fire and hose
towers, observation towers, distribution lines and poles, communication
equipment buildings, smokestacks, television towers, radar towers, masts,
aerials, television antennas, outdoor theater screens (provided such screens
contain no advertising matter other than the name of the theater), equipment
penthouses and cooling towers, grain elevators, farm equipment and storage
barns, silos, and gas holders.
   (b)   In the Agricultural Intensive Zone (A-N), the Agricultural Extensive
Zone (A-X), the Agricultural Commercial Zone (A-C), the Agricultural Industrial
Zone (A-I), and the Agricultural Residential Zone (A-R), there shall be no
height limits, except for residential uses and small wind energy systems, as
specified in Section
8-2.1103, respectively.
   (c)   Upon the approval of a Use Permit by the Planning Commission, the
structures set forth in Subsection (a) of this section and all structures
normally permitted in such zones may be permitted to further exceed the height
limits for the particular zone when the Planning Commission finds that such
additional height is necessary for the normal operation of a permitted use and
will not be injurious to neighboring properties or detrimental to the public
health, safety, and welfare.
   (d)   Churches, schools, and other permitted public and semi-public
buildings may exceed the height limits of the zone in which they are located in
accordance with the terms and conditions of an approved Use Permit.
   (e)   In any zone, other than the Airport Overlay Zone (A-O), public utility
transmission lines may exceed the height limits of the zone in which they are
located.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 12, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-2.1005.   Fences and walls, hedges, and trees.
   (a)   Fences, walls and hedges may be located anywhere on a property in
Residential (R) Zones up to a maximum height of seven (7) feet, except as noted
herein:
   (1)   Within the front yard setback, they do not exceed three (3) feet in
height for a distance of four (4) feet from the sidewalk or edge of pavement,
to provide site distance for cars backing into the roadway from the driveway.
   (2)   One (1) foot of lattice may be added to any three (3) foot front yard
fence provided that the lattice is at least fifty (50) percent open.
   (3)   Within the front yard setback, they do not exceed six (6) feet in
height, if they are located behind the ten (10) foot setback in the front yard
of an interior lot and at the fifteen (15) foot setback in the front yard on a
corner lot. The height of the fence or wall should be reduced in height in
increments between the ten (10) (or fifteen (15)) foot setback and the four (4)
foot setback required by Subsection (1), above.
   (4)   On a corner lot, a fence, wall or hedge over three (3) feet in height,
measured from the curb gutter grade, shall not be located in a triangular area
measured twenty-five (25) feet along the inside face of the sidewalk in either
direction from the sidewalk intersection. Where no sidewalk exists, the
measurement shall be made along the right-of-way line.
   (5)   On a corner lot, if not exceeding six (6) feet in height and set back
a minimum of ten (10) feet from the property line, they may be located along
the street side yard. At such height, they may extend along the rear yard
portion of the lot as well as the length of the house on the street side yard
until they meet the triangular area described in Subsection (3), above.
   (6)   Atrium and courtyard walls located outside the required yards may
exceed six (6) feet in height through approval of a Site Plan Review
application.
   (7)   The Planning Director may modify the maximum heights of fences, walls,
and hedges as set forth in this section, as long as it is found that the size,
shape, topography, location of the site, or orientation of structures on
adjacent properties justifies such modification, and the property where the
fencing or landscaping is modified will not cause detriment to the surrounding
neighborhood nor a safety hazard for the use of adjacent properties or
roadways.
   (b)   Where trees are located within twenty (20) feet of intersected street
lines, the main trunks of such trees shall be trimmed free of branches to a
height of seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet above the curb grade.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1006.   Landscaping.
   All applications that are accompanied with plans for lawn and landscaped
areas shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 3 of this title, the Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1007.   Nonconforming Buildings and Uses.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to permit the continued
operation of existing uses and buildings which do not otherwise conform to the
provisions of this chapter, while guarding against such uses becoming a threat
to more appropriate development, and to provide for the eventual elimination of
uses likely to be most objectionable to the neighbors of such uses.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
   Nonconforming building
   “Nonconforming building” shall mean a building or structure, or portion
thereof, which lawfully existed prior to the adoption of the zoning regulations
on November 18, 1963, or a subsequent amendment to this chapter, but which, as
a result of such adoption or amendment, does not conform to all the height and
area regulations of the zone in which it is located or which is so designed,
erected, or altered that it could not reasonably be occupied by a use permitted
in the zone in which it is located.
   Nonconforming use
   “Nonconforming use” shall mean a use which lawfully occupied a building or
land prior to the adoption of the zoning regulations on November 18, 1963, or a
subsequent amendment to this chapter, and which, as a result of such adoption
or amendment, does not conform with the use regulations of the zone in which it
is located.
   (c)   Continuing existing buildings and uses. Except as otherwise provided
in this chapter, any use of land, buildings, or structures which is legally
nonconforming due to the adoption of the zoning regulations on November 18,
1963, or a subsequent amendment to the zoning regulations contained in this
chapter, may be continued. Except as provided for in this section, no use of
land, buildings, or structures shall be enlarged, expanded, or intensified in
any manner.
   (d)    Continuing conditional uses. Any use lawfully existing at the time of
the adoption of the zoning regulations on November 18, 1963, or a subsequent
amendment to this chapter, shall be and remain a nonconforming use, and in no
case shall such use be enlarged, expanded, or intensified in any manner until a
Use Permit has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   (e)   Repair of unsafe or unsanitary buildings. The provisions of this
chapter shall not prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition
any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the Planning, Public
Works and Environmental Services Department or declared unsanitary by the
Health Department.
   (f)   Replacement of damaged or destroyed nonconforming buildings. Any
nonconforming building or structure damaged by fire, flood, explosion, wind,
earthquake, war, riot, or other calamity or act of God may be restored or
reconstructed; provided, however, such repair or reconstruction shall conform
to the applicable Building Codes, including FEMA requirements and local
ordinances regulating development in a flood zone, in effect at the date of
such restoration or reconstruction and without change to a nonconforming use,
should such exist.
   (g)   Reconstruction and enlargement of certain nonconforming dwellings. The
provisions of this chapter shall not prevent the reconstruction or enlargement
of any single family dwelling located in any zone on any lot or parcel
containing an area or dimension smaller than that required by the provisions of
this chapter, which area or dimension existed or exists at the time of the
imposition of such area or dimension regulation; provided, however, any such
reconstruction or enlargement shall comply with all the other regulations of
the zone in which it is situated.
   (h)   Extension of nonconforming uses and buildings. Upon an application for
a Use Permit, the Planning Commission may permit the extension of a
nonconforming use throughout those parts of a building, which parts were
manifestly designed or arranged for such use prior to the date such use of the
building became nonconforming, if no structural alterations, except those
required by law, are made therein.
   (i)   Changes to other nonconforming uses. Upon an application for a Use
Permit, the Planning Commission may permit the substitution of one
nonconforming use for another nonconforming use which is determined by the
Planning Commission to be of the same or more restrictive nature. Whenever a
nonconforming use has been changed to a more restrictive use or conforming use,
such more restrictive use or conforming use shall not thereafter be changed
back to a less restrictive use or to a nonconforming use.
   (j)   Cessation of uses. For the purposes of this section, a use shall be
deemed to have ceased when it has been discontinued, either temporarily or
permanently, whether with the intent to abandon such use or not, for a
continuous time period of twelve (12) months or more.
   (k)   Cessation of uses of buildings designed for nonconforming uses. A
building or structure which was designed for a use which does not conform to
the provisions of this chapter and which is occupied by a nonconforming use
shall not again be used for nonconforming purposes when such use has ceased for
a period of twenty-four (24) months or more.
   (l)   Cessation of uses of buildings designed for conforming uses. A
building or structure which was designed for a use which conforms to the
provisions of this chapter but which is occupied by a nonconforming use shall
not again be used for nonconforming purposes when such use has ceased for a
period of twelve (12) months or more.
   (m)   Cessation of nonconforming uses of land. Land on which there is a
nonconforming use not involving any building or structure, except minor
structures, including buildings containing less than three hundred (300) square
feet of gross floor area, fences, and signs, where such use has ceased for six
(6) months or more shall not again be used for nonconforming purposes, and such
nonconforming use of land shall be discontinued, and the nonconforming
buildings or structures shall be removed from the premises within twelve (12)
months after the first date of nonconformity.
   (n)   Cessation of nonconforming junk yards. Regardless of any other
provision of this chapter, no junk yard which exists as a nonconforming use in
any zone shall continue as provided in this section for nonconforming uses
unless such junk yard, within one (1) year after the junk yard has become a
nonconforming use, shall be completely enclosed within an existing building or
otherwise within a continuous solid fence not less than eight (8) feet nor more
than twelve (12) feet in height or equivalent continuous hedgerow screening.
The operation shall be conducted in such a manner as to be substantially
screened at all times by the building, fence, or hedgerow. Plans for the
required fence or hedgerow shall meet the approval of the Planning Director.
All other provisions of this section shall apply to any nonconforming junk
yard.
   (o)   Construction approved prior to November 18, 1963. The provisions of
this chapter shall not require any change in the overall layout, plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any development, buildings, or
structure, or part thereof, where official and valid approvals and required
building permits have been granted prior to November 18, 1963, the construction
of which development, building, or structure, conforming with such plans, shall
have been started prior to December 18, 1963, and carried on in the normal
manner to completion within the subsequent one (1) year period.
   (p)   Expansion of legal nonconforming residential buildings. Where an
existing single family dwelling unit in the Residential Low Density (R-L) zone
is legally nonconforming by reason of off-street parking and/or substandard
yard setbacks, it may be enlarged or expanded so long as the improvement does
not result in a further encroachment into a required parking area or yard.
   (q)   Expansion of legal nonconforming single-family dwellings and duplexes.
Where an existing single-family dwelling or duplex in any of the residential
zones is nonconforming by reason of off-street parking and/or substandard yard
setbacks, it may be enlarged or expanded so long as the improvement does not
result in a greater encroachment into an existing required parking area or
yard.
   (r)   Densities greater than one per lot. Dwellings constructed prior to
March 18, 1986, in densities greater than one (1) per lot may be expanded or
repaired provided the improvement does not result in an encroachment into a
required parking area or yard.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 12, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-2.1008.   Outdoor storage in residential zones.
   (a)   Outdoor storage prohibited. No outdoor storage, as defined in this
section, shall be conducted on any parcel within the Rural Residential one acre
(RR-2), Residential Low (R-L), Residential Medium (R-M), Residential High (R-H)
zone, except as otherwise authorized by this section.
   (b)   Outdoor storage defined. For the purposes of this section, “outdoor
storage” shall mean the physical presence of any personal property not fully
enclosed within a structure. “Outdoor storage” shall mean and include, but not
be limited to, the following:
   (1)   Inoperable motor vehicles and farm, commercial, and industrial
equipment of all types;
   (2)   Inoperable or unlicensed recreational vehicles;
   (3)   Junk, imported waste, and discarded or salvaged materials;
   (4)   Dismantled vehicles and vehicle parts, including commercial and
industrial farm machinery, or parts thereof, tires, and batteries;
   (5)   Scrap metal, including salvaged structural steel;
   (6)   Salvaged lumber and building materials;
   (7)   Salvaged commercial or industrial trade fixtures;
   (8)   Operable or inoperable industrial or commercial equipment or tools,
except commercial vehicles as defined in Section
8-2.1314 of Article 13 of this chapter;
   (9)   New building materials and supplies for any project for which no
building permit has been issued;
   (10)   New or used furniture and/or appliances;
   (11)   Bottles, cans, and paper;
   (12)   Boxes, cable spools, and packing crates; and
   (13)   All other miscellaneous personal property not excluded by Subsection
(c) of this section.
   (c)   Exclusions. Outdoor storage as defined by Subsection (b) of this
section shall exclude the following:
   (1)   The parking of operable motor vehicles, including passenger vehicles,
commercial vehicles, and recreational vehicles, in compliance with Article 13
of this chapter; and
   (2)   The storage of residential building materials and supplies which are
needed to construct a project on the parcel for which a building permit has
been issued.
   (d)   Regulations regarding outdoor storage.
   (1)   The maximum area on any parcel within which outdoor storage shall be
allowed shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.
   (2)   Such storage areas shall be screened from view by the public and
adjoining residents by a fence which meets the height regulations of this
article and which in fact screens the view of the storage area.
   (3)   The materials stored within the storage area shall not exceed the
height of the fence.
   (4)   Such storage areas shall not be located in a required front yard
setback.
   (e)   Violations and penalties. Any violation of this section shall
constitute an infraction, punishable as provided by Section 25132 of the
Government Code of the State. Four (4) or more violations by any person during
the preceding twelve (12) months shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7,
2018)
Sec. 8-2.1009.   Public utility lines and structures.
   (a)   Lines. With the exception of lines associated with major electrical
transmission and distribution projects, local public utility communication and
gas and electrical power distribution and transmission lines, both overhead and
underground, shall be permitted in all zones without the necessity of first
obtaining a use permit or site plan approval. The routes of all proposed
utility transmission lines, except communication transmission lines for local
service purposes, shall be submitted to the Commission for recommendation prior
to the acquisition of rights-of-way therefor.
   (b)   Structures. Communication equipment buildings and electric power
distribution substations shall be permitted in all zones, subject to first
obtaining a use permit, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter. As a
condition of the issuance of such permit, the Commission may require screening,
landscaping, and/or architectural conformity to the neighborhood. Other
structures associated with major electrical transmission and distribution
projects, such as poles and towers, shall be subject to Subsection (c), below.
   (c)   Major Electrical Transmission and Distribution Projects. A use permit
requirement applies to all major electrical transmission and distribution
projects. Such projects are not allowed in any zone where they are not
identified as a conditional use. Section
8-2.1106 of this chapter governs those projects, and sets forth various
standards and requirements for applications, permit review, and related
matters. In some cases, State and Federal laws may regulate certain types of
characteristics of these projects. This section shall be construed to provide
the County with the maximum control consistent with such other laws.
   (d)   New Development. Underground utilities shall be required in all new
development within unincorporated communities, where feasible.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1010.   Projections into yards and courts.
   Certain architectural features may extend from a main building into required
yards or courts as follows:
   (a)   Cornices, canopies, and eaves may extend beyond the front wall and/or
rear wall a distance not exceeding three (3) feet.
   (b)   Open, unenclosed outside stairways may extend beyond the front wall
and/or rear wall a distance not exceeding four (4) feet six (6) inches.
   (c)   Uncovered landings and necessary steps may extend beyond the front
wall and/or rear wall a distance not exceeding six (6) feet; provided, however,
such landing and steps shall not extend above the entrance floor of the
building except for a railing which does not exceed three (3) feet in height.
   (d)   Bay windows and chimneys may extend beyond the front wall and/or rear
wall a distance not exceeding three (3) feet.
   (e)   Such architectural features may also extend into any side yard a
distance of not more than three (3) feet.
   (f)   Accessory structures attached to dwellings, consisting of patio
covers, sunshades, and similar structures, may extend into required rear yards
provided the following conditions are satisfied:
   (1)   No part of the structure shall be located within ten (10) feet of the
rear lot line.
   (2)   The structure shall be unenclosed on three (3) sides except for the
following:
   (i)   Required vertical supports;
   (ii)   Insect screening; and
   (iii)   Kickboards not exceeding one (1) foot in height as measured from the
ground level.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1011.   Pools.
   Any pool, pond, lake, or open tank not located within a completely enclosed
building and containing, or normally capable of containing, water to a depth at
any point greater than eighteen (18) inches, when used as a private swimming
pool in any zone, shall comply with the following requirements:
   (a)   Such pools shall be used solely for the enjoyment of the occupants of
the premises on which they are located and their guests and not for instruction
or parties when fees are paid therefor, unless a Use Permit is first obtained.
   (b)   Such pools shall be located on the rear one-half (1/2) of the lot or
not less than fifty (50) feet from the front property line.
   (c)   Such pools shall maintain the side and rear yards required for
accessory buildings but in no case shall be closer than five (5’) feet from any
lot line nor cover more than forty (40) percent of any required rear yard.
   (d)   Lot coverage by a swimming pool shall not be considered in measuring
the maximum lot coverage for buildings.
   (e)   Filter and heating systems for swimming pools shall not be located:
   (1)   Within any required yard adjacent to a public street; or
   (2)   Within three (3) feet of a side or rear property line; or
   (3)   Within ten (10) feet from the living area of any dwelling unit on an
adjacent parcel, unless enclosed in a soundproof enclosure.
   (f)   Fencing and barrier requirements set forth in Yolo County Code Section
7-1.04(h).
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1012.   Commercial coaches.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definition shall
apply:
   “Commercial coach” shall mean “commercial coach” as defined in Section
18001.8 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California. This section
shall apply to the use of commercial coaches or modular offices where the
intent is to locate the coach at the same site for more than six (6) months.
Temporary uses of mobile homes and commercial coaches are governed by Section
8-2.1013 of this article.
   (b)   Permanent commercial coaches are allowed through the issuance of a
Site Plan Review in the following zones, provided that the proposed use of the
coach is an allowed or permitted use in the zone in which it is located:
   (1)   Agricultural Intensive (A-N) zone;
   (2)   Agricultural Extensive (A-X) zone;
   (3)   Agricultural Commercial (A-C) zone;
   (4)   Agricultural Industrial (A-I) zone;
   (5)   Light Industrial (I-L) zone;
   (6)   Heavy Industrial (I-H) zone;
   (7)   Parks and Recreation (P-R) zone;
   (8)    Public Open Space (POS) zone; and
   (9)   Public and Quasi-Public (PQP) zone.
   (c)   Permanent commercial coaches shall meet the following development
standards:
   (1)   The commercial coach shall be constructed on a permanent foundation
which meets the requirements of all agencies with jurisdiction.
   (2)   The elevation of the floor shall be the same as other commercial
structures in the area.
   (3)   The commercial coach shall be covered with exterior siding materials
and of colors which are consistent with other structures in the area.
   (4)   If the commercial coach is placed on an elevated foundation, the
exterior siding shall extend to the ground.
   (5)   The roof line and overhang shall be consistent with other structures
in the area.
   (6)   The commercial coach shall have a covered and/or recessed entrance.
   (7)   Handicapped ramps shall be required in accordance with the provisions
of the Uniform Building Code.
   (8)   Landscaping shall be required around the perimeter of the commercial
coach.
   (9)   Building components, such as windows, doors, caves, and parapets,
shall be consistent with other structures in the area.
   (10)   Mechanical equipment on the roof, ground, or building shall be
screened from the public view with materials harmonious with the structure or
shall be located so as not to be viewed from public ways.
   (11)   Refuse and waste removal areas shall be screened from view from
public ways with materials harmonious with the building.
   (12)   Utility services shall be underground.
   (d)   The Zoning Administrator may waive or modify any of the conditions set
forth in Subsection (c) of this section where the Administrator finds that
compliance with such conditions is unnecessary to achieve compatibility of the
commercial coach or modular office with surrounding land uses.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1013.   Manufactured or mobile homes and trailers.
   (a)   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall
apply:
   “Mobile home” shall mean a structure used as semi-permanent housing and
designed for human habitation, with or without a permanent foundation and can
be transported by a motor vehicle. For the purposes of this section, mobile
homes shall be considered structures when such mobile homes are parked in a
mobile home park. “Mobile home” includes “trailers” that are used for habitable
purposes, whether temporary or permanent.
   “Trailer” shall mean any vehicle without motive power or designed to be
drawn by a motor vehicle and to be used in such a manner as to permit temporary
occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters, or the conduct of any business, trade,
or occupation, or use as a selling or advertising device, or use for the
storage or conveyance of tools, equipment, or machinery, and so designed that
it is mounted on wheels and may be used as a conveyance on highways and
streets. “Trailer” shall include the terms “camp trailer”, “trailer coach”,
“automobile trailer”, and “house trailer” except when “house trailer” falls
within the definition of “mobile home”. For the purposes of this chapter,
trailers shall be considered structures when such trailers are parked in mobile
home parks or trailer camps and are used on such sites for human habitation,
offices, wash houses, storage, or similar auxiliary services necessary to the
human habitation of the court or camp.
   (b)   In addition to any other requirements set forth in this chapter, the
use of mobile homes and the operation of mobile home parks shall be governed by
the sanitary regulations and building regulations prescribed by the State of
California and/or Yolo County, together with all amendments thereto
subsequently adopted and as may otherwise be required by law.
   (c)   Manufactured or mobile homes may be located on individual lots and
temporarily or permanently used as substitutes for “stick built” residences in
the agricultural zones, and in other zones if the home is an allowed or
permitted use, subject to the following development standards:
   (1)   The mobile home or office meets all other development standards of
this chapter, including the agricultural home siting standards contained in
Section
8-2.402 and all setback and other standards for the zone in which it is
located.
   (2)   The mobile home shall have a floor area of sufficient size to be
compatible with existing dwellings in the area.
   (3)   Approved mobile home skirting shall be applied around the base of the
mobile home so as to obscure the area beneath the unit. Wood skirting located
nearer than six (6) inches to the earth shall be treated wood or wood of
natural resistance to decay and termites as defined in the most current edition
of the Uniform Building Code, or any amendment thereto. Metal skirting shall be
galvanized or treated metal or metal resistant to corrosion.
   (4)   The mobile home, its installation and facilities, any permanent
buildings, and any mobile home accessory buildings and structures shall be
governed by the standards adopted by the California Department of Housing and
Community Development, and said provisions shall govern the maintenance, use,
and occupancy of such mobile homes.
   (d)   A mobile home, trailer, or commercial coach may be used as a temporary
dwelling or office in any zone, pending the construction of a permanent
dwelling or office on the same lot or lots, after obtaining a building permit
for the construction of the permanent dwelling or office subject to the
following development standards:
   (1)   The mobile home or commercial coach shall not be located on the same
site for more than six (6) months, except as otherwise provided in this
subsection.
   (2)   Such six (6) months period shall commence on the issuance of the
building permit and shall automatically and immediately terminate should the
building permit become void.
   (3)   The Chief Building Official Inspector may renew the same for one
additional six (6) months period provided he or she determines that substantial
progress has been made in the construction and that it is reasonable and
probable that the structure will be completed within one additional six (6)
months’ period.
   (4)   Such mobile home or commercial coach shall not be installed on a
foundation.
   (e)   In the zones wherein the sale of new or used mobile homes is a
permitted or conditional use, one (1) mobile home may be used as an office in
conjunction with the sales. Such use shall be considered accessory to the
principal use of the site.
   (f)   Trailers or commercial coaches, with no permanent foundation or
structure, may be used by watchmen employed for the protection of the principal
permitted use when located in industrial or public and open space zones, on, or
adjacent to, the parcel occupied for the principal permitted use, subject to
the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1014.   Mobile Home Parks.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definition shall
apply: “Mobile home park” shall mean any area or tract of land where one or
more mobile home sites are rented or held out for rent. “Mobile home park”
shall include the terms “mobile home court”, “trailer court”, and “trailer
park”.
   (b)   Mobile home parks are permitted through the issuance of a Major Use
Permit in the residential (R-L, R-M, and R-H) zones where they are allowed,
although new parks are encouraged to apply for a Planned Development rezoning.
New mobile parks may be allowed in other urban, non-agricultural zones through
a Planned Development rezoning, provided the park is proposed on lands with
access to public services (water, sewer) within an established community.
Mobile home parks shall meet the development standards outlined in this
section, unless modified through a Planned Development zone, in addition to any
conditions which may be imposed by a Use Permit.
   (c)   The minimum mobile home park area shall be five (5) acres and the
minimum number of sites shall be fifty (50). The Planning Commission may modify
the provisions of this requirement to develop mobile home parks with a minimum
park area of one and one-half (1½) acres provided all the other standards set
forth in this section are complied with.
   (d)   No more than one (1) single-family mobile home may be placed on a
mobile home space. No occupied travel trailer, camper, or recreational vehicle
shall be allowed on any approved mobile home space except as provided for in
Subsection (s)(3), below.
   (e)   The minimum space area, and minimum space width, for each mobile home
shall be:
   (1)   Two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet, and forty (40) feet
wide, for single wide mobile homes.
   (2)   Three thousand four hundred (3,400) square feet, and fifty (50) feet
wide, for double wide mobile homes.
   (3)   Four thousand four hundred (4,400) square feet, and sixty (60) feet
wide, for triple wide mobile homes.
   (f)   The mobile home and accessory structures shall not cover more than
sixty-five (65) percent of the space area.
   (g)   The minimum yard setbacks for individual spaces shall be five (5) feet
on all sides, except for any side or rear yard abutting the project property
line, in which case the minimum yard setback shall be ten (10) feet.
   (h)   Spaces beneath mobile homes shall be enclosed with architecturally
harmonizing skirts or by a combination of skirts, decks and grading with
ventilation and access in accordance with State law.
   (i)   The maximum height of the mobile homes shall be twenty (20) feet, and
the maximum height of any accessory use structures shall be two (2) stories or
thirty (30) feet maximum, whichever is less.
   (j)   Each mobile home shall be provided with one (1) or more occupant
parking space(s) which may be tandem spaces. For every five (5) spaces within
the park, one (1) visitor parking space shall be provided by the park owner/
operator.
   (k)   Separate recreational vehicle parking spaces shall be provided. RV
parking spaces shall be centralized in lots and fenced for security and each
space shall be a minimum of ten (10) by twenty (20) feet.
   (l)   The park shall include a twenty (20) foot buffer strip along all
streets or roadways adjoining the park, which shall be landscaped and into
which no mobile homes or parking spaces shall be placed. The buffer strip shall
be street side of any perimeter park fencing required.
   (m)   At least fifteen (15) percent of the total park area or seven hundred
(700) square feet per space, whichever is less, shall be devoted to
recreational areas and facilities, excluding any buffer strip. Use of such
facilities shall be limited to park residents. All recreational areas and
facilities shall be completed prior to park occupancy, except as approved by
the Planning Commission in a phasing program. No recreation area shall be less
than three thousand (3,000) square feet in area and total recreation area for
any park shall not be less than six thousand (6,000) square feet in area. For
parks with children, a tot lot of a minimum twelve hundred (1,200) square feet
in area equipped with play apparatus shall be provided for each twenty-five
(25) spaces.
   (n)   All streets shall be designed by a registered civil engineer and paved
with asphaltic concrete to not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width if no
car parking is permitted; and to not less than thirty-two (32) feet in width if
car parking is permitted on one side and forty (40) feet in width if car
parking is permitted on both sides. Roads may be divided into separate adjacent
one-way traffic lanes by a curbed divider if each lane is not less than fifteen
(15) feet in clear width; if car parking is proposed, each lane shall be
increased in width by seven (7) feet.
   (o)   All utility distribution facilities serving individual mobile home
spaces shall be placed underground. The park owner is responsible for complying
with the requirements of this subsection and shall make the necessary
arrangements with each of the serving utilities for the installation of such
facilities. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed
ducts, and other necessary appurtenant structures may be placed above ground.
Water and sewer distribution facilities shall be installed in conformance with
applicable utility specifications. All mobile home spaces must be served with
water, electricity, telephone and cable lines.
   (p)   All mobile home park applications shall include a landscaping plan for
open space and recreational areas.
   (q)   A mobile home park shall be allowed up to fifty (50) square feet of
sign area visible from external roadways and adjoining property. Signs shall be
limited to:
   (1)   One (1) freestanding sign and one (1) wall sign.
   (2)   No single sign shall exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area.
   (3)   The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be six (6) feet.
   (4)   A freestanding sign located in the mobile home park buffer strip.
   (r)   The following accessory uses are permitted in a mobile home park:
   (1)   Accessory uses permitted by right through issuance of a building
permit include uses that serve park residents and are not available for use by
the general public, such as coin operated machines for laundry, soft drinks,
and similar uses.
   (2)   Accessory uses permitted subject to first obtaining a Site Plan Review
include a management facility or office; recreational facilities or clubhouses;
a common car wash; storage facilities; a single family residence for the
manager which may also be used in part as an office; and the operation of a
business or occupation for the purpose of mobile home sales.
   (3)   Accessory uses permitted subject to first obtaining a Minor Use Permit
include permanent or transient recreational vehicle spaces, and associated
uses.
   (s)   The owner or operator of the mobile home park shall be responsible for
maintaining compliance with all sections of County, State, and other pertinent
laws and regulations pertaining to the use, operation, and maintenance of such
mobile home park. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to
abrogate, void or minimize such other pertinent regulations.
   (t)   The owner or operator shall have a resident manager on duty at all
times who shall be responsible for such compliance in the absence of the owner
or operator.
   (u)   It shall be the responsibility of the park owner to see that the
common landscaped areas are well-kept and maintained.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1015.   Massage therapy services.
   “Massage Therapy Services,” as defined and regulated by the Massage Therapy
Act (Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code), are an
allowed use in any of the zoning districts subject to issuance of a business
license and a Use Permit, depending on the size of the business.
   (a)   Independent contractors and sole providers, including those
individuals that provide outcall services or provide services as a home
occupation, within the unincorporated area, shall secure and maintain a
business license at all times.
   (b)   Massage therapy services which are provided by a business
establishment at a physical location, or through an outcall service, and employ
more than a single therapist, shall acquire a Minor Use Permit, or Major Use
Permit, at the discretion of the Planning Director.
(§ 12, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24, 2016)
Article 11: Energy and Telecommunications Development Standards
Sec. 8-2.1101.   Co-generation facilities.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish permit
requirements and development standards for co-generation energy facilities in
the unincorporated area of Yolo County.
   (b)   Definitions.
   Co-generation
   “Co-generation” means the production of electricity using waste heat (as in
steam) from an industrial process or the use of steam from electric power
generation as a source of heat.
   Co-generation facility
   “Co-generation facility” shall mean a facility which involves the generation
of more than five hundred (500) kilowatts of power.
   Co-generation facility, small
   “Small co-generation facility” shall mean a facility which involves the
generation of five hundred (500) kilowatts of power or less and does not create
secondary uses on the site.
   (c)   Permits required.
   (1)   Construction of a co-generation facility located on lands zoned for
agricultural uses (including the Agricultural Intensive (A-N) zone, the
Agricultural Extensive (A-X) zone, the Agricultural Commercial (A-C) zone, and
the Agricultural Industrial (A-I) zone), and on lands zoned for industrial uses
(including the Heavy Industrial (I-H) and the Light Industrial (I-L) zone, but
not in the Office Park/Research and Development (OPRD) zone), may be approved
through the issuance of a Major Use Permit by the Planning Commission.
   (2)   Construction of a small co-generation facility located on properties
zoned for agricultural and industrial uses may be approved through the issuance
of a Minor Use Permit by the Zoning Administrator.
   (d)   Findings. Co-generation facilities of any size shall be approved in
agricultural zones only if they are located so as to preserve as much land in
agricultural production as possible, in addition to complying with all other
requirements for issuance of a Use Permit.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1102.   Wireless telecommunication facilities.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement permit
requirements and development standards for wireless telecommunication
facilities in the unincorporated area of Yolo County.
   (b)   Definitions.
   Eligible facilities request
   “Eligible facilities request” shall mean any request for modification of an
existing permitted tower or base station that does not substantially change the
physical dimension of the tower or base station, involving: (1) colocation of
new transmission equipment; (2) removal of transmission equipment; or (3)
replacement of transmission equipment.
   Radio
   Radio is a generic term for communication of sound, data, or energy by means
of electromagnetic wave propagation. For regulatory purposes “radio” includes
the popular terms “television” and “microwave”. The term “wireless” is
interchangeable with “radio.”
   Section 6409(a) modification
   “Section 6409(a) modification” shall mean any eligible facilities request
pursuant to Section 6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of
2012 (“Spectrum Act”), which mandates that a local government approve certain
wireless broadband facilities siting requests for modifications and colocations
of wireless transmission equipment on an existing tower or base station that do
not result in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of the tower or
base station.
   Wireless facility modification, substantial change
   A “substantial change to a wireless facility” shall be as defined by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in Title 47 Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR) Section 1.6100(b)(7), including the following:
   (i)   An increase in the height of a permitted tower, that is not in the
public right of way, by more than ten percent (10%) or by the height of one (1)
additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not
to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater; or, an increase in the height
of a permitted support structure by more than ten percent (10%) or more than
ten (10) feet, whichever is greater.
   (ii)   Adding an appurtenance to the body of a permitted tower, that is not
in the public right of way, that would protrude from the edge of the tower more
than twenty (20) feet or more than the width of the tower structure at the
level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; or, adding an appurtenance to
the body of a permitted structure that would protrude from the edge of the
structure by more than six (6) feet.
   (iii)   Installation of more than the standard number of new equipment
cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four (4) cabinets; or, for
permitted towers and base stations in the public right of way, installation of
any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no existing ground
cabinets associated with the structure or installation of ground cabinets that
are more than ten percent (10%) larger in height or overall volume than any
other ground cabinets associated with the structure.
   (iv)   Excavation or deployment outside of the permitted facility site; for
permitted towers not in the public right of way any excavation or deployment of
transmission equipment outside of the current site by more than thirty (30)
feet in any direction (measurement excludes existing access or utility
easements related to the site).
   (v)   Modifications that would defeat the concealment elements of the
permitted support structure.
   (vi)   The modification does not comply with conditions associated with the
siting approval of the construction or modification of the permitted facility.
   Wireless telecommunication facility
   “Wireless telecommunication facility” shall mean an un-staffed facility for
the transmission and reception of radio signals, including, but not limited to
cellular radiotelephone service facilities, specialized mobile radio service
facilities, microwave service facilities, broadband Internet service,
communication towers, personal communication service facilities, and commercial
paging service facilities.   
   Wireless telecommunication facility, attached
   “Attached wireless telecommunication facility” shall mean a
telecommunication facility that is attached to an existing permitted structure
whose tower height is no more than eighty (80) feet.
   Wireless telecommunication facility, small
   “Small wireless telecommunication facility” shall mean a telecommunication
facility whose tower height is no more than eighty (80) feet.
   Wireless telecommunication facility, large
   “Large wireless telecommunication facility” shall mean one whose tower
height is greater than eighty (80) feet.
   (c)   Permits required.
   (1)   Construction of a wireless telecommunication facility may be approved
in the
following zoning districts, provided the facility meets setback requirements
and other standards, as provided in Section 8-2.1102(e), below, as shown in
Table 8-2.1102.
      Table 8-2.1102
      Allowed Wireless Telecommunications Facility Uses and Permit Requirements
A =           Land Use Permit Required by Zone
Allowed
use,
subject to
zoning
clearance
SP = Site
Plan                                                               Specific Use
Review     A-N, A-X,   RR-5, RR-2, C-L, C-G, I-L, I-H, PQP POS, P- Requirements
UP (m) =   A-I A-C, A- R-L, R-M,   DMX, C-H  OPRD      R           or
Minor Use  R           R-H                                         Performance
Permit                                                             Standards
UP (M) =
Major Use
Permit
N = Use
Not
Allowed
A = Allowed use,     Land Use Permit Required by Zone
subject to zoning
clearance
SP = Site Plan                                                     Specific Use
Review            A-N, A-X, RR-5, RR-                              Requirements
UP (m) = Minor    A-I A-C,  2, R-L,   C-L, C-G, I-L, I-H, PQP POS, or
Use Permit        A-R       R-M, R-H  DMX, C-H  OPRD      P-R      Performance
UP (M) = Major                                                     Standards
Use Permit
N = Use Not
Allowed
Wireless Telecommunication Facility
                                                                   20-ac
                                                                   minimum in
Small                                                              agricultural
telecommunication                                                  zones 2-ac
facility (up to   SP        UP(m)     UP(m)     UP(m)     UP(m)    minimum in
80 ft on min                                                       all other
parcel sizes) (a)                                                  zones
                                                                   See Sec. 8-
                                                                   2.1102(e)
Small
telecommunication
facility (up to                                                    See Sec. 8-
80 ft if min      UP(m)     UP(M)     UP(M)     UP(M)     UP(M)    2.1102(e)
parcel size
cannot be met)
(b)
Large
telecommunication UP(m)     N         N         UP(m)     UP(m)
facility (>80 ft
on 40 ac or more)
Large
telecommunication UP(M)     N         N         UP(M)     UP(M)    See Sec. 8-
facility (>80 ft                                                   2.1102(e)
<40ac)
Attached
telecommunication A         UP(m)     SP        A         SP
facility (up to
80 ft)
                                                                   See
Eligible                                                           definition
facilities        A         A         A         A         A        in Sec. 8-
request                                                            2.1102(b)
                                                                   and Sec. 8-
                                                                   2.1102(f)
 
(a)   Must meet parcel size requirements: 20 acres or more in agricultural
zones, 2 acres or more in all other zones
(b)   Minor Use Permit required in the agricultural zones on parcels less than
20 acres, Major Use Permit required in all other zones on parcels less than 2
acres
   (2)   Construction of a small wireless telecommunication facility on rural
lands zoned for agricultural uses may be approved through the issuance of a
Site Plan Review approval by staff, provided the facility is located on a
parcel twenty (20) acres or more in size.
   (3)   If an application for a proposed small wireless telecommunication
facility in the agricultural zones fails to meet the minimum parcel size or any
of the specific development standards set forth in Section 8-2.1102(e), below,
the application shall be referred to the Zoning Administrator for a hearing and
decision to issue a Minor Use Permit.
   (4)   Construction of a wireless telecommunication facility that is attached
to an existing structure (such as a barn on rural lands zoned for agricultural
uses or a warehouse on lands zoned for industrial uses), regardless of the size
of the parcel, may be approved with the issuance of a building permit only,
provided the overall height of the tower is no more than eighty (80) feet.
   (5)   An attached telecommunication facility may be permitted in the
commercial and public and open space zones through Site Plan Review approval so
long as the overall tower height is no more than eighty (80) feet.
   (6)   If an application for a small telecommunication facility is proposed
in the residential, commercial, industrial, or public and open space zones on a
small lot of less than two (2) acres, or if the application fails to meet any
of the development standards set forth in 8-2.1102(e), below, the application
shall be referred to the Planning Commission for a public hearing to consider
issuance of a Major Use Permit.
   (7)   Construction of large wireless telecommunication facilities on lands
zoned for agricultural, industrial, open space and recreation uses, shall be
considered for approval of a Minor Use Permit, provided the facility is located
on a parcel forty (40) acres or more in size. Large wireless telecommunication
facilities constructed on parcels less than forty (40) acres, on lands zoned
for agricultural, industrial, open space and recreation uses, shall be
considered in all cases for approval of a Major Use Permit. The application
shall meet all of the development standards set forth in Section 8-2.1102(e),
below.
   (8)   An applicant may submit in writing a request for modification to an
existing permitted tower or base station. An eligible facilities request that
does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the facility shall be
approved in accordance with 47 CFR Section 1.6100, as described in subsection
(f), below.
   (d)   Application. Each application for a wireless telecommunication
facility permit shall include the following:
   (1)   A graphic depiction of the search ring used in determining facility
location. The graphic shall identify all existing telecommunication tower sites
within the search ring.
   (2)   A propagation or signal map showing the proposed coverage area (with
and without the proposed facility).
   (3)   A photo simulation of the proposed developed site from four directions
(north, south, east and west).
   (4)   A written justification that identifies opportunities to collocate the
proposed facility on an existing facility have either been exhausted or are not
available in the area.
   (e)   Development standards. The following development standards shall be
satisfied prior to the approval of a wireless communications facility:
   (1)   The site can provide all necessary infrastructure for the development
of the proposed wireless communication facility. The minimum parcel size
required for a large telecommunication facility shall be two (2) acres.
   (2)   Opportunities to co-locate the subject facility on an existing
facility have either been exhausted or are not available in the area.
   (3)   The facility as proposed is necessary for the provision of an
efficient wireless communication system.
   (4)   The development of the proposed wireless communication facility will
not significantly affect the existing onsite topography and vegetation; or any
designated public viewing area, scenic corridor or any identified
environmentally sensitive area or resource. Wireless communication facilities
proposed to locate in a designated scenic corridor, including areas identified
by the General Plan as providing scenic value, may require stealth design
elements to mitigate visual impacts.
   (5)   The proposed wireless communication facility will not create a hazard
for aircraft in flight and will not hinder aerial spraying operations.
   (6)   The applicant agrees to accept proposals from future applicants to co-
locate at the approved site.
   (7)   The applicant agrees to reserve space and/or provide conduit available
for County and emergency communications.
   (f)   Eligible facilities request for a wireless telecommunication facility
modification.
   (1)   An application for a “Section 6409(a) Modification” on an existing
wireless communication facility may be submitted to the Planning Division for
processing. Federal law requires local government approval of any eligible
facilities request for modification of an existing wireless tower or base
station. An eligible facilities request is any request for modification of an
existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical
dimensions of such tower or base station, involving:
   i.   Colocation of new transmission equipment
   ii.   Removal of transmission equipment; or
   iii.   Replacement of transmission equipment.
   (2)   A modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of an
existing wireless communication facility if it meets the criteria listed in
Sec. 8-2.1102(b) above. (Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018; as amended by § 2, Ord. 681.236, eff. December
22, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.1103.   Small and large wind energy systems.
   (a)   Purpose. The purposes of this section are as follows:
   (1)   To provide for the placement of small, accessory wind energy systems
to enable generation of electricity from the wind, primarily for on-site use,
thereby reducing the consumption of electricity supplied by utility companies.
   (2)   To provide regulations to process applications for utility-scale large
wind energy systems that generate electricity from the wind primarily for off-
site customers.
   (3)   To minimize potential adverse impacts associated with wind energy
systems on area residents, historic sites, aesthetic quality and wildlife
through careful siting, design and screening, consistent with State law.
   (4)   To avoid or minimize public safety risks associated with wind energy
systems by providing standards for the placement, design, construction,
modification and removal of such systems, consistent with Federal, State and
local regulations.
   (b)   Definitions.
   Large wind energy system
   “Large wind energy system” shall mean a utility-scale wind energy conversion
system consisting of several wind turbines, towers, and associated control or
conversion electronics, which have a rotor size greater than two hundred (200)
square meters in size (approximately fifty-two (52) feet in diameter), or which
have a rated capacity of more than one hundred fifty (150) kilowatts per
turbine site, whichever is less, and that will be used to produce utility power
to off-site customers.
   Meteorological (met) tower
   “Meteorological (or met) tower” shall mean a temporary wind test tower
erected by a wind energy company to measure wind speeds and other
meteorological data, in preparation of applying for a permanent large-scale
wind energy system.
   Small wind energy system
   “Small wind energy system” shall mean a wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion
electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than one hundred fifty
(150) kilowatts per customer site consistent with the requirements of paragraph
(3) of subdivision (b) of Section 25744 of the Public Resources Code and that
will be used to reduce net onsite consumption of utility power. Such uses are
accessory to a primary use on the site.
   Wind energy, free air zone
   “Wind energy, free air zone” shall mean that the bottom of the turbine’s
blades are at least ten (10) feet above any structure or object that is within
three hundred (300) feet.
   Wind energy, on-site
   “Wind energy, on-site” shall mean only the parcel upon which a small wind
energy system and its associated accessory structure(s) are located and the
location upon which the electrical power generated is primarily used.
   Wind energy, system height
   “Wind energy, system height” shall mean the height above existing grade of
the fixed portion of both a small or large wind energy system tower, and the
height to the tip of the blade or the highest point of the system at the 12:00
position.
   Wind energy, tower height
   “Wind energy, tower height” shall mean the height above existing grade of
the fixed portion of a small or large wind energy system tower, excluding the
wind turbine.
   (c)   Permitted and prohibited locations. The provisions of this section
apply to small wind energy systems that generate more than one (1) kilowatt of
electricity, or are greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height, or have
rotors one (1) meter or more in diameter. These small wind energy systems
require the issuance of a Site Plan Review, Minor Use Permit, or Major Use
Permit approval, as set forth below. In addition, the installation of any wind
energy system below these size criteria is allowed in any zone district and
requires issuance of a building permit only.
   The provisions of this section also apply to large wind energy systems that
generate more than one hundred fifty (150) kilowatts of electricity. Any wind
energy systems installed prior to the effective date of this section shall be
treated as a prior nonconforming use pursuant to this chapter unless, through
the issuance of a permit pursuant to this section, they are subsequently made
conforming.
   (1)   Permitted locations. Small wind energy systems used to reduce onsite
consumption of electricity may be installed and operated in the following
districts or specific zones: agricultural districts (in the Agricultural
Intensive (A-N), the Agricultural Extensive (A-X), the Agricultural Commercial
(A-C), the Agricultural Industrial (A-I), and the Agricultural Residential (A-
R) zones); residential districts (in the Rural Residential (RR-5 and RR-1),
Residential Low (R-L), Residential Medium (R-M), and Residential High (R-H)
zones); commercial districts (in the Local Commercial (C-L), the General
Commercial (C-G), the Downtown Mixed Use (DMX), and the Highway Commercial (C-
H) zones); industrial districts (in the Light Industrial (I-L), the Heavy
Industrial (I-H), and the Office Park/Research and Development (OPRD) zones);
and Public Quasi-Public (PQP) zone only.
   Large utility scale wind energy systems used to produce electricity for off-
site customers, and meteorological towers, may be installed and operated in the
following districts: agricultural districts (the Agricultural Intensive (A-N),
the Agricultural Extensive (A-X), and the Agricultural Industrial (A-I) zones.
   (2)   Prohibited locations. Small and large wind energy systems, and
meteorological towers, are not allowed or permitted in locations other than
those identified in subsection (1), above, or where otherwise prohibited by any
of the following:
   (i)   Small and large wind energy systems, and meteorological towers, are
specifically prohibited in the POS and P-R zones.
   (ii)   Sites listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the
California Register of Historical Resources pursuant to Section 5024.1 of the
Public Resources Code.
   (iii)   A comprehensive land use plan and any implementing regulations
adopted by an airport land use commission pursuant to Article 3.5 (commencing
with Section 21670) of Chapter 4 of Division 9 of Part 1, as well as height
limits established in any provision of Federal, State, or local laws or
regulations for structures located in the vicinity of an airport.
   (iv)   The terms of an open-space easement entered into pursuant to the
Open-space Easement Act of 1974, Chapter 6.6 (commencing with Section 51070) of
Division 1 of Title 5 of the Government Code.
   (v)   The terms of an agricultural conservation easement entered into
pursuant to the California Farmland Conservancy Program Act, Division 10.2
(commencing with Section 10200) of the Public Resources Code.
   (vi)   The terms of a contract entered into pursuant to the Williamson Act,
Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 51200) of Division 1 of Title 5 of the
Government Code.
   (vii)   The terms of any easement entered into pursuant to Chapter 4
(commencing with Section 815) of Division 2 of Part 2 of the Civil Code.
   (d)   Minimum parcel size. All small wind energy systems shall be located on
parcels of at least one (1) acre in size. All large wind energy systems, and
meteorological towers, shall be located on parcels of at least twenty (20)
acres in size, subject to a Major Use Permit being issued, as required below.
   (e)   Number of systems allowed. On parcels containing large agricultural
operations, up to a maximum of one small wind energy system for every ten (10)
acres may be allowed, provided that each of the systems meet the definition of
a small wind energy system contained in Section
8-2.1103(b), above. For large wind energy systems, and meteorological towers,
up to a maximum of one wind energy system or tower for every ten (10) acres may
be allowed, subject to a Major Use Permit being issued, as required below.
   (f)   Permits required. The following types of approvals are required:
   (1)   Construction of small wind energy systems on rural lands zoned for
agricultural uses (including the Agricultural Intensive (A-N), the Agricultural
Extensive (A-X), the Agricultural Commercial (A-C), the Agricultural Industrial
(A-I), and the Agricultural Residential (A-R) zones) may be approved through
the issuance of a Site Plan Review approval by staff. This approval is a
ministerial, “over the counter” approval like a building permit, and does not
require a public hearing, unless the application fails to meet the specific
Development Standards set forth in Section
8-2.1103(h), below, in which case the application may be referred by staff to
the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission for a hearing and decision
to issue a Minor or Major Use Permit.
   (2)   Construction of small wind energy systems located on properties within
non-agricultural or urban areas that are zoned for rural residential,
commercial, and industrial uses are also allowed through the issuance of a
Minor or Major Use Permit, depending on the application’s consistency with all
of the Development Standards set forth in Section
8-2.1103(h), below. Specifically, wind systems are permitted with approval of a
Minor Use Permit, issued by the Zoning Administrator after a public hearing, on
lots of two (2) acres or more, and which meet all of the Development Standards
set forth in Section
8-2.1103(h), below, in areas zoned for residential uses (in the RR-5, RR-1, R-
L, R-M, and R-H zones), commercial uses (in the C-L, C-G, DMX, and C-H zones),
industrial uses (in the I-H, I-L, and OPRD zones), and in the PQP zone only. If
the application for a small wind energy system is proposed on a small lot of
less than two (2) acres, or if the application fails to meet any of the
Development Standards, the application may be referred by staff to the Planning
Commission for a public hearing and issuance of a Major Use Permit.
   (3)   Construction of large wind energy systems, and meteorological towers,
on rural lands zoned for agricultural uses (including the A-N, A-X, and A-
I zones) shall be approved in all cases through the issuance of a Major Use
Permit.
   (g)   Application. An application for a large wind energy system shall
include all of the application requirements for a Major Use Permit, in addition
to all of the detailed site plan materials noted below. An application for a
meteorological tower shall be required to submit only the site plan materials
that are relevant to its construction and operation:
   (1)   Existing topography and drainage channels.
   (2)   Direction and velocity of prevailing winds across the project site, at
various elevations.
   (3)   Location, height, and dimensions of all existing structures.
   (4)   Distance to all residences and any sensitive receptors located within
two (2) miles of the wind turbine(s).
   (5)   Manufacturer and model designation, rated KW capacity, overall machine
height (grade level to highest tip extension), total blade diameter, hub
height, rated maximum rotor RPM, location of proposed structures and buildings
and, upon request of the Planning Director, manufacturer's production record.
   (6)   Location, grades, and dimensions of all roads and parking areas, both
existing and proposed.
   (7)   Location and extent of known archaeological resources.
   (8)   Location and type of project security fencing.
   (9)   Location of site by longitude and latitude coordinates within ten (10)
feet and elevation of site above mean sea level within ten (10) feet.
   (10)   A plan of proposed project phasing.
   (11)   Any and all technical reports which may be required to prove
consistency with applicable policies and design standards listed in this
section, and which may be used as the basis for implementing mitigation
measures incorporated into the environmental document adopted for the project,
such as noise, biological resources, scenic resources, geotechnical and other
studies.
   (12)   A certificate signed by a registered civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor stating that area encompassed by the project has been surveyed under
his supervision or that a previous survey was performed by a registered civil
engineer or licensed land surveyor and that sufficient monuments have been
placed to accurately establish the exterior project boundaries.
   (13)   A certificate signed by a registered civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor stating that the proposed development is in full compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. The Director of the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department may require the submittal of additional
documentation of compliance when deemed necessary.
   (14)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, including revegetation
plan.
   (15)   If the application includes any wind energy system tower with a total
height over two hundred (200) feet or any system which is located within twenty
thousand (20,000) feet of the runway of any airport, the application shall be
accompanied by a copy of written notification to the Federal Aviation
Administration.
   (16)   An application including any wind energy system located within two
(2) miles of any microwave communications link shall be accompanied by a copy
of a written notification to the operator of the link.
   (17)   An application including any wind energy system located within a one
hundred (100) year flood plain area, as such flood hazard areas are shown on
the maps designated by the County or the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
shall be accompanied by a detailed report which shall address the potential for
wind erosion, water erosion, sedimentation and flooding, and which shall
propose mitigation measures for such impacts.
   (18)   Photo simulations showing how the proposed project would appear
visually from several viewing points.
   (19)   Such additional information as shall be required by the Planning
Director.
   (h)   Development standards for small wind energy systems.  Applications for
small wind energy systems shall meet all of the following standards and any
permit issued for such a system shall be conditioned to meet the standards,
unless findings of fact to justify a waiver of any of the standards are adopted
by the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission. Such a waiver shall be
appropriate only where the findings demonstrate that a waiver is consistent
with the overall purposes described in this chapter and all relevant
considerations of public health, safety, and welfare:
   (1)   Maximum tower and system height. Any system application shall include
evidence that the proposed height does not exceed the height recommended by the
manufacturer or distributor of the system. In no case shall the system height
exceed any limits established by applicable Federal Aviation Administration
requirements.
   (2)   On agricultural (A-N, A-X, A-C, A-I, A-R) and PQP zoned parcels of one
(1) acre to five (5) acres, the height of small wind energy systems shall not
exceed a maximum height of sixty (60) feet for the tower and eighty (80) feet
for the system.
   (3)   On agricultural (A-N, A-X, A-C, A-I, A-R) and PQP zoned parcels of
more than five (5) acres, the height of small wind energy systems shall not
exceed a maximum height of one hundred (100) feet for the tower and one hundred
sixty (160) feet for the system unless the applicant can demonstrate that such
height is not in the free air zone. In no case shall the system height exceed
any limits established by applicable Federal Aviation Administration
requirements.
   (4)   Small wind energy systems proposed on agricultural (A-N, A-X, A-C, A-
I, A-R) and PQP zoned parcels with heights greater than those specified in (1)
and (2), above, may be permitted through the issuance of either a Minor Use
Permit or a Major Use Permit, to be determined by County staff.
   (5)   On parcels of two (2) acres or more within the residential (RR-5, RR-
2, R-L, R-M, and R-H) zones, the commercial (C-L, C-G, DMX, and C-H) zones, and
the industrial (I-L, I-L and OPRD) zones, the height of small wind energy
systems shall not exceed a maximum height of fifty (50) feet for the tower and
one hundred (100) feet for the system, and the systems may be permitted through
the issuance of a Minor Use Permit. Wind energy systems on parcels between one
(1) and two (2) acres within the residential (RR-5, RR-2, R-L, R-M, and R-H)
zones, the commercial (C-L, C-G, DMX, and C-H) zones, and the industrial (I-L,
I-H and OPRD) zones, and wind energy systems between fifty (50) and one hundred
(100) feet in height for the tower, and between one hundred (100) feet and one
hundred sixty (160) feet in height for the system, may be permitted through the
issuance of a Major Use Permit;
   (6)   Notwithstanding the height limits in (1) through (5), above, all
allowed and permitted wind energy towers located on properties within or
adjacent to an Airport Overlay (A-O) zone that are within a designated aviation
safety zone and/or which are regulated by an applicable airport master or land
use plan, shall comply with applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
safety height requirements and/or the applicable adopted airport master or land
use plans.
   (7)   Setbacks. The minimum setback from any property line to the base of
wind energy system shall be equal to the system’s height. The setbacks required
by this subsection shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property
line of the parcel on which it is located; provided that where guy wire
supports are used, setbacks shall be measured from where the guy wire is
anchored to the ground, rather than the base of the tower. The Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission may allow reduced setbacks if s/he
determines it would result in better screening of the system, i.e., closer
spacing would allow greater screening from trees, structures, or topography or
otherwise reduce the systems’ visual impact, provided that the owner of the
neighboring property agrees in writing.
   (8)   Lattice and/or guyed towers shall not be allowed within five hundred
(500) feet of a residential district (R-L, R-M, R-H districts), excluding Rural
Residential (RR-5 and RR-2) districts.
   (9)   Measures to minimize aesthetic impacts:
   (i)   Use of existing site features for screening. Wind energy systems
should be located to take advantage of the screening afforded by any existing
trees, topography and structures to minimize the system’s visibility from
dwellings on adjacent property and public roads, but without significantly
compromising viable system performance. Screening should not significantly
block or reduce the wind reaching the turbine and should not increase the
turbulence (gustiness) of the wind to the turbine. Priority for appropriate
screening shall be given (in descending order) to minimizing visibility from
existing dwellings on adjacent properties and across the roadway from the wind
energy system, public rights-of-way, and public parks and open spaces. At the
discretion of staff, applicants proposing wind energy systems in locations that
are not at least partially screened by any existing trees, topography or
structures must submit documentation as to why locations which would provide
screening are not available or technically feasible due to wind speeds or other
characteristics.
   (ii)   Colors and finish. Wind energy system components shall have a
nonglare/non-reflective finish (e.g., galvanized metal) or appropriate color of
neutral white or light gray. On smaller turbines, darker neutral colors (dark
gray, black, unfinished metal) are usually also acceptable. Logos and
advertising are explicitly prohibited.
   (iii)   Signals, Lights and Signs. No signals, lights or signs shall be
permitted on a small wind energy system unless required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA). If lighting is required, the County shall review the
available lighting alternatives acceptable to the FAA and approve a design that
it determines would cause the least impact on surrounding views. Such permitted
wind systems shall be of a height that does not require installation of a
flashing light or signal in compliance with FAA regulations, unless the lights/
signals are screened from view of motorists, pedestrians, and occupants of
adjacent structures, consistent with FAA requirements; or the applicant
demonstrates that the alternative locations for the system would also require a
light/signal and would be no less visible from the surrounding area than the
proposed location. However, in documented migratory bird flyways, preference
shall be given to white strobe lights operating at the longest interval allowed
per FAA requirements.
   (10)   Crop Dusting. In the event a wind energy system is proposed to be
sited in an agricultural area that may have pest control aircraft operating at
low altitudes, the applicant and County shall take reasonable steps to notify
and solicit comments from pest control aircraft pilots registered to operate in
the County. Wind energy systems shall not be allowed where the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission determines they would pose a risk for
pilots spraying fields.
   (11)   Biological Impacts. Wind energy systems shall not be allowed in
locations that would significantly affect habitat for special status protected
bird and bat species. Monthly monitoring of bird and/or bat strikes for at
least the first year of operation shall be required as a Condition of Approval
for large wind turbines located within sensitive habitat areas, as modified by
recommendations from the wildlife agencies involved.
To minimize the potential for special status birds and bats to collide with
towers/turbines, wind energy systems shall not be located in the following
general locations, as mapped or determined by the Natural Diversity Data Base,
the Yolo County Natural Heritage Program, or similar programs, unless findings
are adopted by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission, as described in
(iv), below:
   (i)   Within five hundred (500) feet of wetlands, staging areas, wintering
areas, bat roosts, or rookeries documented as supporting birds or bats listed
as endangered or threatened species under the federal or California Endangered
Species Acts; or
   (ii)   Within migratory flyways documented by State or Federal agencies; or
   (iii)   Within one thousand (1,000) feet of publicly owned wildlife refuges.
   (iv)   Wind energy systems may be located in such areas described above in
(i), (ii), or (iii), if discretionary Use Permit review is provided and the
Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission adopts findings of fact, after
consultation with the California Department of Fish and Wildlife and U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service, as appropriate, and consistent with The California
Guidelines for Reducing Impacts to Birds and Bats from Wind Energy Development,
(October 2007, as amended), that determine installation of a small wind energy
system in the proposed location will not have a significant impact on any
protected birds and bats. In determining potential impacts, the design of the
proposed tower shall be considered, and the use of monopoles, as opposed to
lattice or guyed-lattice towers, shall be encouraged.
   (12)   Views and scenic corridors. Wind energy systems shall not be located
where they would substantially obstruct views of adjacent property owners and
shall be placed or constructed below any major ridgeline visible from any
designated scenic corridor listed by the State or in the Open Space Element of
the Countywide General Plan, unless they are designed to blend in with the
surrounding environment in such a manner that they would not have a significant
visual impact, as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Planning
Commission.
   (13)   Slopes. Construction of a wind energy system on any slopes steeper
than four to one (4:1) is prohibited.
   (14)   Noise. The proposed system shall not generate noise levels exceeding
sixty (60) decibels or any existing maximum noise levels applied pursuant to
the Noise Element of the General Plan, or noise ordinance, for the applicable
zoning district, as measured at the nearest property line, except during short-
term events such as utility outages and severe wind storms. This 60 decibel
noise threshold may be exceeded if the adjacent property owner agrees in
writing, and/or if the adjacent property is commonly owned by the applicant or
owner of the project site.
   (15)   Climbing apparatus. Climbing apparatus shall be located at least
twelve (12) feet above the ground, and the tower shall be designed to prevent
climbing within twelve (12) feet of the ground.
   (16)   Site access and on-site roads. Construction of on-site roads to
install and maintain wind energy systems shall be minimized. Temporary access
roads used for initial installation shall be regraded and revegetated to a
natural/preconstruction condition after completion of installation.
   (17)   Turbine certification. Wind energy system turbines shall be approved
by the California Energy Commission or certified by a national program (i.e.,
National Electrical Code (NEC), American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
and Underwriters Laboratories (UL)).
   (18)   Building, engineering, and electrical codes. The system shall comply
with the California Building Code and be certified by a professional
mechanical, structural, or civil engineer licensed by the State. However, a wet
stamp shall not be required, provided that the applicant demonstrates that the
system is designed to meet the:
   (i)   UBC requirements for wind exposure D;
   (ii)   UBC requirements for Seismic Zone 4;
   (iii)   Requirements for soil strength of not more than one thousand (1,000)
pounds per square foot; or
   (iv)   Other relevant conditions required by the County to protect public
safety.
   (v)   Electrical components of the system shall conform to the National
Electric Code.
   (i)   Development standards for large wind energy systems. Applications for
large wind energy systems, and meteorological towers, shall meet all of the
following standards and any Major Use Permit issued for such systems shall be
conditioned to meet the standards, unless findings of fact to justify a waiver
of any of the standards are adopted by the Planning Commission:
   (1)   Large wind energy systems, and meteorological towers, shall comply
with subsections (5) through (17) of Section
8-2.1103(h), above.
   (2)   Maximum tower and system height. Any system application shall include
evidence that the proposed height does not exceed the height recommended by the
manufacturer or distributor of the system.
   (3)   Setbacks. The following setbacks shall be required for large wind
energy systems:
   (i)   The minimum setback from the base of any large wind energy system to
any adjacent property line(s) where the adjacent parcel(s) are not under common
applicant ownership and contain less than forty (40) acres shall be equal to
two (2) times the overall system’s height, or five hundred (500) feet,
whichever is more;
   (ii)   The minimum setback from the base of any large wind energy system to
any adjacent property line(s) where the adjacent parcel(s) are not under common
applicant ownership and contain more than forty (40) acres shall be equal to
one and one-half (1.5) times the overall system’s height, or five hundred (500)
feet, whichever is more;
   (iii)   The minimum setback from the base of any large wind energy system to
any off-site residence(s) on adjacent parcels not under common applicant
ownership shall be three (3) times the overall system’s height, or one thousand
(1,000) feet, whichever is more, unless the adjacent neighbor approves a lesser
distance;
   (iv)   The Planning Commission may allow a reduction in the setbacks in (i),
(ii) or (iii), above, not to exceed a minimum setback of one (1) times the
overall wind system’s height, if a letter of consent from the owner(s) of
record of adjacent parcels is filed with the County. The Planning Commission
may also allow a reduction or waiver of the setbacks in (i) or (ii), above, if
the project exterior boundary is a common property line between two (2) or more
approved wind energy projects and the property owner of each affected property
has filed a letter of consent to the proposed setback reduction with the
County.
   (v)   The minimum setback from the base of any large wind energy system to
any on-site residence(s) and accessory structures designed for human occupancy
shall be equal to one and one-half (1.5) times the overall system’s height, or
five hundred (500) feet, whichever is less;
   (vi)   The minimum setback from the base of any large wind energy system to
any publicly maintained public highway or street, any public access easement,
including any public trail, pedestrian easement, or equestrian easement, or
railroad right-of-way, shall be equal to one and one-half (1.5) times the
overall system’s height, or five hundred (500) feet, whichever is less.
   (4)   Wind generator setbacks (spacing) within the project boundary shall be
in accordance with accepted industry practices pertaining to the subject
machine.
   (5)   Fencing shall be erected for each wind machine or on the perimeter of
the total project. Wind project facilities shall be enclosed with a minimum
four- (4-) foot-high security fence constructed of four (4) strand barbed wire
or materials of a higher quality. Fencing erected on the perimeter of the total
project shall include minimum eighteen- (18-) inch by eighteen- (18-) inch
signs warning of wind turbine dangers. Such signs shall be located a maximum of
three hundred (300) feet apart and at all points of site ingress and egress.
Where perimeter fencing is utilized, the Planning Commission may waive this
requirement for any portion of the site where unauthorized access is precluded
due to topographic conditions.
   (6)   All on-site electrical power lines associated with wind machines shall
be installed underground within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a wind turbine
and elsewhere when practicable, excepting therefrom "tie-ins" to utility type
transmission poles, towers, and lines. However, if project terrain or other
factors are found to be unsuitable to accomplish the intent and purpose of this
provision, engineered aboveground electrical power lines shall be allowed.
   (7)   Colors and finish. Wind energy system components shall have a
nonglare/non-reflective finish (e.g., galvanized metal) or color appropriate to
the background against which they would be primarily viewed, as determined by
the Planning Commission, unless it is not technically possible to do so.
   (8)   Signals, Lights and Signs. No signals, lights or signs shall be
permitted on a wind energy system unless required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA). If lighting is required, the County shall review the
available lighting alternatives acceptable to the FAA and approve a design that
it determines would cause the least impact on surrounding views. However, in
documented migratory bird flyways, preference shall be given to white strobe
lights operating at the longest interval allowed per FAA requirements.
   (9)   Noise. Where a sensitive receptor such as a group of residences, a
school, church, public library, or other sensitive or highly sensitive land
use, as identified in the Noise Element of the County General Plan, is located
within one-half (1/2) mile in any direction of a project's exterior boundary, a
noise or acoustical analysis shall be prepared by a qualified acoustical
consultant prior to the issuance of any Major Use Permit. The report shall
address any potential noise impacts on sensitive or highly sensitive land uses,
and shall demonstrate that the proposed wind energy development shall comply
with the following noise criteria:
   (i)   Audible noise due to wind turbine operations shall not be created
which causes the exterior noise level to exceed forty-five (45) dBA for more
than five (5) minutes out of any one- (1-) hour time period, or to exceed fifty
(50) dBA for any period of time, when measured within fifty (50) feet of any
existing group of residences, a school, hospital, church, or public library.
   (ii)   In the event that noise levels, resulting from a proposed
development, exceed the criteria listed above, a waiver to said levels may be
granted by the Planning Commission provided that: written consent from the
affected property owners has been obtained stating that they are aware of the
proposed development and the noise limitations imposed by this code, and that
consent is granted to allow noise levels to exceed the maximum limits allowed;
and a permanent noise impact easement has been recorded on the affected
property.
   (10)   A toll-free telephone number shall be maintained for each wind energy
project and shall be distributed to surrounding property owners to facilitate
the reporting of noise irregularities and equipment malfunctions.
   (11)   Fire Protection. Any Major Use Permit issued for a large wind energy
system project shall include fire control and prevention measures stated in the
Conditions of Approval which may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
   (i)   Areas to be cleared of vegetation and maintained as a fire/fuel break
as long as the wind system is in operation, such as thirty (30) feet around the
periphery of the system base and around all buildings (access driveways and
roads that completely surround the project may satisfy this requirement); and
ten (10) radius feet around all transformers.
   (ii)   All buildings or equipment enclosures of substantial size containing
control panels, switching equipment, or transmission equipment, without regular
human occupancy, shall be equipped with an automatic fire extinguishing system
of a Halon or dry chemical type, as approved by the applicable Fire Department.
   (iii)   Service vehicles assigned to regular maintenance or construction at
the wind energy system shall be equipped with a portable fire extinguisher of a
4A40 BC rating.
   (iv)   All motor driven equipment shall be equipped with approved spark
arrestors.
   (12)   Erosion and Sediment Control. Any Major Use Permit issued for a large
wind energy system project shall include erosion and sediment control measures
stated in the Conditions of Approval which may include, but are not limited to,
necessary re-soiling, proposed plant species, proposed plant density and
percentage of ground coverage, the methods and rates of application, sediment
collection facilities. The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be
consistent with the applicable requirements of the California Regional Water
Quality Control Board pertaining to the preparation and approval of Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plans.
   (13)   Monitoring. Upon reasonable notice, County officials or their
designated representatives may enter a lot on which a large wind energy system
permit has been granted for the purpose of monitoring noise environmental
impacts, and other impacts which may arise. Twenty-four (24) hours advance
notice shall be deemed reasonable notice.
   (14)   Building, engineering, and electrical codes. The system shall comply
with the California Building Code and be certified by a professional
mechanical, structural, or civil engineer licensed by the State. A wet stamp
shall be required.
   (j)   Abandonment, financial surety, and other violations.
   (1)   A small wind energy system that ceases to produce electricity on a
continuous basis for eighteen (18) months shall be considered abandoned. A
large wind energy system that ceases to produce electricity on a continuous
basis for twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. Facilities deemed
by the County to be unsafe and facilities erected in violation of this section
shall also be subject to this provision. The code enforcement officer or any
other employee of the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Department shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits from
the system owner/operator regarding the system’s usage, shall make a
determination as to the date of abandonment or the date on which other
violation(s) occurred.
   (2)   Upon a determination of abandonment or other violation(s), the County
shall send a notice hereof to the owner/operator, indicating that the
responsible party shall remove the wind energy system and all associated
facilities, and remediate the site to its approximate original condition within
ninety (90) days of notice by the County, unless the County determines that the
facilities must be removed in a shorter period to protect public safety.
Alternatively, if the violation(s) can be addressed by means short of removing
the wind energy system and restoring of the site, the County may advise the
owner/operator of such alternative means of resolving the violation(s).
   (3)   In the event that the responsible parties have failed to remove the
wind energy system and/or restore the facility site or otherwise resolve the
violation(s) within the specified time period, the County may remove the wind
energy system and restore the site and may thereafter initiate judicial
proceedings or take any other steps authorized by law against the responsible
parties to recover costs associated with the removal of structures deemed a
public hazard.
   (4)   Financial Surety. Prior to the issuance of a building permit
authorizing installation of a large wind energy system, the applicant shall
provide a demolition surety in a form and amount deemed by the County to be
sufficient to remove and dispose of the wind energy system and restore the site
to its approximate preconstruction condition. The County shall draw upon this
surety in the event the responsible party fails to act in accordance with the
provisions of this section within ninety (90) days of termination of
operations, or upon determination by the County that the wind energy system is
unsafe, has been abandoned, or is in violation of this chapter. The surety
shall remain in effect until the wind energy system is removed.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7,
2018; as amended by § 4, Ord. 1522, eff. August 6, 2020)
Sec. 8-2.1104.   Solar energy systems.
   (a)   Purpose. The purposes of this section are as follows:
   (1)   To provide for the placement of solar energy systems to enable
generation of electricity from the sun, for on- and/or off-site uses, thereby
increasing local production and use of renewable energy and reducing peak
demand on the power grid.
   (2)   To minimize potential adverse impacts associated with solar energy
systems on area residents, historic sites, and agricultural and biological
resources through careful siting, design and operation, consistent with State
law.
   (3)   To avoid or minimize public health and safety risks associated with
solar energy systems by providing standards for the placement, design,
construction, modification and removal of such systems, consistent with
Federal, State and local regulations.
   (4)   To streamline the solar permitting process that complies with the
Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 21, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and
cost-effective installations of small accessory use solar energy systems, as
defined below.
   (b)   Definitions.
   Solar energy system
   “Solar energy system” shall mean a device, array of devices, or structural
design feature which is used to provide for generation and/or storage of
electricity from sunlight, or the collection, storage, and distribution of
solar energy for space heating or cooling, daylight for interior lighting, or
water heating.
   Accessory solar energy system
   “Accessory solar energy system” shall mean an onsite solar energy system in
which the energy generated contributes to the supply of power to and/or offsets
energy demands on the property, or on adjacent or contiguous properties. An
accessory solar energy system shall be limited to ground-mounted systems, roof-
mounted systems, floating systems, and systems affixed to shade structures
located over parking areas. Accessory solar energy systems do not include small
accessory use roof-mounted and ground-mounted solar energy systems as defined
in this Section. Accessory solar energy systems shall not occupy more than
seven and one-half (7.5) acres of land. A solar energy system that produces
power that is sold directly to the electrical grid with a generation capacity
of more than one (1) megawatt shall be considered a utility solar energy
system, as defined below.
   Adjacent
   A property shall be “adjacent” to the property with the accessory solar
energy system if the property lines are separated by less than one hundred
(100) feet at their nearest point.
   Small accessory use ground-mounted solar energy system
   “Small accessory use ground-mounted solar energy system” shall mean a system
that:
   (i)   is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate
rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal; and
   (ii)   is structurally mounted to the ground.
   Small accessory use roof-mounted solar energy system
   “Small accessory use roof-mounted solar energy system” shall mean a system
that:
   (i)   is mounted to the roof of a house, building, or other structure;
   (ii)   is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate
rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal; and
   (iii)   has a solar panel or module array that does not exceed five (5) feet
above rooftop for photovoltaic or seven (7) feet above rooftop for thermal
solar systems.
   Medium-sized solar energy system
   “Medium-sized solar energy system” shall mean a private on-site or utility
solar energy conversion system consisting of many ground-mounted solar arrays,
a solar photovoltaic system mounted on a rack or pole that is ballasted on or
attached to the ground, or roof-panels, and associated control or conversion
electronics, occupying more than seven and one-half (7.5) acres and no more
than thirty (30) acres of land, and that will be used to produce utility power
to onsite uses and/or off-site customers.
   Large-scale solar energy system
   “Large-scale solar energy system” shall mean a utility solar energy
conversion system consisting of many ground–mounted solar arrays, or a solar
photovoltaic system mounted on a rack or pole that is ballasted on or attached
to the ground, and associated control or conversion electronics, occupying more
than thirty (30) acres of land, and that will be used to produce utility power
to off-site customers.
   Utility solar energy system
   “Utility solar energy system” shall mean a solar facility featuring panels
designed to generate solar power that is fed directly into the electrical grid,
supplying a utility company with energy which is distributed to offsite end
users. For the purposes of this Section, a utility solar energy system has a
total generation capacity of more than one (1) megawatt. A solar energy system
that feeds directly to the power grid but generates one (1) megawatt or less
shall be considered a medium-sized solar energy system as defined above.
   Specific, Adverse Impact
   “Specific, Adverse Impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health
or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete.
   (c)   Applicability  The provisions of this Section apply to onsite
accessory and small accessory use solar energy systems, medium-sized solar
energy systems, and large-scale solar energy systems, as defined in subsection
(b). These solar energy systems require the issuance of a Building Permit, a
Site Plan Review, or a Use Permit, as set forth below. Any solar systems
installed prior to the effective date of this Section shall be considered
legal, conforming uses so long as a County permit or approval was issued in
connection with their installation.
   (d)   Administration and required approvals. The following types of
approvals are required in addition to any other permits that may be required by
State, federal, and regional agencies and by any other sections of this Code:
   (1)   All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety
standards and requirements imposed by the state and the County Building and
local fire department or districts.
   (2)   Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and
for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be
certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing
and Mechanical Code.
   (3)   Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all
applicable safety and performance standards established by the California
Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and
accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and
reliability.
   (4)   Small accessory use roof-mounted and ground-mounted solar energy
systems may be approved in all zones through the issuance of a Building Permit
and a Zoning Clearance, provided the application meets setback and other
standards, as provided in this Section. However, consistent with Section
65850.5 of the California Government Code, if the Chief Building Official has a
good faith belief that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse
impact upon the public health and safety, the Official may require the
applicant to apply for a Use Permit. Such a Use Permit shall be considered by
the Zoning Administrator according to the requirements of Section 65850.5.
   (5)   Accessory solar energy systems that occupy more than two and one-half
(2.5) acres, excluding ground-mounted systems located in the POS and P-R zones,
may be approved through the issuance of a Building Permit and Site Plan Review,
provided the application meets the Development Standards set forth in Section
8-2.1104(g), below. The Site Plan Review approval is ministerial (not
discretionary) and does not require a public hearing. If the application fails
to meet any of the standards, the application shall instead be evaluated as an
application for a Minor Use Permit by the Zoning Administrator.
   (6)   Accessory or medium-sized ground-mounted solar energy systems proposed
to locate in the POS and P-R zones may be approved through the issuance of a
Minor Use Permit as set forth in Section 8-2.1104(e)(4), below.
   (7)   Solar energy systems proposed on a property or structure that is a
designated Historic Landmark or is located within a designated Historic
District may be permitted provided that the design of the facilities is
consistent with the purposes of the Landmark or District designation.
   (8)   Medium-sized solar energy systems may be approved through Site Plan
Review if the facility is located on non-prime farmland that is not under a
Williamson Act contract and shall include a vegetative substrate, derived from
source-identified plant materials whose origin includes Yolo County and
surrounding counties, planted and maintained beneath and between the rows of
panels. Any medium-sized solar energy system that is located on prime farmland
or on land that is enrolled in the Williamson Act shall require the issuance of
a Minor Use Permit provided the application is consistent with the conditions
and standards set forth in subsections (h) and (i), below.
   (9)   Large-scale solar energy systems occupying no more than one hundred
twenty (120) acres of land may be approved through the issuance of a Major Use
Permit by the Planning Commission, provided the application is consistent with
conditions and standards set forth in subsections (h) and (i). A large-scale
solar energy system greater than one hundred twenty (120) acres requires
approval from the Board of Supervisors, following a recommendation from the
Planning Commission, provided the application is consistent with conditions and
standards set forth in subsections (h) and (i), below.
   (10)   If a utility solar energy system is proposed to locate on lands under
a Williamson Act contract, the use must be found to be compatible in accordance
with Section 106 of the Yolo County Williamson Act Guidelines, including
compliance with the Williamson Act statutes governing the principles of
compatibility required under Section 51238.1 of the California Government Code.
   (11)   Solar energy development shall employ design features that allow for
full restoration of the land once the system has ceased to generate
electricity.
   (e)   Permitted locations.
   (1)   Solar energy systems may be installed and operated in the following
zones, provided the systems meet setback and other standards, as provided in
this Section and shown in Table 8-2.1104:
Table 8-2.1104
Allowed Solar Uses and Permit Requirements
A =       Land Use Permit Required by Zone
Allowed
use,
subject
to zoning
clearance
SP = Site
Plan                       RR- 5,                                 Specific Use
Review    A-N, A-          RR- 2,  C-L,    I-L, I-H,              Requirements
UP (m) =  X, A-I  A-C, A-R R-L, R- DMX, C- OPRD      PQP POS, P-R or
Minor Use                  M, R-H  G, C-H                         Performance
Permit                                                            Standards
UP (M) =
Major Use
Permit
N = Use
Not
Allowed
A =       Land Use Permit Required by Zone
Allowed
use,
subject
to zoning
clearance
SP = Site
Plan                      RR- 5,                                   Specific Use
Review    A-N, A- A-C, A- RR- 2,  C-L,     I-L, I-                 Requirements
UP (m) =  X, A-I  R       R-L, R- DMX, C-  H, OPRD  PQP   POS, P-R or
Minor Use                 M, R-H  G, C-H                           Performance
Permit                                                             Standards
UP (M) =
Major Use
Permit
N = Use
Not
Allowed
Solar Energy System
Small
accessory
use roof-
mounted
solar     A       A       A       A        A        A     A
energy
system
(up to
10kW)                                                              Sec. 8-
Small                                                              2.1104(f)
accessory
use
ground-
mounted   A       A       A       A        A        A     SP
solar
energy
system
(up to
10kW)
Accessory
solar
energy    A       A       A       A        A        A     A/SP(a)
system
(>10kW, <
2.5 ac)                                                            Sec. 8-
Accessory                                                          2.1104(g)
solar
energy    SP      SP      SP      SP       SP       SP    SP/UP(m)
system
(2.5 to
7.5 ac)
Medium-
sized
solar     SP/UP                                     SP/
energy    (m)     N       N       SP/UP(m) SP/UP(m) UP(m) N
system
(7.5 to                                                            Sec. 8-
30 ac)                                                             2.1104(h)
Large-                                                             (i)
scale
solar     UP(M)   N       N       N        UP(M)    UP(M) N
energy
system (>
30 ac)
 
(a)   Site Plan Review required for ground-mounted systems
   (2)   Installation of roof-mounted solar arrays is encouraged in all public
facilities in all zones so long as associated controls or conversion
electronics do not impact other facilities.
   (3)   Accessory and medium-sized solar energy systems in the Public and Open
Space (POS) and Park and Recreation (P-R) zones are limited to roof-mounted
panels and associated controller and conversion electronics.
   (4)   Under circumstances where roof -mounted solar arrays alone cannot
provide sufficient power for onsite uses in the POS or P-R zones, supplemental
ground-mounted solar arrays may be permitted only to the extent necessary to
provide sufficient power for onsite uses only through the issuance of a Minor
Use Permit.
   (5)   Large-scale solar energy systems are prohibited in the Public Open
Space (POS) and Parks and Recreation (P-R) zones.
   (f)   Development standards for small accessory use solar energy systems.
Applications for small accessory use roof-mounted and ground-mounted solar
energy systems shall meet all of the following standards and any permit issued
for such a system shall be conditioned to meet the standards:
   (1)   Photovoltaic solar energy systems may extend up to five (5) feet above
the roof surface even if this exceeds the maximum height limit for the
principal structure for the zone in which it is located, or if this exceeds the
height limit of an accessory structure (fifteen (15) feet).
   (2)   Solar water or swimming pool heating systems may extend up to seven
(7) feet above the roof surface even if this exceeds the maximum height limit
for the principal structure for the zone in which it is located, or if this
exceeds the height limit of an accessory structure (fifteen (15) feet).
   (3)   Excluding solar collection panels, solar energy system equipment may
be installed within the required side and rear yards, but shall not be closer
than ten (10) feet from any property line in agricultural, commercial,
industrial, and public and open space zones and five (5) feet from any property
line in residential zones.
   (4)   Pole mounted solar collection panels located in the residential zones
shall comply with existing regulations for accessory structures (Section
8-2.506(a) and
Table 8-2.506 of this Chapter), i.e., the panels may not exceed ten (10) feet
in height in residential zones and must meet a rear yard setback of five (5)
feet.
   (5)   The solar panels of a small accessory use ground-mounted solar energy
system shall not be included in any calculation of impervious surface for
purposes of calculating lot coverage.
   (g)   Development standards for accessory solar energy systems. Applications
for accessory solar energy systems shall meet all of the following standards.
If the application does not meet one or more of the standards, a Minor Use
Permit shall be required and shall be conditioned to meet the standards, unless
findings of fact to justify a waiver of any of the standards are adopted by the
Zoning Administrator. A waiver may be granted only if the Zoning Administrator
concludes that the waiver is consistent with the purposes of this Section and
that, due to unusual circumstances or other considerations, it is not
reasonable to require compliance with one or more of the standards.
   (1)   Photovoltaic solar energy systems may extend up to five (5) feet above
the roof surface even if this exceeds the maximum height limit for the
principal structure for the zone in which it is located, or if this exceeds the
height limit of an accessory structure (fifteen (15) feet).
   (2)   Solar water or swimming pool heating systems may extend up to seven
(7) feet above the roof surface even if this exceeds the maximum height limit
for the principal structure for the zone in which it is located, or if this
exceeds the height limit of an accessory structure (fifteen (15) feet).
   (3)   Accessory solar energy systems occupying more than two and one-half
(2.5) acres of land that are proposed in agricultural zones and the PQP zone
are encouraged to locate on predominantly (more than sixty percent (60%)) non-
prime farmland and/or previously disturbed areas to the extent feasible.
   (4)   Ground-mounted solar facilities shall meet the front, rear, and side
yard setback requirements of the zone in which they are located, with the
following exceptions: Accessory solar energy systems in agricultural zones
occupying no more than two and one-half (2.5) acres shall not be required to
meet the front yard setback. To address Fire Code requirements for weed
control, a ten (10)-foot perimeter is required from property lines in all
agricultural, commercial, industrial, and public and open space zones and a
five (5)-foot perimeter is required in all residential zones.
   (5)   Ground-mounted solar facilities shall meet the height limit
requirements of the zone in which they are located, except that auxiliary
equipment may exceed this limit.
   (6)   Ground-mounted solar arrays that occupy more than two and one-half
(2.5) acres of Swainson’s hawk foraging habitat shall require a management plan
that includes a vegetative substrate, such as native grasslands habitat or
pollinator habitat, planted and maintained beneath and between the rows of
panels. Native vegetation shall be derived from source-identified plant
materials whose origin includes Yolo County and surrounding counties.
   (7)   Accessory solar energy systems larger than two and one-half (2.5)
acres shall be located no closer than a minimum of one hundred (100) feet away
from a riparian corridor.
   (8)   Accessory solar energy systems shall occupy no more than seven and
one-half (7.5) acres of land or twenty percent (20%) of the area of the parcel,
whichever is smaller.
   (9)   The solar panels of an accessory solar energy system shall not be
included in any calculation of impervious surface for purposes of calculating
lot coverage.
   (h)   Development standards for medium-sized and large-scale solar energy
systems.
   (1)   Medium-sized and large-scale solar energy systems are encouraged to
locate on predominantly non-prime farmland and non-Williamson Act contracted
land, as feasible. Any medium-sized solar energy system that locates on prime
farmland or farmland under Williamson Act contract shall require a Minor Use
Permit.
   (2)   Utility solar energy systems shall be integrated into the agricultural
landscape by maintaining a substrate with a plant palette that supports
ecological function and encourages and maintains wildlife use. Native
vegetation shall be derived from source-identified plant materials whose origin
includes Yolo County and surrounding counties.
   (3)   Solar uses shall require a minimum one hundred (100)-foot buffer from
riparian corridors.
   (4)   Medium-sized solar energy systems shall meet the front, rear, and side
yard setback requirements of the zone in which they are located, with the
following exception: in agricultural zones, the setbacks shall be at least
fifty (50) feet from all property lines. A ten (10)-foot perimeter shall be
required in all other zones to address Fire Code requirements for weed control.
   (5)   Large-scale solar energy systems must be setback at least fifty (50)
feet from any property line.
   (6)   Utility solar energy systems shall be located no closer than one
hundred (100) feet from any residential dwelling on an adjacent property.
   (7)   To the extent reasonably practicable, a utility solar energy system
shall have a visual buffer of native vegetation that provides a visual screen
to reduce the view of the solar energy system from residences on adjacent lots,
including those lots located across a public right-of-way. Solar energy systems
proposed to locate in a designated scenic corridor shall require visual
screening. Vegetation shall be derived from source-identified plant materials
whose origin includes Yolo County and surrounding counties.
   (8)   Solar panels shall not be included in any calculation of impervious
surface or impervious cover.
   (i)   Mitigation required.
   (1)   All utility solar energy systems shall mitigate for the permanent loss
of agricultural land, in accordance with Section
8-2.404 (the Agricultural Conservation and Mitigation Program). Medium-sized
solar energy systems approved by Site Plan Review are exempt from this
requirement.
   (2)   If a proposed utility solar energy system will remove Swainson’s hawk
foraging habitat, mitigation for the loss of foraging habitat shall be required
to minimize adverse effects. For each acre of suitable agricultural land
removed, a replacement acre shall be protected and managed to consistently
provide suitable conditions for foraging Swainson’s hawks. Mitigation can be
accomplished by payment of a development fee for land in lieu, providing land
in lieu of a development fee, or other arrangement in accordance with the
California Department of Fish and Wildlife. Alternatively, a project proponent
may seek coverage for the loss of habitat under the Yolo HCP/NCCP as a special
participating entity.
   (j)   Decommissioning. Unless otherwise approved by the County,
decommissioning shall begin no later than twelve (12) months after a medium-
sized or large-scale solar energy system has ceased to generate electricity.
Within six (6) months of the beginning of decommissioning, the solar energy
system and all structures associated with it shall be removed, all materials
shall be recycled or otherwise reused to the extent reasonably practicable, and
the property shall be returned to its condition prior to the installation of
the solar energy system or to some other condition reasonably appropriate for
the designated land use.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1449, eff. November 6,
2014; as amended by Ord. 1454, eff. August 6, 2015; as amended by § 13, Ord.
1466, eff. March 24, 2016; as amended by Ord. 1472, eff. November 10, 2016; as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018; as amended by § 4, Ord. 1522,
eff. August 6, 2020; as amended by § 2, Ord. 681.236, eff. December 22, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.1105.   Energy storage facilities.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to add provisions to the
Yolo County Code to regulate the permitting and installation of energy storage
systems. These changes are necessary and appropriate to improve and enhance
public welfare and safety, to ensure compatible land uses in the vicinity of
areas affected by energy storage systems, and to mitigate the impacts of energy
storage systems on important environmental resources, such as agricultural
lands and wildlife habitat.
   (b)   Definitions.
   Dedicated use building
   “Dedicated use building” shall mean a building that is constructed for the
primary intention of housing battery energy storage system equipment, is
classified as Group F-1 occupancy as defined in the California Building
Standards Code, and complies with the following:
   (i)   The building’s only use shall be for energy storage, energy
generation, and other electrical grid-related operations.
   (ii)   No other occupancy types shall be permitted in the building.
   Participating property
   “Participating property” shall mean an energy storage system host property
or any real property that is the subject of an agreement that provides for the
payment of monetary compensation to the landowner from the energy storage
system owner (or affiliate) regardless of whether any part of the energy
storage system is constructed on the property.
   Small energy storage system
   “Small energy storage” shall mean one (1) or more devices, assembled
together, capable of storing energy in order to supply electrical energy at a
future time, not to include a stand- alone 12-volt car battery or an electric
motor vehicle. A small energy storage facility may be used in conjunction with
an accessory renewable energy system and shall have an aggregate energy
capacity less than or equal to six hundred (600) kWh and consist of only a
single energy storage system technology.
   Energy storage system
   “Energy storage system” shall mean one or more devices, assembled together,
capable of storing energy in order to supply electrical energy at a future
time. An energy storage system has an aggregate energy capacity greater than
six hundred (600) kWh or is comprised of more than one (1) storage battery
technology in a room or enclosed area. An energy storage system facility may be
integrated with a utility renewable energy system with storage connected to the
renewable energy system and the grid or may be a stand-alone storage facility
with storage connected to the grid only.
   (c)   Applicability. The requirements of this Section shall apply to all
energy storage systems permitted, installed, or modified in unincorporated Yolo
County after the effective date of this ordinance, excluding general
maintenance and repair. Energy storage systems constructed or installed prior
to the effective date of this ordinance shall not be required to meet the
requirements of this Section. Modifications to, retrofits or replacements of an
existing energy storage system that increase the total energy storage system
designed discharge duration or power rating shall be subject to the provisions
of this Section.
   (d)   Permitting requirements. Energy storage facilities may be permitted to
locate in the following zones:
Table 8-2.1105
Allowed Energy Storage System Uses and Permit Requirements
 
A =        Land Use Permit Required by Zone
Allowed
use,
subject to
zoning
clearance*
SP = Site
Plan                       RR-5,                                   Specific Use
Review     A-N, A- A-C, A- RR-2, R- C-L,    I-L, I-                Requirements
UP (m) =   X, A-I  R       L, R-M,  DMX, C- H, OPRD PQP   POS, P-R or
Minor Use                  R-H      G, C-H                         Performance
Permit                                                             Standards
UP (M) =
Major Use
Permit
N = Use
Not
Allowed
Energy Storage System
Small
energy     A       A       A        A       A       A     A         
storage
600Kw)
Energy
storage    SP      SP      N\       SP      SP      SP    N
(>600kW to                                                         See Sec. 8-
2MW)                                                               2.1105(e)
Energy
storage    UP(m)   N       N        UP(m)   UP(m)   UP(m) N
(>2MW)
 
(1)   Energy storage systems shall meet all applicable safety and performance
standards established by the California Building Standards Code.
   (e)   Development standards for energy storage systems.
   (1)   Small energy storage systems must be installed in non-habitable
spaces, such as utility rooms, garages, storage rooms or on the exterior of a
building.
   (2)   Onsite utility lines shall be placed underground to the extent
feasible and as permitted by the serving utility.
   (3)   Lighting of an energy storage system shall be limited to that
minimally required for safety and operational purposes and shall be shielded
and downcast from abutting properties and public right-of-way, and shall take
into consideration protection of the rural night sky.
   (4)   Areas within ten (10) feet on each side of an energy storage system,
excluding small energy storage systems, shall be cleared of combustible
vegetation and other combustible growth. Removal of trees should be minimized
to the extent possible.
   (5)   Noise generated from energy storage systems, components, and
associated ancillary equipment shall not exceed a noise level of sixty (60) dBA
as measured at the property line of the nearest offsite residence. Applicants
may submit equipment and component manufactures noise ratings to demonstrate
compliance.
   (6)   Energy storage systems, excluding small energy storage systems, shall
comply with the setback requirements of the zone in which they are located.
   (7)   Energy storage systems shall comply with the height limitations of the
zone in which they are located.
   (8)   Energy storage systems shall have views minimized from adjacent
properties to the extent reasonably practicable using architectural features,
earth berms, landscaping, or other screening methods that will harmonize with
the character of the property and surrounding area.
   (f)   Decommissioning.
   (1)   A decommissioning plan, developed in accordance with all relevant
codes, shall be submitted with any application for an energy storage system,
but excluding a small energy storage system, and shall be implemented upon
abandonment and/or in conjunction with removal from the facility. The
decommission plan shall include:
   (i)   A narrative description of the activities to be accomplished for
complete physical removal of all energy storage system components, batteries,
structures, equipment, security barriers, and transmission lines from the site;
   (ii)   Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local,
state, and federal waste disposal regulations;
   (iii)   The anticipated life of the energy storage system;
   (iv)   The estimated decommissioning costs and method of ensuring funds will
be available for decommission and restoration of the site;
   (v)   The manner in which the site will be restored, including a description
of how any changes to the surrounding areas will be protected during
decommissioning and confirmed as being acceptable after the system is removed;
and
   (vi)   A listing of any contingencies for removing an intact operational
energy storage system from service, and for removing an energy storage system
from service that has been damaged by a fire or other natural disaster event.
   (2)   The owner and/or operator of the energy storage system, not including
a small energy storage system, shall continuously maintain a fund or bond
payable to the County of Yolo, in a form approved by the County, for the
removal of the energy storage system, in an amount to be determined by the
County for the period of the life of the facility. All costs of the financial
security shall be borne by the applicant. (Ord. 681.236, eff. December 22,
2022)
Sec. 8-2.1106.   Major electrical transmission and distribution facilities.
   (a)   Definitions.  
   Major electrical transmission and distribution project
   “Major electrical transmission and distribution project” shall mean a
project that includes a network of transmission lines and related towers and
similar facilities with a capacity to convey two hundred (200) kilovolts (kV)
or greater. It shall also include any project that proposes the designation of
a transmission corridor zone to accommodate such facilities.
   (b)   Application required. At a minimum, each application for a major use
permit for a major electrical transmission and distribution project shall
include the following:
   (1)   A completed application form and filing fee.
   (2)   A description of a reasonable range of alternatives to the proposed
project, including alternatives that use or expand existing rights-of-way and
existing infrastructure.
   (3)   All application materials (maps, site plans, etc.) necessary to
illustrate the proposed location of the proposed facilities and all alternative
locations, together with all other materials required for a conditional use
permit application pursuant to Section
8-2.217 of this chapter, as described on application forms provided by the
Planning Division.
   (4)   A photo simulation of the proposed project and each alternative from
at least six (6) locations along its route in the County. Each location shall
include simulated views of project facilities from four (4) directions (north,
south, east, and west).
   (5)   A narrative explanation of the route of the proposed project and each
alternative, together with a discussion of any alternative locations and
project alternatives considered by the applicant but not formally included for
County consideration.
   (6)   For the proposed project and each alternative, all of the following:
   (i)   Estimated cost, including construction, land acquisition, and other
development costs;
   (ii)   A description of the type of vegetation and soils that would be
removed or impacted by construction;
   (iii)   A map showing the number, types, uses, and distances of buildings,
public and private airports, dedicated open space, and parklands located within
a one-thousand (1,000) foot distance of project infrastructure;
   (iv)   An analysis of the audible noise and lighting impacts of the
proposal, together with any other studies reasonably necessary for the County
to perform its duties as a lead or responsible agency in connection with the
environmental review of the project;
   (v)   An analysis of the potential adverse human health effects of the
project on those present in residential areas, schools, licensed day-care
facilities, playgrounds, and other developed areas in reasonable proximity to
the project. The analysis shall use the best available scientific information
at the time it is conducted; and
   (vi)   An analysis of potential economic impacts on agriculture and related
support industries. The Director may also require an analysis of potential
economic impacts on other matters relevant to the review criteria set forth
below, including potential economic impacts on other industries, on County and
special district revenues, on local tourism and economic development efforts,
and on other similar matters.
   (c)   Coordination and documentation. Within thirty (30) days of filing an
application for a major use permit in connection with a major electrical
transmission and distribution project, the applicant shall provide the County
with copies of all applications for State, Federal, and other permits and
licenses in connection with the proposed project. Promptly following the
issuance of any State or Federal permits or licenses, biological opinions,
records of decision, memoranda of understanding, exemptions, variances, or
similar authorizations or approvals related to the proposed project, the
applicant shall provide copies of those documents to the County.
   (d)   Public outreach. For all major electrical transmission and
distribution projects that traverse a significant portion of the County, and
whose impacts are not likely to be isolated to a small geographic area, the
Director may require the applicant to present the application to interested
members of the public at one or more public meetings arranged by the applicant
at a location convenient for interested members of the public. Such meetings
shall be in addition to any hearings on the permit application held by the
Planning Commission or the Board of Supervisors, and in addition to any
meetings of local general plan advisory committees to which the application is
referred. The Director and the applicant shall, if requested by the Director,
develop a mutually acceptable public outreach program that includes such
meeting(s) and any similar public outreach efforts to be undertaken by the
applicant. If any portion of the proposed project is located within a planning
area designated in a city general plan, the outreach program shall also include
one or more meetings in that city.
   (e)   Deciding authority. The Deciding Authority for a major electrical
transmission and distribution project application shall be the Board of
Supervisors. The Planning Commission shall review the project application and
any other relevant documents, hold at least one (1) noticed public hearing, and
make a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors thereon. Upon receiving this
recommendation, the Board of Supervisors shall consider the application at a
noticed public hearing, taking into account the criteria set forth in
Subsection (f), below.
   (f)   Review criteria. The purpose of this section is to establish use
permit criteria for major electrical power distribution and transmission
projects in the unincorporated area of the County, and shall apply to all such
projects that require a use permit. A use permit for such projects may only be
approved if all of the following findings are made based on substantial
evidence in the record:
   (1)   The proposed project is consistent with any applicable policies in the
General Plan and any applicable specific plan(s), as well as the Yolo Natural
Heritage Program (HCP/NCCP) upon its adoption;
   (2)   There is a demonstrated need for the proposed project;
   (3)   To the greatest feasible (as that term is defined in Public Utilities
Code Section 12808.5) extent, the project utilizes existing infrastructure and
rights-of-way or, alternatively, expands existing rights-of-way, in that order
of preference;
   (4)   There are no feasible alternatives that are superior to the proposed
project, taking into consideration and balancing the considerations set forth
in this section;
   (5)   The proposed project would not have adverse human health effects,
particularly with respect to individuals present in residential areas, schools,
licensed day-care facilities, playgrounds, and other developed areas in
reasonable proximity to the project;
   (6)   To the greatest feasible extent, the proposed project does not have a
significant adverse effect on the environment, agriculture, existing land uses
and activities, areas with significant scenic qualities, or other relevant
considerations of public health, safety, or welfare;
   (7)   To the greatest feasible extent, the proposed project avoids lands
preserved by the County for public park purposes;
   (8)   To the greatest feasible extent, the proposed project avoids lands
preserved by a conservation easement or similar deed restriction for
agricultural, habitat, or other purposes. The Board of Supervisors may waive
this requirement if the applicant provides documentation that the project does
not conflict with the conservation easement or deed restriction, or that the
conservation easement or deed restriction will be amended or extinguished prior
to implementation of the project. If the conservation easement or deed
restriction was provided as mitigation for the impacts of a prior development
project, however, it shall only be amended or extinguished if adequate
substitute mitigation is provided by the applicant;
   (9)   The proposed project complies with all laws, regulations, and rules
regarding airport safety conditions and similar matters, and would not require
a significant change in the operations of a public or private airport in the
County, create an undue hazard for aircraft, or substantially hinder aerial
spraying operations;
   (10)   To the greatest feasible extent, operation of the proposed project
would not create conditions that unduly reduce or interfere with public or
private television, radio, telemetry, or other electromagnetic communications
signals; and
   (11)   The applicant has agreed to conduct all roadwork and other site
development work in compliance with all laws, regulations, and rules relating
to dust control, air quality, erosion, and sediment control, as well as any
permits issued pursuant thereto.
   (g)   Scope. The requirements of this section shall apply to all major
electrical power transmission and distribution projects that have not received
all required Federal, State, and local agency approvals prior to the effective
date of this ordinance.
   (h)   Costs. The project applicant shall reimburse all County costs
associated with reviewing an application for a major electrical power
transmission and distribution project. In addition, if the County is required
to review a proposed transmission corridor zone pursuant to California
Government Code Section 25334 or other provisions of law, such costs shall also
be reimbursed by the project applicant.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 13, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Article 12: Sign Standards
Sec. 8-2.1201.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to establish standards for the uniform
regulation of signs and related structures to ensure the adequate
identification of businesses and other activities, while also maintaining and
improving the quality of the visual environment within the unincorporated area.
Accordingly, this section is adopted to:
   (a)   Ensure that signs erected within the unincorporated area are
compatible with their surroundings and are consistent with the Countywide
General Plan and related land use ordinances;
   (b)   Aid in the identification of properties, land uses, and businesses;
   (c)   Promote commerce, traffic safety, and community identity while also
promoting and enhancing the quality of the visual environment;
   (d)   Protect and enhance property values;
   (e)   Lessen the objectionable effects of competition in the placement and
size of signs;
   (f)   Reduce hazards to motorists and pedestrians;
   (g)   Avoid visual clutter;
   (h)   Provide clear procedures and standards to control the location, size,
type, number, and
   (i)   All other matters pertaining to signs within the unincorporated area.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1202.   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
   A-frame sign
   A temporary sign which has two (2) sides, the frame or support structure of
which is hinged or connected at the top of the sign in such a manner that the
sign is easily moved or erected.
   Abandoned
   A sign is “abandoned” where, for a period of ninety (90) days or more, there
is no sign copy appearing on the sign or where the establishment to which the
sign is attached has ceased operation and it is clear that the sign has been
forsaken and deserted.
   Agricultural sign
   A sign advertising the sale of agricultural products grown or produced in
the agricultural areas of the County, or advertising other uses allowed in the
agricultural zones.
   Amortization period
   The term “amortization period” refers to the period of time set forth in
Section
8-2.1204, below.
   Animated sign
   A sign with action, motion, sound, or changing colors, including signs that
blink or flash with fluctuating lights or other illuminating devices which have
a changing light intensity, brightness or color.
   Directional and information signs
   Signs that are necessary to direct or inform the public as to the location
of publicly-owned facilities or institutions, business districts or historic
locations or districts, not including commercial information such as
advertising for specific businesses or products.
   Effective date
   The term “effective date” refers to the date on which the ordinance
substantially revising this section became effective.
   General business sign
   An on-premise sign, other than a monument, wall, or pole sign, which
identifies a business or which advertises or promotes a commodity or service
offered on the premises where such sign is located.
   Home occupation sign
   A sign used in conjunction with a home occupation.
   Identification sign
   A sign used to identify publicly-owned facilities or institutions, business
districts or historic locations or districts, as well as individual
communities, and may include a community’s name and logo, data, and the
identification of community service organizations.
   Monument sign
   A “monument” sign is a sign which is completely freestanding and has its
base on the ground on the same or adjacent parcels for the businesses that are
being identified or advertised where the project utilizes common facilities,
such as driveways and parking areas.
   Nonconforming sign
   Any sign that lawfully existed on the effective date of this ordinance but
which does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance.
   Off-premises sign
   A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service
or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the same lot
or parcel on which said sign is located. This definition shall include
billboards, posters, panels, painted bulletins, and similar advertising
displays.
   Pole sign
   A permanent freestanding sign which is supported by one (1) or more poles in
or upon the ground on the same or adjacent parcels for the businesses that are
being identified or advertised where the project utilizes common facilities,
such as driveways and parking areas.
   Political sign
   A temporary sign used in connection with a local, State, or national
election or referendum.
   Projecting sign
   A “projecting” sign is a type of wall sign that extends horizontally from a
building.
   Real estate sign
   A temporary sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a
portion of the premises, on which the sign is located.
   Sign
   A “sign” shall mean anything whatsoever placed, erected, constructed,
posted, painted, tacked, nailed, glued, stuck, carved, grown, or otherwise
fastened, affixed, constructed, projected, produced, or made visible, including
billboards, and signboards, for out-of-door advertising purposes in any manner
whatsoever.
   Suspended
   A “suspended” sign is a type of wall sign that is attached to and located
below any permanent eve, roof or canopy.
   Wall sign
   A permanent sign which is painted on or attached directly to a building
surface and identifies or advertises businesses located within the building.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 14, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018)
Sec. 8-2.1203.   Prohibited signs.
   In order to achieve the purposes of this section, the following types of
signs and devices are prohibited:
   (a)   Abandoned signs;
   (b)   Animated signs, including electronic message display signs, and
variable intensity, blinking, or flashing signs with the exception of time and
temperature displays, posting of gasoline or other regulated prices, and
information provided by public agencies;
   (c)   Any sign illuminated by strobeor flashing light;
   (d)   Moving signs or signs that emit sound in order to attract attention;
   (e)   Roof signs;
   (f)   Signs that simulate in color, size, or design, any traffic control
sign or signal, or that make use of words, symbols, or characters in a manner
that interferes with, misleads or confuses pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
   (g)   Signs on a natural feature such as rock, tree, mound, hill or
mountain;
   (h)   Signs on inoperative vehicles and vehicles (including vehicle
trailers) parked for the primary purpose of displaying a sign to passing
pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
   (i)   Signs for home occupations that do not comply with subsections (f) and
(h) of Section
8-2.1207.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 14, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-2.1204.   Nonconforming signs.
   (a)   Any sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to the effective date,
but which does not conform to the provisions of this section, is a legal
nonconforming sign during the amortization period. A lawfully erected and
maintained sign that exceeds the area or height regulations, as set forth in
the provisions of this section, by five (5) percent or less shall not be deemed
nonconforming on the basis of area or height.
   (1)   Every on-site sign that becomes legally non-conforming upon the
effective date shall not be required to be removed, except as provided for in
California Business & Professions Code sections 5492, 5493, 5495, and 5497.
Such signs will be allowed within the amortization period, subject to
subsections (c) and (d), below.
   (2)   Every off-site sign that becomes legally non-conforming upon the
effective date shall not be required to be removed, except as provided for in
California Business and Professions Code sections 5412, 5412.1, 5412.2, and
5412.3. Such signs will be allowed within the amortization period, subject to
subsections (c) and (d), below.
   (b)   Any sign that was not lawfully erected prior to the effective date is
an illegal nonconforming sign. An illegal nonconforming sign must be removed in
accordance with the provisions of this section that apply to legal
nonconforming signs that have exceeded the authorized amortization period.
   (c)   No legal nonconforming sign shall be altered, relocated, replaced,
enlarged or reconstructed, except in such a manner as to cause the sign to
conform fully to this section. A legal nonconforming sign may be maintained or
the advertising copy changed without violating this provision.
   (d)   A legal nonconforming sign destroyed or damaged to the extent of fifty
(50) percent or greater of its value as of the date of such destruction or
damage ceases to be nonconforming and shall be replaced, removed or repaired in
full conformance with the provisions of this section.
   (e)   Unless a longer period is required by California law, all legal non-
conforming signs shall have a useful life and legal life of fifteen (15) years,
calculated from the effective date. Upon expiration of the amortization period,
or the occurrence of any of the events set forth in subsections (c) and (d),
above, the property owner shall remove the sign within thirty (30) days without
compensation. If a property owner fails to remove the nonconforming sign
following the expiration of the amortization period, the County may proceed
with abatement procedures or other legal methods to ensure the prompt removal
of the sign, and the County’s removal and enforcement costs may be charged
against the owner. Nothing in this section precludes a property owner from
voluntarily conforming a nonconforming sign at any time before the end of the
amortization period.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1205.   Signs and sign changes allowed without Site Plan Review.
   The following signs and activities related thereto are allowed “by right”
without a Site Plan Review in all zoning districts, provided that they comply
with the general standards of Section
8-2.1207, below, and any required building permit is obtained:
   (a)   Nonstructural modifications, including modifications to sign copy and
routine maintenance;
   (b)   Legal notices, identification, informational or directional/traffic
controlling devices erected or required by governmental agencies;
   (c)   Flags of national, State, or local governments, or nationally
recognized religious, fraternal, or public service agencies, provided that the
length of the flag shall not exceed one-fourth the height of the flagpole. The
maximum allowed height of a flagpole in a residential zoning district shall be
twelve (12) feet; the maximum height of a flagpole in a nonresidential zoning
district shall be twenty (20) feet;
   (d)   Street address numbers not exceeding an aggregate area of two (2)
square feet;
   (e)   Holiday or seasonal decorations that are intended to be displayed for
a short period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days. No holiday or seasonal
decorations shall be placed within the right-of-way of any street, road, or
highway located within the unincorporated area of Yolo County. No holiday or
seasonal decorations shall have lights that interfere in any manner with the
operation of motor vehicles on any street, road, or highway; and
   (f)   Temporary signs of any nature, including temporary event and/or
political signs, that are posted for a duration of not more than ninety (90)
days. Temporary event and/or political signs shall be placed no sooner than
ninety (90) days prior to the scheduled event or election, and shall be removed
within ten (10) days after such event or election, as required by the State
Outdoor Advertising Act. Such signs shall not be larger than thirty-two (32)
square feet and be limited to one (1) per parcel, in addition to other signs
allowed in this section. No such sign shall be placed within the right-of-way
of any street, road, or highway located within the unincorporated area of Yolo
County or have lights that interfere in any manner with the operation of motor
vehicles on any street, road, or highway.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1206.   Sign application and approval requirements.
   (a)   No sign shall be installed, constructed, or altered without prior
approval by the County in accordance with the permit requirements set forth in
Table 8-2.1206, below, and this section, with the exception of those signs
allowed by right without Site Plan Review pursuant to Section
8-2.1205, above.
   (b)   Unless an application for a Minor Use Permit is required, an
application for a Site Plan Review shall be filed and processed with the
Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department and fees shall be
paid. The application shall include architectural elevations and plans of all
proposed signs drawn to scale, with all dimensions noted, and include
illustrations of copy, colors, materials, and samples of the proposed colors
and materials. The required architectural elevations shall show both the
proposed signs, and any structures on which they will be placed. All
applications under this section shall be processed and decided in a time and
manner consistent with applicable requirements of the Permit Streamlining Act
or within one hundred eighty (180) days after the application is complete,
whichever is greater.
Table 8-2.1206
Allowed Signs and Permit Requirements for All Zones
A = Allowed Land Use Permit Required by Zones (1) (2)
use,
subject to
zoning
clearance*                                                        Specific Use
SP = Site                                                         Requirements
Plan Review                                                       or
UP (m) =    A-N, A-X, R-R, R-L R-M, R-H A-C, C-L, C- A-I, L-I, H- Performance
Minor Use   A-R                         G, C-H, DMX  I, OPRD      Standards
Permit                                                            (3)
UP (M) =
Major Use
Permit
N = Use Not
Allowed
A = Allowed    Land Use Permit Required by Zones (1) (2)
use, subject
to zoning
clearance*                                                        Specific Use
SP = Site Plan                                                    Requirements
Review         A-N, A-X,                   A-C, C-L, A-I, L-I, H- or
UP (m) = Minor A-R       R-R, R-L R-M, R-H C-G, C-H, I, OPRD      Performance
Use Permit                                 DMX                    Standards
UP (M) = Major                                                    (3)
Use Permit
N = Use Not
Allowed
Sign Type
Real estate    A         A        A        A         N            See Sec.
signs                                                             8-2.1207(b)
Directional                                                       See Sec.
and            SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m) SP/UP(m) SP/UP(m)  SP/UP(m)     8-2.1207(c)
information                                                       and (d)
signs
Identification SP        SP       SP       SP        SP           See Sec.
signs                                                             8-2.1207(e)
Agricultural                                                      See Sec.
signs          SP/UP(m)  N        N        N         N            8-2.1207(f)
                                                                  and (g)
General        N         SP       SP       SP        SP
business signs                                                    See
Monument signs N         N        SP       SP        SP           Table 8-
Wall signs     N         N        SP       SP        SP           2.1207, Sec.
                                                                  8-2.1207(h)
                                           N/SP/                  (i), and
Pole signs     N         N        N        UP(m) (4) N            (j), and
                                                                  Sec. 1208.

Off-premises   N         N        N        N         N
signs
 
Notes:
1.   For all other zone districts not listed here (PR, OS, overlay zones), see
Section
8-2.1207(k).
2.   All signs must be appurtenant to the use allowed in the zone district.
3.   General and design standards for all signs are set forth in Section
8-2.1207 and
8-2.1208.
4.   Pole signs are only allowed in the C-H zone
   (c)   The Zoning Administrator shall be the authority for all sign Site Plan
Review applications, and may approve only those that comply with the general
standards and design standards required in Section
8-2.1207 and
8-2.1208, below. The Zoning Administrator may impose additional conditions of
permit approval as are reasonably necessary to achieve the purposes of this
section. The Zoning Administrator may approve monument signs that are larger in
area or height than the normal standards under the circumstances described in
Section
8-2.1207(i). All other deviations from these sign standards shall be through
the Minor or Major Variance process, as outlined in Section
8-2.216 and
8-2.218.
   (d)   In his or her sole discretion, the Zoning Administrator may require a
public hearing, or may refer the application to the Planning Commission, if
specific issues warrant an opportunity for public notice and an opportunity to
comment on a proposed sign and a public hearing is not otherwise required by
law, as allowed under Section
8-2.206(e).
   (e)   Appeals of decisions of the Zoning Administrator or Planning
Commission shall be conducted according to Section
8-2.225.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1207.   General standards for signs.
   (a)   Signs are allowed in the various zones in the unincorporated area,
subject to the design standards set forth in Section
8-2.1208, and subject to the general standards and limitations set forth in
this section and in
Table 8-2.1207, below.
Table 8-2.1207
Sign Standards in Each Zoning District(1) (2)
 
                Maximum Size of Maximum Size   Maximum Size of  Maximum Size of
Zoning          Ag or General   and Height of  Wall Signs       Pole Sign
Districts       Signs Allowed   Monument Signs Allowed          Allowed
                                Allowed (3)
                32 sf in size                  16 sf in overall
A-N, A-X        10 feet in      n/a            size             n/a
                height
                24 sf in size
A-R, RR, R-L(4) 8 feet in       n/a            n/a              n/a
                height
                24 sf in size   24 sf in size  1 sf size per 2
R-M, R-H (4)    8 feet in       8 feet in      feet of building n/a
                height          height         frontage
A-C, C-L, C-G,  12 sf in size 4 48 sf in size  1 sf size per 1
DMX(5) (6)      feet in height  15 feet in     foot of building n/a
                                height         frontage
                                                                200 sf in size
                12 sf in size 4 75 sf in size  1 sf size per 1  60 feet in
C-H (5)         feet in height  15 feet in     foot of building height
                                height         frontage         (75 feet with
                                                                UP)
A-I, I-L, I-H,                  48 sf in size  1 sf size per 2
OPRD (5)(7)     n/a             15 feet in     feet of building n/a
                                height         frontage
 
Notes:
1.   For all other zone districts not listed here (PR, OS, overlay zones), see
Section
8-2.1207(k).
2.   All signs must be appurtenant to the use allowed in the zone district.
3.   The Zoning Administrator may approve an increase in the size and height
for monument signs, see Sec.
8-2.1207(j).
4.   For signs in residential zones, see Sec.
8-2.1207(h).
5.   For signs in commercial and industrial zones, see Sec.
8-2.1207(i).
6.   For signs in the DMX zone, see Sec.
8-2.1208(f).
7.   The regulation of signs in the Office Park/Research and Development (OPRD)
zone district may be defined in an overlaying Planned Development zoning
district that is unique to the project.
sf = square feet of area
n/a = not allowed in zone district
   (b)   Real estate signs advertising the sale, lease or exchange of real
property are allowed subject to the following requirements: not more that
twenty-four (24) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height; not
illuminated; and not more than one such sign per parcel of land.
   (c)   Directional and information signs necessary to direct or inform the
public as to the location of publicly-owned facilities or institutions,
business districts or historic locations or districts, not including commercial
information such as advertising for specific businesses or products. Such signs
shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area or ten (10) feet in height and
shall be limited to one per parcel.
   (d)   Directional and information signs exceeding the size limitations set
forth in subsection (c), above, may be allowed with the issuance of a Minor
Conditional Use Permit. Such signs shall be no more than seventy-five (75)
square feet in area and twenty (20) feet in height.
   (e)   Identification signs for a community may include the community’s name
and logo, data (elevation or population), and the identification of community
service organizations with meeting dates and places. Such signs shall be no
more than seventy-five (75) square feet in area and twenty (20) feet in height.
   (f)   Agricultural signs advertising the sale of agricultural products grown
or produced on lands within Yolo County shall not be illuminated, and are
limited to one per road frontage per parcel. Signs appurtenant to a licensed
home occupation shall be limited to a single non-illuminated free-standing or
wall-mounted sign that is not more than six (6) square feet in area and four
(4) feet in height.
   (g)   Agricultural signs not located on the same parcel that is selling the
agricultural products shall be no more than six (6) square feet in area and ten
(10) feet in height, are limited to one per road frontage per parcel, shall not
be illuminated, and shall be located no more than two (2) miles from the main
parcel. Agricultural signs not located on the same parcel exceeding these size
or geographic limitations may be allowed with the issuance of a Minor Use
Permit. Such signs shall be no more than thirty-two (32) square feet in area
and ten (10) feet in height, shall not be illuminated, and are limited to one
per road frontage per parcel, and shall be located no more than four (4) miles
from the main parcel.
   (h)   Signs allowed in the residential zones are limited to the following:
   (1)   One (1) identification sign on the road frontage(s) of a subdivision,
mobile home park, apartment or condominium complex, group quarters, or
permitted institutional use.
   (2)   For non-residential uses or structures permitted or conditionally
permitted In the R-M and R-H zones, one (1) general or one (1) monument sign on
the road frontage(s) of each parcel, and one (1) wall sign for each business or
tenant on each frontage or building face having a public entrance.
   (3)   Signs appurtenant to a licensed home occupation shall be limited to a
single non-illuminated wall-mounted sign that is not more than two (2) square
feet in area.
   (i)   Signs allowed in the commercial and industrial zones are limited to
the following:
   (1)   One (1) monument sign on the road frontage(s) of each parcel.
   (2)   One (1) wall or one (1) general sign (not both) for each business or
tenant on each frontage or building face having a public entrance.
   (3)   In the C-H zone only, one (1) pole sign on the road frontage(s) of
each parcel.
   (j)   The Zoning Administrator may approve an increase of up to twenty-five
percent (25%) in the allowed size and/or height of monument signs in return for
an applicant or applicants combining multiple individual tenant signs on
several frontages or on adjacent parcels in one shared monument sign. Any other
deviation of up to twenty-five percent (25%) of these sign standards may be
approved by the Zoning Administrator through the discretionary Minor Variance
process. Any deviation of greater than twenty-five percent (25%) from these
standards shall be approved through a Major Variance process by the Planning
Commission.
   (k)   Any deviation (increase) of up to twenty-five percent (25%) of these
sign standards may be approved by the Zoning Administrator through the
discretionary Minor Variance process. Any deviation of greater than twenty-five
percent (25%) from these standards shall be approved through a Major Variance
process by the Planning Commission.
   (l)   Signs allowed in the Parks and Recreation (P-R), Public Open Space
(POS) Public and Quasi-Public (PQP), Specific Plan (S-P), Planned Development
(PD), and the overlay zones are limited to the following:
   (1)   In the P-R, POS, and PQP zones, directional and information signs of
any size or number necessary to direct or inform the public as to the location,
history, and purpose of publicly-owned facilities, publicly-owned natural or
recreational resources, or other appurtenant uses or structures, provided that
the signs are consistent with all other regulations and standards included in
Article 8.
   (2)   In the P-R, POS, and PQP zones, general signs necessary to direct or
inform the public as to the quasi-public services offered on a privately-owned
property, including religious, educational, and other allowed quasi-public
uses, provided that the general signs are no more than thirty-two (32) square
feet in size and ten (10) feet in height, and are consistent with all other
regulations and standards included in Article 8.
   (3)   In the S-P zone, signs that are consistent with the interim
agricultural or other uses prior to the adoption of a Specific Plan, or signs
that are consistent with the adopted Specific Plan, provided that any sign is
consistent with all other regulations and standards included in Article 9.
   (4)   In the Planned Development (PD) zone, signs that are consistent with
the adopted PD zoning or are consistent with the sign regulations for the zone
or zones that are associated with the PD zoning.
   (5)   In the overlay zones (SP-O, NH-O DP-O, MR-O, and A-O zones), signs
that are consistent with the underlying zoning district, provided that any sign
is consistent with all other regulations and standards included in Article 9.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 14, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7, 2018)
Sec. 8-2.1208.   Design standards for signs.
   The following design standards apply to permitted signs located in all zone
districts:
   (a)   Proposed signs shall not unreasonably block the sight lines of
existing signs on adjacent properties from nearby public right-of ways and
paths of travel. The placement and size of a sign shall not impair pedestrian
or vehicular safety.
   (b)   The design, height, location, and size of the sign should be visually
complementary and compatible with the scale and architectural style of the
primary structures on the site, the natural features of the site, and
structures and prominent natural features on adjacent properties on the same
street.
   (c)   Illuminated Signs: Lighting for illuminated signs shall be so arranged
that it will not create a hazardous glare for pedestrians or vehicles on either
a public street or on any private premises.
   (d)   Monument Signs: Monument signs shall be placed so as not to obstruct
visibility necessary for safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation, but may be
placed in required street yard and/or setback areas.
   (e)   Wall signs: All wall signs, including but not limited to projecting
and suspended signs, shall conform to the following requirements:
   (1)   The placement and height of the sign on the site shall be appropriate
to the size of buildings and other features on the site, whether the sign is
freestanding or projecting;
   (2)   A proposed suspended, projecting, or wall sign shall be consistent
with the architectural design of the structure. Signs that cover windows, or
that spill over and/or cover architectural features are not allowed;
   (3)   The minimum clearance between the lowest point of a sign and the grade
immediately below shall be eight (8) feet;
   (4)   The minimum horizontal setback between a sign and the curb line shall
be two (2) feet. The maximum projection over a public sidewalk shall be two-
thirds the width of the sidewalk or six (6) feet, whichever is less;
   (5)   The top of a projecting sign shall not exceed the height of the face
of the building by which it is supported.
   (f)   In addition to the design standards described above, the following
additional design standards shall be applied in the Downtown Mixed Use (DMX)
zone. If there is a conflict between the general or design standards for all
signs and these sign regulations specifically adopted for the DMX zone, the DMX
zone regulations shall apply:
   (1)   Signs shall be provided for commercial uses and buildings along Yolo
Avenue and Woodland Avenue that are appropriate in scale and location, and
shall be architecturally integrated with the surroundings.
   (2)   Signs shall be clearly integrated and consistent in design and
materials with the architecture of the building. Signage in the business
district should support the district’s character and not detract from the area.
   (3)   Monument signs are preferred. Pole signs are prohibited.
   (4)   Ground signage shall be limited in height of five (5) feet.
   (5)   Attached signs shall be flat against the facade, or mounted projection
from the facade.
   (6)   Window signage shall be limited to twenty (20) percent of the total
window frontage per storefront.
   (7)   The maximum area of any single sign mounted perpendicular to a given
facade shall not exceed ten (10) square feet.
   (8)   Signs shall maintain a minimum clear height above sidewalks of eight
(8) feet.
   (9)   Signs shall not extend beyond the curb line.
   (10)   Signs located on the interior of a structure, but visible from the
exterior of the building, are permitted and are not charged against the maximum
allowable signage area if such signs are not physically attached or painted to
the window and do not obscure more than ten percent (10%) of ground floor
street side building transparency. The ten percent (10%) is not to exceed total
glass area calculated for both unattached and temporary window signs.
   (11)   Temporary signs can take the form of banners, window graphics, or as
placards integrated with a window display. Temporary signs are permitted on the
interior of the business establishment only and shall be no more than five (5)
square feet of text and shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in size and no
more than ten percent (10%) of ground floor street side building transparency.
Temporary signs shall not be displayed more than thirty (30) days in a calendar
year.
   (12)   One menu or sandwich board shall be allowed per street address. Menu
boards shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in size (sign and copy area is
calculated on one side only) and shall be positioned so as to be adjacent to
that restaurant or business listed on the board and information on that board
shall be placed in a manner which is clearly visible to pedestrian traffic. All
signs shall be removed at the end of each business day. All signs shall be
securely anchored to the ground.
   (13)   Murals are allowed and shall be reviewed for design by the Esparto
Citizens Advisory Committee.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 14, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-2.1209.   Substitution of non-commercial speech.
   Any non-commercial message or speech may be substituted for the copy of any
commercial sign allowed under this section.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 13: Off-street Parking and Loading
Sec. 8-2.1301.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this article shall be to provide safe and convenient
vehicular access to all land uses, to minimize traffic congestion and hazards
to motorists and pedestrians, and to provide accessible, attractive, secure,
and well-maintained off-street parking and loading facilities without
precluding the feasible redevelopment and adaptive reuse of existing structures
and blocks, when any main building or structure is erected, enlarged, or
increased in capacity. An added purpose of this article is to provide
discretion to the Planning Director, Zoning Administrator, and Planning
Commission to reduce standard parking requirements whenever possible so as to
reduce demand for parking, the use of single occupant vehicles, and
environmental effects, and meet climate change goals.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 4, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7,
2018)
Sec. 8-2.1302.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
   Downtown Mixed Use (DMX) zones
   The Downtown Mixed Use zone applies to downtown business districts of
certain unincorporated towns that are planned for development or redevelopment
of a mixture of primarily commercial, retail, office, residential, and other
uses.
   Gross floor area (GFA)
   Gross floor area is the area within the inside perimeter of the exterior
walls of a structure used, or intended to be used, by owners and tenants for
all purposes, exclusive of vent shafts and courts. Usable area under a
horizontal projection of a roof or floor above, not provided with surrounding
exterior walls shall be included within the total gross floor area.
   Live/work unit or Live/work space
   A live/work unit or live/work space is a building or space within a building
used jointly for commercial and residential purposes where the residential use
of the space is secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work.
“Live/work unit” is further defined as a structure or portion of a structure:
   • That combines a commercial or manufacturing activity allowed in the zone
with a residential living space for the owner of the commercial or
manufacturing business, or the owner’s employee, and that person’s household;
and
   • Where the resident owner, occupant, or employee of the business is
responsible for the commercial or manufacturing activity performed; and
   • Where the commercial or manufacturing activity conducted takes place
subject to a valid business license associated with the premises.
   Parking lot
   A parking lot is a designated area, other than a street or other public way,
used for the parking of automobiles and available to the public, whether for a
fee, free, or as an accommodation for clients, employees, or customers,
excluding one-family and two-family dwellings.
   Vacant land
   Vacant land is land that is currently undeveloped with urban structures, but
may be occupied by a rural residence or structure, and is designated for future
urban growth.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1303.   Applicability.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided by this article or a separately-
adopted ordinance, the provisions of this article shall apply to all uses and
development in County zoning districts referenced below. The general standards
for parking, loading, and accessible spaces in this article shall be considered
a minimum level of design, and more extensive parking design and circulation
provisions may be required by the deciding authority in connection with the
approval of a discretionary permit or entitlement. However, the number of
parking spaces specified in
Table 8-2.1306 shall be considered the maximum number of required spaces unless
a greater amount of parking for a specific use is required by the Planning
Director, Zoning Administrator, or the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1304.   General parking provisions.
   (a)   Location of parking - nonresidential use. Required parking spaces
shall be located on the same parcel with the primary use or structure, or on an
immediately adjacent and contiguous parcel. If it is not feasible to provide
the required amount of parking on the same or adjacent parcel, as determined by
the Planning Director, parking spaces located within two hundred fifty (250)
feet of the premises to which the parking requirements pertain, may be leased
or purchased. An agreement providing for the shared use of private parking
indicating the hours of the expected use by type of activity, executed by the
parties involved, shall be filed with the Planning Director. Property within
the existing or anticipated future right-of-way of a street or highway shall
not be used to provide required parking or loading facilities, unless allowed
through the issuance of a Use Permit.
   (b)   Location of parking - residential use. Required parking shall not be
located in any required front or side yard, except as otherwise permitted for
accessory second units in residential (R) zones according to Article 5, Section
8-2.506(b).
   (c)   Change in nonresidential use. When the occupancy or use of a property,
except for property within the Downtown Mixed Use (DMX) zone, is changed to a
different use, or the lessee, tenant, or owner of a specific use occupying more
than five hundred (500) square feet of leasable commercial floor area, or one
thousand (1,000) square feet of leasable industrial floor area is changed,
through issuance of a discretionary or non-discretionary permit, parking to
meet the requirements of this section shall be provided for the new use or
occupancy, to the extent feasible.
   (d)   Increase in nonresidential use. When an existing occupancy or use of
more than five hundred (500) square feet of leasable commercial floor area, or
one thousand (1,000) square feet of leasable industrial floor area is altered,
enlarged, expanded, or intensified, except for property within the Downtown
Mixed Use (DMX) zone, through issuance of a discretionary or non-discretionary
permit, additional parking to meet the requirements of this section shall be
provided for the altered, enlarged, expanded, or intensified portion only, to
the extent feasible.
   (e)   Two or more uses. Where two (2) or more uses are located in a single
structure or on a single parcel, required parking shall be provided for each
specific use (i.e., the total parking required for an establishment that has
both industrial and office uses shall be determined by computing the parking
for the industrial use and the office use and then adding the two requirements
together). A reduction of the required parking spaces may be approved, as
allowed in Section
8-2.1310.
   (f)   Parking and loading spaces to be permanent. Parking and loading spaces
shall be permanently available, marked, and maintained for parking or loading
purposes, for the use they are intended to serve. The Planning Director may
approve the temporary reduction of parking or loading spaces in conjunction
with a seasonal or intermittent use.
   (g)   Parking and loading to be unrestricted. Owners, lessees, tenants,
caretaker or persons having control of the operation of the premises for which
parking or loading spaces are required by this section shall not prevent,
prohibit or restrict authorized persons from using these spaces without prior
approval of the Planning Director.
   (h)   Use of parking lot for activities other than parking. Required off-
street parking, circulation, and access areas shall be used exclusively for the
temporary parking and maneuvering of vehicles and shall not be used for the
sale, lease, display, repair, or storage of vehicles, trailers, boats, campers,
mobile homes, merchandise, or equipment, or for any other use not authorized by
the provisions of this Code. The temporary use of parking lots for display and
sales may be permitted in advance through the issuance of a Site Plan Review by
the Zoning Administrator, with a finding that an adequate amount of parking
will still be available for customers.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 4, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7,
2018)
Sec. 8-2.1305.   Off-street parking in Downtown Mixed Use (DMX) zones.
   (a)   For development projects on vacant or under-developed lands of more
than one (1) acre within Downtown Mixed Use (DMX) Zones, off-street parking
shall be provided for all residential and nonresidential uses, as required by
this article, excluding subsections (b) through (e), below.
   (b)   For all other development projects not on vacant or under-developed
lands of more than one (1) acre within Downtown Mixed Use (DMX) Zones, the
following parking requirements apply:
   (1)   No off-street parking is required for new or expanded nonresidential
uses in the DMX zone unless such uses exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet
of gross floor area, in which case off-street parking shall be provided for the
floor area in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet, in accordance with
all provisions of this article, or as modified by (3) below.
   (2)   Off-street parking for new residential uses of four or more units in
the DMX zone shall be provided, in accordance with all provisions of this
article, or as modified by (3) below.
   (3)   Off-street parking requirements for nonresidential and residential
uses may be modified by the Planning Director in accordance with Section
8-2.1310, below.
   (c)   For live/work units of less than two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet, one (1) parking space is required for each unit. For live/work
units greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, required
parking will be based on the applicable parking standard for the nonresidential
use or the closest similar use as determined by the Planning Director or Zoning
Administrator.
   (d)   Off-street parking requirements for both nonresidential and
residential uses may be satisfied by the leasing or purchasing of nearby
parking spaces on adjacent parcels within four hundred (400) feet of the use.
   (e)   Off-street parking spaces provided on the site must be located to the
rear of the principal building or otherwise screened so as to not be visible
from the public right-of-way or residential zoning districts.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1306.   Number of parking spaces required.
   (a)   Number of parking spaces required. Each new or modified land use shall
provide a parking plan using the standard number of off-street parking spaces,
as listed in
Table 8-2.1306, as a guide, but modified, if feasible, to reduce the total
amount of on-site parking. The parking plan for larger uses should include
employee ride-sharing, car-pooling, and transit pass programs, as well
proposals for improved bicycle and pedestrian access. The parking plan shall
take into account any parking reduction or modification that is proposed and
has been granted in compliance with Section
8-2.1310. A minimum number of accessible and bicycle parking spaces shall be
required in the total count of required spaces as listed in Section
8-2.1307(a) and (b). The parking space requirements by land use, specified in
Table 8-2.1306, shall be considered the maximum number of spaces that are to be
provided for each use, unless a greater amount of parking for a specific use is
required by the Planning Director.
   (b)   Land uses not identified. The required number of parking spaces for a
land use not identified in
Table 8-2.1306 shall be determined by the Planning Director. The Director may
require the preparation of a parking demand study to determine the parking
requirement for unlisted uses.
Table 8-2.1306
Parking Requirements by Land Use 1
Land Use Number of Parking Spaces Required
Land Use                                                                        Number of Parking Spaces Required
Industrial Uses
Industrial uses of all types (over 1,000 SF), including warehouses,             1 for each 2,000 SF of the first 40,000 SF of GFA; and
manufacturing, processing                                                       1 for each 4,000 SF of GFA for the portion over 40,000 SF
Retail and sales services accessory to the industrial use (over 1,000 SF)       1 for each 300 SF of GFA
Recreation, Education and Public Assembly Uses
Amusement enterprises                                                           1 for each 4 persons of the facility’s allowed maximum attendance
Bowling alleys and billiard halls                                               3 for each bowling lane; and
                                                                                2 for each billiard table
Churches, synagogues, temples, mosques and other places of worship (2) ,        1 for each 4 fixed seats (2) in the main chapel or assembly room; and
mortuaries, and funeral homes                                                   1 for every 25 SF of seating area where there are no fixed seats (2)
Commercial recreation and similar uses (e.g., shooting ranges, race tracks,     1 for each 4 persons of the facility’s allowed maximum attendance
miniature golf course, pitch and putt courses, and zoos)
Commercial swimming pools and swimming schools                                  1 for each 500 SF of water surface area
                                                                                10 minimum
Correctional institutions and facilities                                        1 for each 2,000 SF of GFA
Emergency shelters                                                              1 for each 8 beds; and
                                                                                1 for each 400 SF of office or other non-residential area
                                                                                2 for each hole on all golf courses; and
Golf courses and driving ranges                                                 1 for each tee for driving ranges; and
                                                                                1 for each 300 SF of restaurant/bar area
                                                                                1 bus parking space per 20 campers
Organizational camps                                                            1 for each resident staff; and
                                                                                1 for each nonresident staff on the largest shift
Meeting facilities - Theaters, auditoriums, conference centers, stadiums, sport 1 for each 4 fixed seats (2) or for every 25 SF of seating area within the main
arenas, gymnasiums and similar places of public assembly                        auditorium where there are no fixed seats (2)
Schools: general curriculum                                                     1 for each staff member, faculty member, and employee (full-time, part-time, or
   elementary and middle school                                              volunteer)
Schools: general curriculum                                                     1 for each 4 students; and
   High school, colleges and universities, business and professional schools 1 for each staff member, faculty member and employee (full-time, part-time, or
                                                                                volunteer)
                                                                                1 for each 3 students; and
Schools: special schools or trade schools                                       1 for each staff member, faculty member, and employee (full-time, part-time, or
                                                                                volunteer)
Residential Uses
                                                                                1 for each dwelling unit containing not more than 2 bedrooms, and 2 parking
One-family and two-family dwellings, ancillary dwelling units, second dwelling  spaces for each dwelling unit containing 3 or more bedrooms
units, accessory dwelling units                                                 See Sec.
                                                                                8-2.506(b)(6) for Accessory Dwelling Units
Farm labor housing                                                              Group quarters: 1 per 4 beds
                                                                                Dwelling units: 2 per dwelling
Guest house, accessory structure conversion to habitable accessory housing      1 space
structure
Multi-family dwelling                                                              1 for each dwelling unit containing not more than 1 bedroom or one and one-
                                                                                half (1 1/2) for each dwelling unit containing 2 or more bedrooms
Caretaker/night watchman housing                                                1 per unit
Clubs, conference centers, fraternity and sorority houses, rooming and boarding 1 for each guest room
houses, and similar structures having guest rooms
Residential care facility                                                       1 for each 3 persons cared for
Mobile home parks                                                               1 for each mobile home parcel
                                                                                1 guest space for each 5 spaces, or fraction thereof
Model home/sales office                                                         2 per office; and
                                                                                2 for visitors
Commercial Uses- Retail
Automobile sales, boat sales, mobile home sales, retail nurseries, and other    1 for each 2,000 SF, or portion thereof, for open area devoted to display or
open uses not in an enclosed structure                                          sales for the first 10,000 SF; and
                                                                                1 for each 5,000 SF, or portion thereof, over 10,000 SF
Equipment sales and rental, indoor                                              1 for each 400 SF of GFA
Retail stores (over 500 SF)                                                     1 for each 300 SF of GFA
Supermarkets and shopping centers (under 200,000 SF of GFA)                     1 for each 300 SF of GFA
Shopping centers (projects over 200,000 SF of floor area)                       1 for each 300 SF of GFA up to 100,000 SF; and
                                                                                1 for each 400 SF of GFA above 100,000 SF
                                                                                The greater of the following:
Restaurants, including drive-ins, cafes, night clubs, bars, and other similar   1 for each 300 SF of GFA; or
places where food or refreshment are dispensed                                  1 for each 4 fixed seats (2) and/or 1 for every 50 SF of floor area where seats
                                                                                may be placed
Wholesale commercial nurseries                                                  1 for each 500 SF of display area
Commercial Uses - Services
Automobile repair, gas and service stations                                     1 for each 400 SF of GFA
Bed and breakfast                                                               1 for each guest room; and
                                                                                1 for resident manager
Child care centers                                                              1 for each 5 children that the facility is designed to accommodate
Hospital                                                                        1 for each 4 patient beds
Hotels and Motels                                                               1 for each unit/room; and
                                                                                1 for each 350 SF of GFA
Medical offices, clinics, veterinary hospital                                   1 for each 350 SF of GFA
Offices, general, financial, business and professional uses (over 500 SF)       1 for each 350 SF of GFA
Personal services (over 500 SF)                                                 1 for each 350 SF of GFA
Public/Mini Storage                                                             1 space per 100 storage units or 5 spaces, whichever is greater
Social care facilities including convalescent and nursing homes, senior living  1 for each 3 residents of the maximum licensed resident capacity
facilities, sanitariums, etc.
Agricultural Uses
Farm Offices (over 500 SF)                                                      1 for each 500 SF of GFA
Agricultural Processing (over 1,000 SF)                                         1 for each 2,000 SF of the first 40,000 SF of GFA; and
                                                                                1 for each 4,000 SF of GFA for the portion over 40,000 SF
Agricultural Research facilities (office, laboratory, or similar use) (over     1 for each 350 SF of GFA
1,000 SF)
                                                                                For Tasting Rooms:
                                                                                1 for each 300 SF of GFA
Winery and olive oil operations (over 1,000 SF)                                 For Production Facilities:
                                                                                1 for each 2,000 SF of the first 40,000 SF of GFA; and
                                                                                1 for each 4,000 SF of GFA for the portion over 40,000 SF
Private and commercial horse stables                                            1 for each 5 horse stalls (when boarding)
                                                                                Daily and event parking to be determined by Use Permit review process
Yolo Stores (over 500 SF)                                                       1 for each 300 SF of GFA
 
Notes:
(1)   The parking ratios in this table are recommended for use by applicants in
developing a parking plan for their projects (see Sec. 8-1306(a)).
(2)   Twenty-four linear inches (24") of bench or pew shall be considered a
fixed seat.
GFA = Gross floor area
SF = Square feet of floor area
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 4, Ord. 1497, eff. June 7,
2018)
Sec. 8-2.1307.   Special parking space requirements.
   In addition to the parking spaces required by Section
8-2.1306, a new use, expanded use, or change in use shall also provide, when
applicable, the type and number of spaces required as follows:
   (a)   Accessible parking required. For multi-family residential, commercial,
industrial, institutional, and public uses, California law establishes the
required number of accessible parking spaces. The requirements in effect at the
time of adoption of this article are reflected in
Table 8-2.1307 (Number of Accessible Parking Spaces Required), and shall apply
unless the California Building Code is amended to establish stricter
requirements. In all respects, accessible parking spaces shall be designed,
located and provided with identification signing as set forth in the California
Building Code, as may be amended from time to time. One in every eight (8)
accessible spaces, but not less than one (1), shall be van accessible.
Table 8-2.1307
Number of Accessible Parking Spaces Required
Total Number of Parking Spaces in Lot or Minimum Required Number of Accessible
Garage                                   Parking Spaces
Total Number of Parking Spaces in Lot Minimum Required Number of Accessible
or Garage                             Parking Spaces
1-25                                  1
26-50                                 2
51-75                                 3
76-100                                4
101-150                               5
151-200                               6
201-300                               7
301-400                               8
401-500                               9
501-1,000                             2% of total
1,001 and over                        20 plus 1 for each 100, or fraction over
                                      1,001
 
   (b)   Bicycle parking. The following bicycle parking standards shall apply
only for those uses located within community growth boundaries as identified in
the General Plan.
   (1)   For non-residential uses, bicycle parking spaces shall be provided at
a rate equal to five (5) percent of the total required vehicle parking spaces.
Spaces may be in the form of racks (for short-term use) or lockers (for long-
term use by employees).
   (2)   For multiple-family housing, bicycle parking spaces shall be provided
at a rate equal to ten (10) percent of the total required parking spaces.
   (3)   Bicycle parking spaces shall be conveniently located and generally
within proximity to the main entrance of a structure and shall not interfere
with pedestrian access.
   (4)   Bicycle and vehicle parking areas shall be separated from one another
by a physical barrier or sufficient distance to protect bicycles and riders
from damage.
   (5)   All bicycle parking and storage areas shall be paved with asphalt,
concrete or other all-weather surface.
   (c)   Company vehicles. Commercial or industrial uses shall provide one (1)
parking space for each company vehicle which is parked on the site during
normal business hours. Such space may be located within a building.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1308.   Loading space requirements.
   (a)   General requirements. In any zone, in connection with every building
or part thereof hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of five thousand
(5,000) square feet or more, which building is to be occupied for
manufacturing, storage, warehousing, goods display, or retail sales, or as a
hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning establishment, or other use
similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials or
merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same lot with such
building at least one (1) off-street loading space, plus one (1) additional
such loading space for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of
gross floor area in the building.
   (b)   Location. Loading spaces shall be situated to ensure that the loading
facility is screened from adjacent streets and neighboring residential
properties.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1309.   Determination of fractional spaces.
   When units or measurements determining the number of required off-street
parking and off-street loading spaces result in a requirement of a fractional
space, any fraction up to one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded, and any fraction
of one-half (1/2) or more shall require one (1) off-street parking or off-
street loading space.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1310.   Adjustments to parking requirements.
   The adjustments to the parking requirements, below, may be used in any
combination with each other; however, the total reduction of parking spaces may
be no greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total spaces. The
adjustments shall be applied to all non-residential uses.
   (a)   Shared peak-hour parking. Where two (2) or more adjacent uses have
distinct and differing peak parking usage periods, (e.g. a theater and a bank),
a reduction in the required number of parking spaces may be approved by the
Planning Director based on the findings and recommendations of a parking study
prepared by a qualified parking or traffic consultant. The amount of reduction
may be up to the number of spaces required for the least intensive of the uses
sharing the parking. An agreement providing for the shared use of private
parking, executed by the parties involved, shall be filed with the Planning
Director.
   (b)   Shared on-site parking adjustment. Where two (2) or more
nonresidential uses are on a single site, the number of parking spaces may be
reduced through adjustment up to a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%); as
long as the total of spaces is not less than required for the use requiring the
largest number of spaces. An agreement providing for the shared use of private
parking, executed by the parties involved, shall be filed with the Planning
Director.
   (c)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking requirements for nonresidential
and residential uses may be modified by the Planning Director, the Zoning
Administrator, or the Planning Commission based on a parking supply study
prepared by a civil engineer or other certified professional which indicates an
ample supply of on-street or other nearby public parking, or adequate nearby
available private parking for shared nonresidential uses.
   (d)   Compact car spaces. Lots with twenty (20) or more spaces may
substitute compact car spaces for up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total
number of required spaces.
   (e)   Motorcycle parking. Lots with twenty (20) or more spaces may replace
regular spaces with motorcycle spaces for up to five percent (5%) of the total
number of required spaces.
   (f)   Incentive for porous or permeable paving. Where porous or permeable
paving materials are used to satisfy parking lot paving requirements as set
forth in Sec.
8-2.1313(b), a twenty percent (20%) reduction of the total number of required
spaces may be granted by the Planning Director.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1311.   Development Standards.
   (a)   Minimum parking space sizes and lot dimensions. All off-street parking
areas shall be designed and improved as follows:
   (1)   Size of required parking spaces. Each required parking space shall be
at least nine feet in width and eighteen feet in length (9’ x 18’), with
adequate provisions for ingress and egress by a standard full size passenger
vehicle. This standard shall apply to all uses, including single-family
residential, except where noted in Subsections 2, 3, 4, and 5, below. Parking
spaces in parking lots shall comply with the minimum dimension requirements in
Table 8-2.1311 (Minimum Off-Street Parking Dimensions) and as illustrated in
Figure 8-2.1311 (Off-Street Parking Dimensions).
Table 8-2.1311
Minimum Off-Street Parking Dimensions
 
Angle of Parking Space Width (in Space Length   Space Depth     Aisle Width (in
(in degrees) (A) feet) (B)       (per vehicle)  (from curb) (D) feet) (E)
                                 (C)
Parallel (0°)   9 ft            18 ft          9 ft            12 ft (one-way)
30°             9 ft            18 ft          15 ft           11 ft (one-way)
45°             9 ft            18 ft          17 ft           13 ft (one-way)
60°             9 ft            18 ft          18 ft           18 ft (one-way)
90°             9 ft            18 ft          18 ft           24 ft (one-way)
 
Figure 8-2.1311
Off-Street Parking Dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/de66ea921125bb6e72629087eec5bc9b667694bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9766.jpg]
   (1)   Enclosed parking spaces. Enclosed parking spaces (i.e. residential
garages) shall be at least ten feet in width and twenty feet in length (10’ x
20’) for a single vehicle. The width shall increase by ten (10) feet for each
additional vehicle.
   (2)   Compact car spaces. Compact car spaces shall be a minimum of eight
feet in width and fourteen feet in length (8’ x 14’) and shall be identified
with pavement markings designating it as a “compact space.”
   (3)   Motorcycle parking spaces. Motorcycle spaces shall be a minimum size
of four feet in width and eight feet in length (4’ x 8’).
   (4)   Loading spaces. Loading spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet in
width, twenty-five feet in length, and fourteen feet of vertical clearance (10’
x 25’ x 14’).
   (b)   Minimum aisle widths. All nonresidential off-street parking lots shall
be designed and improved as follows:
   (1)   Aisle width for parallel and angled parking. Aisles within a parking
lot shall be as listed in
Table 8-2.1311.
   (2)   Fire access aisles. The aisles adjacent to nonresidential structures
shall be a minimum width of twenty-six (26) feet to accommodate fire emergency
vehicles and shall be located so that the vehicles can park within one hundred
fifty (150) feet of all sides of the structures. Aisles adjacent to structures
that are greater than two (2) stories in height shall be a minimum width of
thirty (30) feet.
   (3)   Truck aisles. Access aisles for multiple-axle trucks in commercial and
industrial projects shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet. Truck movement
templates (i.e., turning radii elements including wheel paths, which define the
needed width of pavement, and the front overhang, which is the zone beyond the
pavement edge that must be clear of obstructions above curb height) shall be
included on the site plan design to indicate turning conditions.
   (c)   Access to areas and spaces. The following access design standards
shall be required:
   (1)   Circulation within parking lot. The parking lot shall be designed so
that a car entering the parking lot shall not be required to enter a public
street to move from one location to any other location within the parking lot
or premises.
   (2)   Forward entry into right-of-way. With the exception of parking spaces
for dwelling units in residential zones, parking and maneuvering areas shall be
arranged so that vehicles entering a vehicular right-of-way can do so traveling
in a forward direction only.
   (3)   Driveway access. Off-street parking facilities shall be designed to
limit access to private property from streets and highways to a minimum number
of standard driveways in compliance with the County of Yolo Improvement
Standards on file in the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Department.
   (4)   Directional signage. Signs shall be painted on the pavement or
permanently installed on poles indicating the location of “Entrance” and “Exit”
areas.
   (5)   Pedestrian pathways. Pedestrian pathways shall be defined by use of
paint or distinctive paving colors, patterns, or textures that are different
from vehicle drive aisles.
   (d)   Lighting. Parking lots shall provide on-site lighting necessary to
protect the public safety.
   (1)   Parking lots shall have lighting capable of providing adequate
illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be energy-
efficient and in scale with the height and use of the on-premises structure(s).
All illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed downward, away
from adjacent properties and public right-of-way.
   (2)   The maximum height of any parking lot light shall not exceed the
height requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
   (e)   Striping and identification. Individual parking stalls shall be
clearly striped and permanently maintained on pavement surface. Arrows shall be
painted on pavement surface to indicate direction of traffic flows.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1312.   Landscaping and screening.
   (a)   Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as follows on all parking
lots, excluding those in agricultural zones, unless as required by a
discretionary approval.
   (1)   Landscape plan required. A landscape and irrigation plan in
conformance with State and local ordinance shall be submitted to the Planning
Director for approval.
   (2)   Shading requirement. Parking lots shall include tree plantings that
will result in fifty percent (50%) shading of the parking lot surface area
within ten (10) years of commencement of use. A signed statement from a
landscape architect or environmental design professional shall be included
within the landscape and irrigation plan certifying that the shading
requirement will be met within ten (10) years. The Planning Director may reduce
or waive the fifty percent (50%) shading requirement, on a case by case basis,
if the parking lot proposal includes solar panels or a paving technique that
radiates significantly less heat than traditional asphalt.
   (3)   Landscaping materials. Landscaping materials shall be provided
throughout the parking lot area using a combination of trees, shrubs, and
vegetative ground cover. Water conservation and use of native landscape plant
materials shall be emphasized.
   (4)   Location of landscaping. Parking lot landscaping shall be located so
that pedestrians are not required to cross through landscaped areas to reach
building entrances from parked cars.
   (5)   Curbing. Areas containing plant materials shall be bordered by a
concrete curb or other barrier design as approved by the Planning Director.
   (b)   Screening. The following screening designs are required:
   (1)   Adjacent to residential uses. Parking lots that abut a residential use
or zone shall be separated from the property line by a landscaping strip. The
landscaping strip shall have a minimum width of five (5) feet. A minimum six
foot (6’) high solid fence shall be installed on the residential side of the
landscaping strip, except that the fence shall be a minimum of three feet (3’)
high where located adjacent to a required front yard setback on an adjoining
lot.
   (2)   Adjacent to streets. Parking lots adjoining a public street shall be
designed to provide a landscaped planting strip or landscape berm between the
edge of the street right-of-way and parking lot. The landscaped planting strip
or berm shall not encroach on the street right-of-way. (Refer to the County of
Yolo Improvement Standards, on file in the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department, for visibility requirements at intersections
and driveways.)
   (3)   Modification of screening requirements. The Planning Director may
modify any or all of such screening requirements when, due to special
conditions of the size or shape of the lot, differences in elevations between
lots, intervening features, such as waterways and other man-made geographical
features, or the distance of the parking lot from the adjoining lot, the
modification meets the overall objectives of this section.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1313.   Paving.
   (a)   Agricultural zones. Required parking spaces, loading areas, and roads
required in agricultural zones shall be all-weather and usable for the purpose
for which they are provided, but are not required to be paved, unless as
required as part of a discretionary approval, or when stricter fire access
requirements prevail. In conformance with Section
8-2.1307(a), accessible parking shall be required for applicable uses. The
required parking spaces shall be clearly marked and maintained, as described in
Section
8-2.1304(f), when the land use is in operation. Connections of the access
driveway(s) to the public road, and parking lot surface design shall be per
County of Yolo Improvement Standards on file in the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department.
   (b)   In all other zones. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all
off-street parking and loading areas shall be paved, graded, and drained so as
to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area. The use of swales
and pervious surfaces to capture storm water runoff for maximum groundwater
recharge are encouraged. Surfacing materials required to satisfy the paving
regulations must be durable and dustless and must be maintained to provide for
orderly and safe loading, unloading, parking, and storage of vehicles and
equipment. Porous or permeable materials, such as pervious asphalt or pavers
and plantable pavers, are encouraged. An adjustment to parking requirements may
be granted for using permeable or pervious paving, as set forth in Section
8-2.1310(f). Connections of the access driveway(s) to the public road, and
parking lot surface design shall be per County of Yolo Improvement Standards on
file in the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-2.1314.   Recreational and commercial vehicle parking in residential
zones.
   (a)   Scope. This section specifies the requirements for the parking of
recreational vehicles and commercial vehicles, and the provision of parking
spaces for such vehicles, on residential properties located in any residential
zone within the unincorporated County.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, certain words and
phrases used in this section are defined as follows.
   Commercial vehicle
   A commercial vehicle includes: any self-propelled vehicle over ten thousand
(10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight, and/or having more than two (2) axles,
and which is used by the owner thereof for commercial purposes; any towed
vehicle used by the owner thereof for commercial purposes; and all other self-
propelled equipment, including tractors, which are used by the owners thereof
for commercial purposes and which are stored outdoors, excluding passenger
vehicles.
   Passenger vehicle
   A passenger vehicle includes all automobiles, and all passenger vehicles and
pickup trucks of ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight or less and
which have no more than two (2) axles.
   Recreational equipment
   Recreational equipment includes any operable equipment intended for outdoor
recreational use including, but not limited to, all-terrain vehicles, boats,
canoes, jet skis, pop-up campers, snow mobiles, and trailers for transporting
such equipment; and under eighteen (18) feet in length and under ten thousand
(10,000) pounds gross weight.
   Recreational vehicle
   A recreational vehicle includes all of the following: All operable towed
vehicles and self-propelled vehicles, including “trailers” as defined in
Article 10 of this chapter, tent trailers, tractor trailers, fifth-wheel
trailers, trailers for towing recreational vehicles and equipment, boats,
aircraft, self-propelled motor homes, all-terrain vehicles, dune buggies,
racing vehicles, and any other self-propelled or towed vehicle over ten
thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight but not used by the residents of
the site on which the vehicle is parked for a commercial purpose; and campers
and camper shells which are detached from a vehicle.
   (c)   Prohibitions. The following are prohibited:
   (1)   No recreational vehicle, as defined in this section, shall be parked
within any required front, side, or rear yard adjacent to a public street.
   (2)   No recreational vehicle, as defined in this section, shall be utilized
or occupied as a residential dwelling, either temporarily or permanently,
unless an application is approved by the Planning Director for a temporary
dwelling during the construction of a home.
   (3)   No commercial vehicle, as defined in this section, shall be parked in
any area within any residential zone, except for the immediate loading or
unloading of goods or people.
   (d)   Designated recreational vehicle parking areas. The parking of
recreational vehicles on any parcel in a residential zone shall be allowed only
as follows:
   (1)   Recreational vehicles may be parked in any area other than a required
front, side, or rear yard adjacent to a public street if the area is paved in
accordance with Section
8-2.1313 of this article.
   (2)   Recreational vehicles may be parked within a garage so long as the
parking space requirements for the applicable residential use, as set forth in
Table 8-2.1306, can still be met.
   (3)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue a permit allowing a
recreational vehicle to be parked in a required front, side, or rear yard
adjacent to a public street in accordance with Sec.
8-2.206 in Article 2 of this chapter.
   (e)   Designated recreational equipment parking areas in residential zones.
The parking of recreational equipment on any parcel in a residential zone shall
be allowed only as follows:
   (1)   Recreational equipment may be located on any area on the parcel,
except on the street side of a corner lot. The parking area shall not obstruct
required parking spaces for passenger vehicles.
   (2)   The parking area shall be paved in accordance with Section
8-2.1313 of this article.
   (3)   Recreational equipment may be parked within a garage so long as the
parking space requirements for the applicable residential use, as set forth in
Table 8-2.1306, can still be met.
   (f)   Violations and penalties. Any violation of this section shall
constitute an infraction, punishable as provided by Section 25132 of the
Government Code of the State. Four (4) or more violations by any person during
the preceding twelve (12) months shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 14: Cannabis Land Use Ordinance
Sec. 8-2.1401   Relationship to other county cannabis regulations.
   Cannabis land uses must comply with all applicable laws, policies, and
regulations at the County, State, and Federal level, as specified throughout
this article. The State has recognized that statewide legalization of cannabis
activities is not in alignment with federal cannabis laws; the County defers to
the State in this regard, recognizing that consistency with federal cannabis
laws is not currently possible. The regulations below are a non-exclusive list
of other County Code sections that contain regulations specific to cannabis
activities.
   A.   Title 8 (Land Development) Chapter 2 (Zoning Regulations) – The Zoning
Regulations establish land use districts, controls on land uses, and
development standards. The Cannabis Land Use Ordinance applies these
regulations, as appropriate, to identified cannabis use types. Unless otherwise
specified, the Cannabis Land Use Ordinance is intended to establish additional
regulations applicable to all cannabis use types. Where the Cannabis Land Use
Ordinance is silent on an issue that is otherwise addressed elsewhere in the
Zoning Regulations, the Zoning Regulations shall apply. Where a requirement of
the Cannabis Land Use Ordinance directly conflicts with a requirement of the
Zoning Regulations, the requirement of the Cannabis Land Use Ordinance shall
apply.
   B.   Title 8 (Land Development) Chapter 5 (Development Agreements) –
Applicants for a County Cannabis Use Permit may apply for a Development
Agreement pursuant to the Development Agreements regulations and Section
8-2.1410(H), Development Agreements, of this article.
   C.   Title 12 (Business Licenses) Chapter 4 (Cannabis Licensing Ordinance) –
All cannabis uses and operations must be fully compliant with applicable
licensing requirements set forth therein.
(Ord. 1541, eff. October 14, 2021)
Sec. 8-2.1402.   Purpose.
   The adoption of this article is necessary and desirable to accomplish and
balance the following:
   A.   Protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
   B.   Protect environmental resources and minimize environmental impact.
   C.   Ensure neighborhood compatibility.
   D.   Ensure safe access to medical cannabis for patients.
   E.   Support agricultural economic development including recognition of
valuable new crops, preservation of agricultural land, and creation of
opportunities for new farmers.
   F.   Recognize cannabis as an agricultural crop with unique challenges
including Federal classification, legal history, crop value, transaction
security, distinct odor, and energy and water requirements.
   G.   Recognize competing and evolving community values and interests related
to the cannabis industry.
   H.   Avoid establishing undesirable precedents for other agricultural
sectors.
   I.   Avoid unintended consequences including unforeseen community impacts
and over-regulation that drives cannabis activities underground.
   J.   Allow for adaptation to changing market, cultural, and regulatory
considerations over time.
   K.   Acknowledge the will of the voters in passing Proposition 64, The
Control, Regulate and Tax Audit Use of Marijuana, in 2016.
(Ord. 1541, eff. October 14, 2021)
Sec. 8-2.1403.   Definitions.
   A.   General information. Unless otherwise defined, the County accepts the
State definitions of various terms related to cannabis and cannabis activities
as used in this article. Other applicable definitions shall be as provided in
State law and other sections of County code, as amended. Changes to applicable
definitions in State law shall take effect locally 90 days after the change
takes effect at the State level.
   B.   Buffer easements. Executed agreements between willing neighbors to
accept smaller buffer distances, subject to oversight and acceptance by the
County.
   C.   Buffer exemptions. Automatic approval of existing buffers
(“grandfathering”). Buffer exemptions are not allowed under this Article.
   D.   Buffer exceptions. Discretionary reduction of greater than ten percent
for buffers based on the specific conditions at the site.
   E.   Buffer reductions. Discretionary reduction of up to ten percent for
buffers based on the specific conditions at the site.
   F.   Canopy. See Section
12-04.03(I) of the Yolo County Code. With the exception of co-location, the
maximum cultivation canopy at any site shall not exceed two-acres. Cultivation
in the Capay Valley is limited to the canopy approved for each licensee as of
the effective date of this article.
   G.   Capay Valley. This area shall be defined as the Capay Valley General
Plan Study Area (not including the “Common Overlapping Area”) as established in
the Capay Valley Area Plan.
   H.   CESA/ESA. California Endangered Species Act and federal Endangered
Species Act, respectively.
   I.   Clarksburg. This area shall be defined as the growth boundary for the
town of Clarksburg as established in the General Plan.
   J.   Co-Location. The issuance of more than one cannabis license to
different ownerships or business entities on the same or contiguous parcels.
   K.   Cultivation site. Area approved for cultivation and related activities.
   L.   Early development agreements. As described in Final Policy adopted by
the Board of Supervisors on March 6, 2018. For the purposes of this article
this term shall also include Cannabis Nursery/Processing Request For Proposal
(RFP) applications that execute Development Agreements in advance of the
adoption of this article.
   M.   Edible.  Manufactured cannabis that is intended to be used, in whole or
in part, for human consumption, including but not limited to chewing gum.
   N.   Existing licensees. Holders of a validly issued license on June 29,
2021, and license applications received as of June 29, 2021 for which all fees
have been paid.
   O.   Farm dwelling. Pursuant to General Plan Policy LU-3.1, any residence
located on land zoned and/or designated for agricultural use.
   P.   Greenhouse. A structure or thermally isolated area of a building that
maintains a specialized sunlit environment used for and essential to the
cultivation, protection, or maintenance of plants. For the purposes of this
article, cultivation in a greenhouse (including mixed light) is considered an
indoor use.
   Q.   Hoop house. A shade cloth structure that is readily removable and
temporary in nature, without any equipment or utilities. The ends may be
covered or left open and the material covering the structural members is
readily removable and is typically removed and re-affixed frequently. For the
purposes of this article, cultivation in a hoop house is considered an outdoor
use.
   R.   Indoor(s). Within a fully enclosed and secure structure that complies
with the California Building Code (CBC), as adopted by the County, that has a
complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground
to the roof, and a foundation, slab, or equivalent base to which the floor is
securely attached. The structure must be secure against unauthorized entry,
accessible only through one or more lockable doors, and constructed of solid
materials that cannot easily be broken through, such as 2” x 4” or thicker
studs overlain with 3/8” or thicker plywood or equivalent materials. Plastic
sheeting, regardless of gauge, or similar products do not satisfy this
requirement. For the purposes of this article, cultivation in greenhouses and
enclosed nurseries are considered indoor operations.
   S.   Mixed light cultivation. Cultivation of cannabis using light
deprivation and/or artificial or controlled lighting. For the purposes of this
article, mixed light cultivation occurs in a greenhouse, is considered an
indoor use.
   T.   Nurseries. See Section
12-04.03(LL).
   U.   Permittee. The individual or entity operating pursuant to the Cannabis
Use Permit.
   V.   Outdoor(s). Any location that is not "indoor(s)". For the purposes of
this article, cultivation in fields and in hoop houses is considered outdoor
operations.
   W.   Premises. See Section
12-04.03(OO) of the YCC.
   X.   Public park. An area of land used for community recreation with
accommodations for children such as playground equipment and/or swimming
facilities or that is regularly used by children, that is owned or operated by
a public entity, County-owned campgrounds, and the Yolo Bypass Wildlife Area
headquarters. Natural and/or open space areas, including State or Federal
designated parks and forestlands as recognized within the Yolo County General
Plan, are not included within this definition.
   Y.   Qualified odor professional. An individual or firm accepted by the
Director as having expert qualifications in the analysis and control of odor,
particularly cannabis odor. Expertise should include knowledge of the science
of odors and odor control/abatement, experience with odor control technologies,
and experience monitoring, modeling, and/or regulating odor.
   Z.   Sensitive land use. As defined in Section
8-2.1408(E), Buffers, of this article.
   AA.   Shipping container. See Section
8-2.1408(QQ), Trailers and Shipping Containers, of this article.
   BB.   Trailer. See Section
8-2.1408(QQ), Trailers and Shipping Containers, of this article.
   CC.   Vertical integration. Operations under the same ownership that hold
more than one category of license use type.
   DD.   YCC. Yolo County Code of Ordinances.
   EE.   Yolo HCP/NCCP. Yolo Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Community
Conservation Plan implemented by the Yolo Habitat Conservancy.
   FF.   Youth Center. See Section 11353.1 of the California Health and Safety
Code.
(Ord. 1541, eff. October 14, 2021; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1564, eff. December
21, 2023)
Sec. 8-2.1404.   Applicability.
   A.   Effective date. The requirements of this article are effective 30 days
after adoption.
   B.   Regulatory transition period. Existing Licensees in good standing are
eligible for license renewal in accordance with this Subsection and all other
licensing requirements. Existing Licensees outside of the Capay Valley seeking
non-cultivation license types shall apply for a Pre-Application Review between
January 3, 2022 and January 31, 2022. In addition, existing licensees shall
adhere to the following deadlines for submission of a complete use permit
application:
   By December 16, 2022
   Existing Licensees located within the Capay Valley (Category 1) that do not
seek relocation outside the Capay Valley.
   Existing Licensees located outside Capay Valley that intend to seek non-
cultivation license types (Category 2).
   By December 15, 2023
   Existing Licensees located outside Capay Valley that are required by the
CLUO to relocate (i.e., those located on residentially-zoned land) (Category
3).
   Existing Licensees outside Capay Valley that do not seek additional non-
cultivation license types (Category 4).
   Existing Licensees located within the Capay Valley (Category 5) that seek
relocation outside the Capay Valley (note: cannot renew a cultivation license
in 2023).
   Early Implementation Development Agreement applications for which an
Environmental Impact Report or Negative Declaration has been prepared under the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) seeking a use permit pursuant to
Section
8-2.1410(J)(1)(a) (Category 6).
   Existing Licensees that do not timely apply for a use permit shall be
precluded from license renewal in 2023 (Category 1) or 2024 (Categories 2, 4,
6) and the cultivation license allocation for these licensees shall be returned
to the pool of available licenses for use permit recipients. Category 3
licensees may not renew their license for 2023 or thereafter for cultivation at
their current sites irrespective of whether they apply for a use permit in an
alternative location. Category 5 licensees may not renew their license for
2023.
   With the exception of Category 3 and 5 licensees, Existing Licensees with a
timely, complete application that is pending in the use permit process may
continue to seek license renewal and continue to operate with a validly issued
license through March 31, 2025 (Categories 1 and 2) or through March 31, 2026
(Categories 4 and 6). If a use permit for an existing site is granted, the site
shall be brought into compliance with the requirements and conditions of the
permit within one year of approval, or the renewal of required license(s) shall
be prohibited and the license allocation shall be returned to the pool of
available licenses. If a use permit is denied for categories 1, 2, 4 and 6, the
existing license(s) shall expire on March 31 at the end of the regular license
term, renewal of the license(s) shall be prohibited, and the license allocation
shall be returned to the pool of available licenses. New licensees may apply
for available use permit/licenses (if any), after processing of Existing
Licensees is substantially underway, on a date to be determined by the
Director.
   C.   Relocation. Cannabis activities on sites that do not meet the
requirements of this article must relocate and secure a Cannabis Use Permit, or
cease all operations including the storage of harvested cannabis, on or prior
to the deadlines set forth in Subsection B, above.
   D.   Non-conforming uses. Prior to the relocation deadlines established in
subparagraph (C) above, legally licensed cannabis activities that are not in
compliance with the terms of this article shall be considered legal non-
conforming uses if otherwise conducted in accordance with all applicable state
and local legal requirements. After the relocation deadlines established in
subparagraph (C) above, non-conforming cannabis activities are illegal and
shall be discontinued and may be abated by County at the licensee’s sole cost
and expense if not ceased by the licensee.
   E.   Cannabis cultivation and related activities are agricultural land uses.
Legal cultivation of cannabis is an agricultural use.
   F.   Other agricultural land uses. The requirements of this article apply
only to cannabis related uses.
   G.   Personal medical and adult use. Personal medical and adult use of
cannabis is allowed by right subject to the requirements of this article and
other applicable County and State regulations.
   H.   Strict standards and interpretation. Nothing in this article shall be
construed to allow any activity relating to cannabis activity that is otherwise
not expressly permitted in the County Code or is illegal under State law.
   I.   Unspecified cannabis activities. Any use not expressly permitted in
this article is prohibited.
   J.   Buffers. Cannabis uses shall be exempted from the buffer requirements
of Section
8-2.1408(E) (Buffers) of this article if new identified sensitive land uses
locate within otherwise applicable buffer distances subsequent to use permit
issuance (see Section
8-2.1408(E)).
(Ord. 1541, eff. October 14, 2021; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1545, eff. January
6, 2022; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1554, eff. November 24, 2022; as amended by §
2, Ord. 1558, eff. December 22, 2022; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1564, eff.
December 21, 2023)
Sec. 8-2.1405.   Cannabis use categories and types.
   The following County cannabis use categories and related State cannabis use
types are recognized by this article. Descriptions are as defined by State law,
as amended. Not all use types are permitted. See Section
8-2.1407, Table of Cannabis Development Regulations, of this article for
prohibited uses, permitted uses, and conditions applicable to each use.
   A.   Personal.
   1.   Outdoor
   2.   Indoor
   B.   Cultivation, Nurseries, and Processing (Commercial).
   1.   Outdoor Cultivation (fields and hoop houses)
   2.   Indoor Cultivation (enclosed buildings and/including greenhouses)
   3.   Mixed Light Cultivation (enclosed buildings and/including greenhouses)
   4.   Nurseries (indoor, outdoor, and mixed light)
   5.   Processing Only (including storage)
   C.   Manufacturing, testing, and distribution.
   1.   Manufacturing – Non-volatile
   2.   Manufacturing – Volatile
   3.   Manufacturing – Infusion
   4.   Manufacturing – Packaging and Labeling
   5.   Testing/Laboratory
   6.   Distribution
   7.   Distribution – Transport Only
   D.   Retail.
   1.   Retail – Storefront
   2.   Retail – Non-Storefront
   3.   Special Cannabis Event – Tasting, promotional activities, and special
events related to cannabis are prohibited in Yolo County.
   E.   Microbusiness.
(Ord. 1541, eff. October 14, 2021)
Sec. 8-2.1406.   Cannabis permit requirements.
   A.   General requirements. Except as allowed in Section
8-2.1404(B) and (C), Applicability, of this article cannabis uses shall only be
permitted in compliance with this article and all applicable codes set forth in
the County Code. Required approvals, permits, and licenses shall be obtained
prior to commencement of the cannabis activity. All conditions of the Cannabis
Use Permit shall be satisfied prior to the commencement of the cannabis
activities authorized by the Use Permit unless otherwise specified in the
accompanying conditions of approval.
   B.   State cannabis license requirement. Each permitted cannabis use
requires an applicable State license. The State Cannabis License is assigned to
the permittee and is not transferrable.
   C.   County cannabis license requirement. Each permitted cannabis use
requires a County Cannabis License. The County Cannabis License is assigned to
the licensee and is not transferrable, unless approved by the County.
   D.   County business license requirement. In addition to the County Cannabis
License requirement, every permittee, except cultivators, nurseries, and
processing licensees, must also obtain a County Business License.
   E.   County cannabis use permit requirement. Each commercial cannabis use
requires a Cannabis Use Permit as identified in Section
8-2.1407, Table of Cannabis Development Regulations, of this article. The
Cannabis Use Permit is assigned to the specific location where the activity
will take place. Cannabis Use Permits run with the land.
   F.   Personal use exemption. Personal medical and adult use cannabis
activities require no licenses or permits, provided they are legally conducted
in compliance with the requirements of all applicable County and State laws,
including without limitation Chapter 4 of Title 12 of the Yolo County Code.
   G.   Limitation on licenses and permits. The number of State licenses an
individual or business can hold shall be as dictated by State law. The number
of separate County cannabis licenses and Cannabis Use Permits an individual or
business can hold shall be as established in this article. Each site may have
no more than one Cannabis Use Permit. A permittee may have multiple license
types under one Use Permit, provided they are specifically authorized in the
permit or subsequent permit amendment.
   The Board will select a procedure for allocation of Use Permits and/or
licenses in instances where demand does or is expected to exceed the available
number of permits/licenses. Various methods may be used to allocate limited
permits and/or licenses to otherwise compliant applicants. These methods may
include a lottery which would be conducted following final action by the
Planning Commission on Use Permits and the conclusion of applicable appeal
periods. Once a permit and license have been granted, subject to continued
regulatory compliance, the license allocation will be considered secured and
annual license renewal will not be subject to subsequent competitive (lottery
or similar) allocation requirements.
   The total number of Cannabis Use Permits issued by the County shall not
exceed 65, of which no more than 5 may be located in the Capay Valley. Once
allocated, rights to licenses in the Capay Valley cannot be transferred or sold
to another licensee, and if not exercised will be returned to the allocation
pool for use outside of the Capay Valley. Should any use permit in the Capay
Valley be voided, rescinded, revoked, abandoned, or become inactive or
equivalent, it may not be reissued to another party and the total number of
allowed permits for the Capay Valley shall be reduced by one.
   The number of licenses shall be allocated by use type not to exceed the
following:
   Personal (indoor or outdoor) = no permits/licenses required; unlimited
   Cultivation (indoor or outdoor) = 49
   Nurseries1 = 5 (0 in Capay Valley)
ftnt 1 On-site ancillary facilities serving site production only are not
subject to cap.
   Processing1 = 7 (0 in Capay Valley)
   Manufacturing = 6 (0 in Capay Valley)
   Testing = 2 (0 in Capay Valley)
   Distribution = 7 (0 in Capay Valley)
   Retail (Store front) = 5 (0 in Capay Valley and 0 in Clarksburg)
(applications not allowed for two years from the effective date of this
article)
   Retail (Non-Storefront) = 10 (0 in Capay Valley) (must be associated with a
Yolo Cannabis Use Permit)
   Special Cannabis Event = 0
   Microbusiness = 5 (0 in Capay Valley)
   H.   Over-concentration. The Capay Valley area is hereby identified as an
area of over-concentration and shall be limited to no more than five Cannabis
Use Permits. New or relocating Cannabis Use Permits are not allowed in the
Capay Valley. The remaining unincorporated area of the County shall not be
considered over-concentrated based on Existing Licenses. New/relocated cannabis
operators shall not be allowed in any other area of the County with seven
Cannabis Use Permits in any six-mile diameter area. The determination of over-
concentration for new/relocating permittees will be based on the order in which
applications have been determined to be complete.
   The determination of whether an area is or is not over-concentrated shall be
based on the number of Cannabis Use Permits issued within the area, subject to
the following. All cannabis uses at a vertically integrated site shall be
counted as “one” for the purposes of determining over-concentration. Each
owner/entity at a co-located site shall be counted individually (i.e.,
separately) for the purposes of determining over-concentration. Each operation
covered by a development agreement approved through the “early” development
agreement process that predated this article shall also count toward the
limitation.
   The Director shall establish procedures to implement this section by
ensuring the efficient and orderly processing of Cannabis Use Permits in areas
of over-concentration, consistent with the adopted CLUO. The procedures shall
ensure that Cannabis Use Permit applications within any identified area of
over-concentration will be processed simultaneously during the transition to
the CLUO to enable consideration of community specific issues and to facilitate
community involvement, and be processed prior to the consideration of
applications not in over-concentrated areas. (EIR MM OVC-1a, I-V and OVC-1b)
   I.   Revocability. Cannabis Use Permits are revocable, as set forth more
fully in Section
8-2.1412.
   J.   Expiration. At the sole discretion of the decision-making authority,
the term for any Cannabis Use Permit may be limited to a specified number of
years. All permits expire automatically at the end of their stated term or, if
a complete permit renewal application is filed prior to expiration, on the date
of final action by the County (including on any related administrative appeals)
on the application for renewal. The County provides no representations or
assurances that Use Permit renewals will be authorized under the terms of this
article, as may be amended from time to time, upon the expiration of any
permits issued hereunder. All activities covered by a permit must cease
immediately upon expiration or be subject to abatement by the County at the
sole cost and expense of the permittee. Use permits for outdoor cultivation
within a city sphere-of-influence shall be conditioned to expire within one
year following annexation.
   K.   Vested rights. Unless otherwise required by California law, no County
Cannabis License or Cannabis Use Permit establishes a property interest, vested
right, or entitlement beyond the authorization to conduct the cannabis uses
specifically identified in the permit for the term provided therein, subject to
the permit’s conditions and the requirements of any applicable State and County
laws and regulations, and subject to County’s ability to terminate the cannabis
program under
8-2.1409(C). The Permittee and the Cannabis Use Permit shall be subject to all
duly adopted amendments to State and County law or regulation, including
amendments to this article and the administrative policies adopted thereunder.
   L.   Findings for approval or denial. The decision-making authority may
grant approval of a Cannabis Use Permit if the following findings are made,
based on substantial evidence in the record:
   1.   The requested use is a conditionally allowed use in the applicable zone
designation.
   2.   The requested use is consistent with the general plan, and area or
specific plan if applicable.
   3.   The proposed use complies with each of the applicable provisions of the
Cannabis Land Use Ordinance and other applicable sections of the County Zoning
Regulations.
   4.   The proposed use, together with the applicable conditions, will not
impair the integrity or character of the neighborhood nor be detrimental to the
public health, safety, or general welfare.
   a.   The population in the area has been taken into consideration.
   b.   The crime rate in the area has been taken into consideration.
   c.   The record of nuisance abatements in area has been taken into
consideration.
   d.   Community character has been taken into consideration.
   e.   Community support has been taken into consideration.
   5.   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, sanitation, and/or other
necessary facilities will be provided, as required in applicable County and
State regulations, standards, and specifications.
   6.   The number of cannabis operations in the area has been taken into
consideration.
   7.   The proximity of cannabis operations to each other, and/or to other
identified sensitive land uses has been taken into consideration.
   8.   The proximity to adjoining/nearby land uses has been taken into
consideration.
   9.   The compliance history of the applicant and/or operator has been taken
into consideration.
   10.   Parcel size and proposed uses on the non-cannabis portion(s) of the
parcel have been taken into consideration.
   11.   Subject matter input relevant to the specific location or proposed
project from County department and division heads, and the Cannabis Unit have
been taken into consideration. This shall include information and
recommendations from the Agricultural Commissioner relevant to compatibility of
proposed cannabis cultivation with adjoining non-cannabis crops.
   12.   Other cultural, social, equity, and environmental justice concerns
deemed applicable by the County have been taken into consideration. (EIR MM
OVC-1c)
   13.   Site efficiency and use of the site to minimize fallowing of
agricultural land has been taken into consideration.
   The findings generally applicable to the grant of a Use Permit under the
Yolo County Code do not apply to Cannabis Use Permits, which are subject only
to the findings set forth above.
(Ord. 1541, eff. October 14, 2021)
Sec. 8-2.1407.   Table of Cannabis Development Regulations.11
                State   Agric   Res
State    Max    License Zones   Zones    Comm   Comm      Indus
Cannabis Canopy Type14  (AN, A- (RR-5,   Zones  Zones (C- Zones (I- Special Use
License  Area5  and     X, A-I, RR-2, R- (C-L,  G, C-H)   L, I-H)13 Regulations
Type            Agency  A-C)13  L, RM,   DMX)13 13
                                R-H)13
                                                                 Res
                                                                 Zones
                                               State     Agric   (RR-  Comm   Comm  Indus
                                     Max       License   Zones   5,    Zones  Zones Zones Special Use
State Cannabis License Type          Canopy    Type14    (AN, A- RR-2, (C-L,  (C-G, (I-L, Regulations
                                     Area5     and       X, A-I, R-L,  DMX)13 C-H)  I-
                                               Agency    A-C)13  RM,          13    H)13
                                                                 R-
                                                                 H)13
Personal
                                     < 6
Personal – Outdoor                 plants    Exempt    A1     A1   A1    A1   A1   Title 8,
                                     per DU                                               Chapter 2,
                                     < 6                                                  Article 14
Personal – Indoor                  plants    Exempt    A1     A1   A1    A1   A1
                                     per DU
Cultivation3, Nurseries, and Processing
                                     < 25
Specialty Cottage – Outdoor9       mature    1C, DCC   UP(M)17 N     N      N     N
                                     plants
Specialty Cottage – Indoor         < 500 sf  1C, DCC   UP(M)   N     N      UP(M) UP(M)
Specialty Cottage – Mixed Light4   < 2,500   1C, DCC   UP(M)   N     N      UP(M) UP(M)
                                     sf
                                     < 5,000
                                     sf or               UP
Specialty – Outdoor9               < 50      1, DCC    (M)17  N     N      N     N
                                     mature
                                     plants
Specialty – Indoor                 501 to    1A, DCC   UP(M)   N     N      UP(M) UP(M)
                                     5,000 sf
Specialty – Mixed Light4           2,501 to  1B, DCC   UP(M)   N     N      UP(M) UP(M)
                                     5,000 sf
Small – Outdoor9                   5,001 to  2, DCC    UP      N     N      N     N     Title 8,
                                     10,000 sf           (M)17                           Chapter 2,
Small – Indoor                     5,001 to  2A, DCC   UP(M)   N     N      UP(M) UP(M) Article 14
                                     10,000 sf
Small – Mixed Light4              5,001 to  2B, DCC   UP(M)   N     N      UP(M) UP(M)
                                     10,000 sf
Medium – Outdoor9                 10,001 to 38, DCC   UP      N     N      N     N
                                     43,560 sf           (M)17 
Medium – Indoor                    10,001 to 3A8, DCC  UP(M)   N     N      UP(M) UP(M)
                                     22,000 sf
Medium – Mixed Light4              10,001 to 3B8, DCC  UP(M)   N     N      UP(M) UP(M)
                                     22,000
Large2 – Outdoor9                 >43,561   5, DCC    N       N     N      N     N
                                     sf16
Large2 – Indoor                    >22,001   5A, DCC   N       N     N      N     N
                                     sf16 
Large2 – Mixed Light4             >22,001   5B, DCC   N       N     N      N     N
                                     sf16 
Nursery – Outdoor, Indoor or Mixed                     UP                               Title 8,
Light                                Unlimited 47, DCC   (M)17  N     N      N     UP(M) Chapter 2,
                                                                                          Article 14
                                               Not
Processing Only6                    N/A       Assigned, UP(M)   N     N      UP(M) UP(M)  
                                               DCC
Manufacturing, Testing, and Distribution12
Manufacturing – Nonvolatile        N/A       6, DCC    UP(M)   N     N      N     UP(M)
Manufacturing -- Volatile            N/A       7, DCC    UP(M)   N     N      N     UP(M)
Manufacturing -- Infusion            N/A       6N, DCC   UP(M)   N     N      N     UP(M)
Manufacturing – Packaging and      N/A       6P, DCC   UP(M)   N     N      UP(M) UP(M) Title 8,
Labeling                                                                                  Chapter 2,
Testing/Laborator y                  N/A       8, DCC    UP(M)   N     N      N     UP(M) Article 14
Distribution                         N/A       11(M)10,  UP(M)   N     N      UP(M) UP(M)
                                               DCC
Distribution – Transport Only      N/A       12(M)10,  UP(M)   N     N      UP(M) UP(M)
                                               DCC
Retail
                                               10(M)10
Retail – Storefront                N/A       and 10A   N       N     UP(M)  UP(M) UP(M)
                                               (M), DCC                                   Title 8,
Retail – Non-Storefront            N/A       9(M)10,   UP(M)   N     N      UP(M) UP(M) Chapter 2,
                                               DCC                                        Article 14
Special Cannabis Event15             N/A       14(M)10,  N       N     N      N     N
                                               DCC
Microbusiness
                                     <10,000   12(M)10,                                   Title 8,
Microbusiness                        sf        DCC       UP(M)   N     N      UP(M) UP(M) Chapter 2,
                                                                                          Article 14
 
Acronyms:
A = Allowed Use (applicable building permits and other approvals required)
DCC = Department of Cannabis Control
DU = dwelling unit
N = Not Allowed
sf = square feet
UP(M) = Major Use Permit
43,560 sf = one acre
Notes:
1.   In, or on the lot containing, a legal residential unit, with landlord’s
permission pursuant to Section
8-2.1406(F), Personal Use Exemption, of this article. Each person cultivating
personal cannabis shall maintain his/her principal place of residence in a
dwelling on the parcel on which the cultivation occurs.
2.   DCC will not issue prior to January 1, 2023.
3.   Cultivation includes processing associated with crops grown onsite. See
Section
8-2.1408(HH), Processing, of this article.
4.   Includes greenhouses.
5.   Limited to two-acre cultivation limit (indoor or outdoor) per County
cannabis license.
6.   Trimming, drying, curing, grading, or packaging of cannabis and non-
manufactured cannabis products associated with crops grown off-site. This use
may only be conducted pursuant to Section
8-2.1408(HH), Processing, of this article.
7.   Includes transport of live plants.
8.   DCC will issue a limited number of Type 3 State licenses (Section 16209 of
the DCC Regulations).
9.   Includes hoop houses.
10.    M = Medicinal; A = Adult-Use.
11.   These cannabis-specific regulations are in addition to other development
regulations that apply in each zone (including minimum lot area, yard setbacks,
height restrictions, building separation, building size, and density/intensity)
and other Specific Use Requirements or Performance Standards that apply in each
zone. In the case of a conflict the more restrictive regulations shall apply.
12.   Distribution ancillary to other licensed and permitted cannabis
activities does not require a separate County business license.
13.   Cannabis uses are prohibited in all zones not listed in this table.
14.   With the exception of Medium Cultivation licenses, State regulations do
not limit the number of licenses a person may hold of a particular license
type. State regulations do limit the types of license a person may hold at one
time. With some exceptions, licensees can only hold licenses in up to two
separate categories.
15.   Includes tasting, promotional activities, farmer’s markets, temporary
events, etc.
16.   Unlimited
17.   Outdoor cultivation within the growth boundaries identified in the
General Plan for unincorporated towns is prohibited.
(Ord. 1541, eff. October 14, 2021; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1545, eff. January
6, 2022)
Sec. 8-2.1408.   Specific Use Requirements and Performance Standards.
   The following specific use requirements or standards are applicable to the
use types authorized by this article. All references to laws and regulations of
the State of California shall be deemed to include any duly-adopted amendments
to such laws and regulations.
   A.   Agricultural applications. This category includes fertilizers,
herbicides, pesticides, rodenticides, fumigants, and other inputs/applications
for improved agricultural performance. Permittees shall comply with applicable
County and State requirements, and manufacturer instructions, for use to the
satisfaction of the County Agricultural Commissioner, and/or other responsible
official. Cultivators, nurseries, and processing licensees shall implement the
Pest Management Plan required pursuant to Section 16310 of the DCC Regulations,
as applicable. Cultivators, nurseries, and processing licensees shall comply
with pesticide laws and regulations as enforced by the Department of Pesticide
Regulation pursuant to Section 16307, Pesticide Use Requirements, of the DCC
Regulations.
   B.   Agricultural maintenance. Permittees operating on agricultural land
must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the County Agricultural Commissioner
that the majority of the parcel, excluding the area in cannabis cultivation,
will be used for agricultural activities, and that any areas in nonagricultural
use will be properly maintained (e.g. weed abatement, pest management, etc.)
to, among other things, avoid maintenance deficiencies that impair or otherwise
conflict with agriculture on other nearby properties.
   C.   Backflow prevention. To protect groundwater or surface water, proper
backflow devices shall be installed, maintained, and tested for all wells where
well water is used to mix agricultural applications or any chemicals.
   D.   Biological resources. Cannabis applicants shall survey and disclose on-
site biological resources pursuant to the requirement to provide a Biological
Resource Survey in Section
8-2.1410(C)(2).
   1.   Reconnaissance-level survey. Applicants shall include with their Use
Permit application a reconnaissance-level survey for biological resources
conducted on the parcel of the cannabis use by a qualified biologist (i.e.,
familiar with wildlife, plants, and habitats in Yolo County). The
reconnaissance-level survey shall include the following elements:
   a.   Prior to the reconnaissance-level survey, the qualified biologist shall
conduct a data review to determine the special-status plant, special-status
wildlife, sensitive habitats (e.g., federally protected wetlands, waters of the
state, riparian habitat, sensitive natural communities) that have the potential
to occur within the proposed activity footprint of the cannabis use. This will
include review of the best available, current data including vegetation mapping
data, the Yolo HCP/NCCP, and database searches of the California Natural
Diversity Database and the California Native Plant Society Inventory of Rare
and Endangered Plants of California.
   b.   The qualified biologist shall map land cover, identify natural
communities, and assess the habitat suitability of the proposed activity
footprint of the cannabis use for special-status plants, special-status
wildlife, and sensitive habitats identified as having potential to occur,
consistent with the requirements of the Yolo HCP/NCCP for species covered by
the plan, and consistent with Term 10 under Attachment A (General Requirements
and Prohibitions) of SWRCB Order WQ 2019-0001-DWQ, if applicable.
   c.   The biologist shall provide a letter report to the applicant and the
County with evidence to support a conclusion as to whether special-status
species and sensitive habitats are present or are likely to occur within the
proposed activity footprint of the cannabis use.
   d.   If special-status plants, special-status wildlife, suitable habitat for
these species, or sensitive habitats are identified as being impacted by the
cannabis use, items 2 through 7 below will apply.
   2.   Species covered under the Yolo HCP/NCCP.  If species covered under the
Yolo HCP/NCCP are identified as being impacted by the cannabis use, the
applicant shall satisfy the requirements of the HCP/NCCP to the extent it is
applicable.
   a.   If species covered under the Yolo HCP/NCCP that are not listed under
CESA or ESA or are only listed under CESA are identified as being impacted by
the cannabis use, payment of Yolo HCP/NCCP mitigation fees and implementation
of applicable HCP/NCCP avoidance and minimization measures are required if
applicable.
   b.   If species covered under the Yolo HCP/NCCP that are also listed under
both CESA and ESA or only under ESA are identified as being impacted by the
cannabis use, the applicant must avoid impacts by implementing no-disturbance
buffers or redesigning the project until such time as federal permits,
authorizations, and procedures/protocols under the HCP portion of the Yolo HCP/
NCCP can be applied.
   3.   Special-status species not covered under the Yolo HCP/NCCP. If species
not covered under the Yolo HCP/NCCP are identified as being impacted by the
cannabis use, the applicant shall apply biological resource protection measures
consistent with state and local requirements as described below:
   a.   If CDFW Species of Special Concern, species listed only under CESA,
nesting raptors and native birds protected under California Fish and Game Code,
or plants considered by CDFW to be "rare, threatened, or endangered in
California" are identified as being impacted by the cannabis use, the applicant
will retain a qualified biologist to conduct protocol-level surveys for these
species for which established, current surveying protocols are available (e.g.,
Protocols for Surveying and Evaluating Impacts to Special Status Native Plant
Populations and Natural Communities [CDFW 2018b], Staff Report on Burrowing Owl
Mitigation [CDFG 2012]). If an established protocol is not available for a
special-status species, then the qualified biologist will consult with CDFW or
USFWS to determine the survey protocol.
   b.   If CDFW Species of Special Concern, species listed only under CESA, or
plants considered by CDFW to be "rare, threatened, or endangered in California"
are identified as being impacted by the cannabis use, these species will be
avoided by implementing no-disturbance buffers or redesigning the project, if
feasible.
   c.   If avoidance of CDFW Species of Special Concern, species listed only
under CESA, or plants considered by CDFW to be "rare, threatened, or endangered
in California" is not feasible, then the applicant will consult with CDFW to
determine applicable, established minimization measures for the given species,
and will implement these measures. If impacts on species listed under CESA are
unavoidable, then the applicant will submit an incidental take permit
application to CDFW and receive take authorization before commencing
development of the proposed activity footprint of the cannabis use. Conditions
of incidental take authorization may include minimization measures to reduce
impacts, and compensation for loss of the species including but not limited to
purchasing credits from a CDFW-approved mitigation bank.
   d.   If species listed under both CESA and ESA or only under ESA are
identified as being impacted by the cannabis use, the applicant must avoid
impacts by implementing no-disturbance buffers or redesigning the project until
such time as federal permits, authorizations, and procedures/protocols can be
acquired.
   4.   Sensitive habitats. If sensitive habitats, including federally-
protected wetlands, waters of the state, riparian habitat, or sensitive natural
communities (e.g., elderberry savanna, valley oak woodland) are identified
within the proposed activity footprint of the cannabis use, these habitats will
be avoided by implementing no-disturbance buffers as required by the SWRCB and
the Yolo HCP/NCCP, such that the habitat is completely protected from direct
and indirect adverse effects of project development. All ground disturbance,
vegetation removal, and staging activities will be prohibited within this no-
disturbance buffer, which may require project redesign.
   a.   A delineation of waters of the United States, including identification
of hydrology, hydric soils, and hydrophytic vegetation, by a qualified
biologist may be required to identify the exact extent of wetland features.
   b.   If federally protected wetlands cannot be avoided by at least 50 feet,
then the proposed commercial cannabis operation will not be permitted until
such time as cannabis uses may receive federal wetland permitting coverage
under Section 404 of the CWA. (EIR MM BIO-1)
   5.   Cannabis activities shall avoid special status species and habitats
where feasible and mitigate pursuant to the Yolo HCP/NCCP and applicable State
requirements when impacts cannot be avoided.
   6.   Cannabis activities determined by the County to be covered activities
under the Delta Plan developed by the Delta Stewardship Council must avoid
impacts to the Yolo Bypass Priority Habitat Restoration Area (PHRA) and the
applicant shall assist the County in demonstrating this through the Delta
Stewardship Council’s Certificate of Consistency process if required.
   7.   Cannabis Permit applicants must demonstrate compliance with a Lake or
Streambed Agreement (LSA) pursuant to State Fish and Game Code 1602 if one is
required. Permittees shall comply with the minimum 100-foot setback from lakes,
perennial ponds, rivers, creeks, sloughs, and perennial streams as set forth in
Policy CO-2.22 of the General Plan, as applicable. Permittees must demonstrate
compliance with the Yolo Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Community
Conservation Plan (Yolo HCP/NCCP), if applicable, and subsequent relevant
adopted plans.
   E.   Buffers. Unless otherwise identified, the following buffers are
required between any cannabis use and any identified sensitive land use:
CLUO Sensitive Land Use Buffers for Outdoor Uses1-6 Measure Buffer From
CLUO Sensitive Land Use    Buffers for Outdoor Uses1- Measure Buffer From
                           6
Off-site individual legal  600 ft for Existing
residences located on      Licensees
parcels under separate     1,000 ft for new or        Building
ownership in any non-      relocating licensees
residential zone           1,000 ft in Capay Valley
                           600 ft for Existing
                           Licensees
                           1,000 ft for new or
                           relocating licensees
                           1,500 ft from
                           residentially zoned land
                           within city limits,
                           residential areas
                           contiguous to City limits
Residentially zoned land   (El Macero, Willowbank,    Zone boundary
                           Royal Oaks Mobile Home
                           Park, and Westucky), and
                           residentially zoned land
                           within town growth
                           boundaries (Clarksburg,
                           Dunnigan, Esparto, Knights
                           Landing, Madison, Yolo,
                           Zamora) for new or
                           relocating licensees8 
                           1,000 ft in Capay Valley
                           600 ft for Existing
                           Licensees
Public parks               1,000 ft for new or        Parcel
                           relocating licensees
                           1,000 ft in Capay Valley
Licensed day cares
Recognized places of
worship                    600 ft for Existing
Public or licensed private Licensees
schools                    1,000 ft for new or        Building
Licensed treatment         relocating licensees
facilities for drugs or    1,000 ft in Capay Valley
alcohol
Licensed youth centers
Federal lands held in
trust by the federal
government or subject of a 1,000 ft7                 Parcel
trust application for a
federally recognized
Tribal government
Tribal Cultural Resources  1,000 ft7                  Resource boundary
Off-site individual legal
residences located on
parcels under separate
ownership in any non-      None for Existing
residential zone;          Licensees
residentially zoned land;  100 ft for new or
public parks; licensed day relocating licensees 9     As shown above by
cares; recognized places   100 ft in Capay Valley     sensitive land use
of worship; public or      (Existing Licensees, new
licensed private schools;  structures)
licensed treatment
facilities for drugs or
alcohol; and licensed
youth centers
Federal lands held in
trust by the federal
government or subject of a                            As shown above by
trust application for a    1,000 ft                   sensitive land use
federally recognized
Tribal government; and
Tribal Cultural Resources
 
Notes:
1.   Buffers applied to residences on non-residentially zoned parcels, day
cares, places of worship, schools, treatment facilities, and youth centers
shall be measured from the closest surface of the building in which the use is
operated to the closest point of any structure or outdoor area containing
cannabis.
2.   Buffers applied to residentially zoned land shall be measured from the
closest point of the residential zone boundary to the closest point of any
structure or outdoor area containing cannabis.
3.   Buffers applied to public parks and Tribal trust land shall be measured
from the closest point of the parcel boundary to the closest point of any
structure or outdoor area containing cannabis.
4.   Buffer Reductions – When deliberating a Cannabis Use Permit application
for Existing Licensees only, reductions of up to ten percent of the required
buffer distances described above may be approved by the County based on
consideration of project-specific and/or site-specific factors, including but
not limited to considerations of compatibility with surrounding land uses.
Buffer reductions cannot be used on buffers from Federal lands held in trust by
the federal government or subject of a trust application for a federally
recognized Tribal government, buffers from Tribal Cultural Resources or buffers
in the Capay Valley.
5.   Buffer Exceptions – When deliberating a Cannabis Use Permit application
for Existing Licensees only, reductions of more than ten percent of the
required buffer distances described above may be approved by the County based
on consideration of project-specific and/or site-specific factors including but
not limited to considerations of compatibility with surrounding land uses.
Buffer exceptions cannot be used on buffers from Federal lands held in trust by
the federal government or subject of a trust application for a federally
recognized Tribal government, buffers from Tribal Cultural Resources, or
buffers in the Capay Valley.
6.   Buffer Easements – On a case-by-case basis, at the discretion of the
County, in conjunction with consideration of a Cannabis Use Permit, for
Existing Licensees only, buffer easements on neighboring property(ies) may be
considered as an alternative to compliance with the identified required
buffers. The easement must be approved by the County, be in effect so long as
the Cannabis Use Permit is in effect, and shall be recorded in the chain of
title for the affected property(ies) using a template approved by County
Counsel. Buffer easements cannot be utilized in the Capay Valley.
7.   Applies to all cannabis uses (indoor and outdoor).
8.   Only applies outside of Capay Valley.
9.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the requirement for
a 100-foot buffer between indoor cannabis uses and identified sensitive land
uses shall apply to any indoor cannabis structure for which a building permit
was issued after the effective date of this article whether undertaken by
existing, new, or relocated licensees; and the licensee may request approval of
a reduction of up to ten percent of this buffer in conjunction with an
application for a new or amended Cannabis Use Permit.
   F.   Building design. Design and construction of buildings and structures
shall comply with all applicable codes, standards, regulations, and guidelines,
and shall demonstrate consideration of odor control, air quality, noise
control, environmental controls (including temperature, humidity, and
ventilation), safety and security, lighting, aesthetics, energy use, and other
appropriate impact mitigation. All required building permits shall be obtained.
New development shall be clustered or otherwise sited to minimize impacts.
Design, materials, and general appearance must be compatible with the character
and scale of what is typical in the applicable zone (see also Section
8-2.1408(OO), Site Design, and (PP), Site Maintenance (General), of this
article).
   G.   Co-Location. Co-location is permitted at the County’s discretion based
on site-specific and project-specific considerations, regardless of use type so
long as each licensee meets all of the permit conditions and the County and
State cannabis license requirements for each individual use type. Each
premises, as defined under State law, must obtain a separate State Cannabis
License. Canopy is separately calculated for each licensee. Sharing of
infrastructure, security, and operations is permitted subject to review and
approval through the Cannabis Use Permit process, and consistency with State
law. The combined operations cannot exceed the terms of the permit for the
site. No minimum site size or maximum number of licenses applies beyond what is
required by state law.
   H.   Cultural resources. 
   1.   General. In accordance with Policies CO-4.12 and CO-4.13, and Actions
CO-A63 through CO-A66, of the Cultural Resources chapter of the Conservation
and Open Space Element of the County General Plan, and
8-2.1410(C.1) of this article, applicants shall submit a Cultural Resource
Survey (if required) to determine the potential for Tribal cultural,
archeological, or historical resources to be located on the project site, and/
or impacted by the proposed project. The County shall provide the Cultural
Resource Survey to appropriate State agencies and Tribal representatives for
review and comment. The County will undertake appropriate coordination
(including formal consultation if required) with Tribal representatives. Based
on the recommendations in the Cultural Resource Survey and comments received
from reviewing parties, the County will identify appropriate requirements to
avoid or minimize impacts to cultural resources. These requirements will be
included as proposed conditions of approval for the subject application. If
onsite resources are identified, a mitigation plan is required to protect
identified resources in accordance with General Plan Actions CO-A63 and CO-A64
prior to issuance of permits.
   If cultural resources (Tribal cultural, archaeological, and/or historic) are
encountered during construction or operations, workers shall not alter the
materials or their context until an appropriately trained cultural resource
consultant has evaluated the find and appropriate steps are taken in accordance
with the subsections below. A minimum 100-foot buffer around the find shall be
established upon its discovery. Project personnel shall not collect cultural
resources. Prehistoric resources include chert or obsidian flakes, projectile
points, mortars, pestles, dark friable soil containing shell and bone dietary
debris, heat-affected rock, or human burials. Historic resources include stone
or adobe foundations or walls, structures and remains with square nails, and
refuse deposits often in old wells and privies.
   2.   Tribal cultural resources. If Tribal cultural resources are encountered
all work in the area shall cease, resources shall be accorded culturally
appropriate dignity, removal, reinterment, or other protection; disposition
shall be as directed by the culturally affiliated tribe(s) pursuant to a
Treatment Plan or Treatment Agreement (or other comparable arrangement). For
resources that remain in place, a 1,000 foot buffer shall be provided.
   3.   Human remains. If human remains are discovered, permittees shall comply
with Section 7050.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. Cultivation,
grading/excavation, or other soil disturbance activities shall be immediately
halted at the location of human remains and in the nearby area until the County
Coroner has determined that the remains are not subject to the provisions of
Section 27491 of the California Government Code or any other related provisions
of law concerning investigation of the circumstances, manner and cause of any
death, and the recommendations concerning the treatment and disposition of the
human remains have been made to the person responsible for the excavation, in
the manner provided in Section 5097.98 of the Public Resources Code. If the
coroner determines that the remains are not subject to his or her authority and
the remains are recognized to be those of a Native American, the coroner shall
contact the Native American Heritage Commission within 24 hours and disposition
shall be as specified by Commission and in accordance with applicable
requirements of State law.
   Native American remains shall be accorded culturally appropriate dignity,
removal, reinterment, or other protection/disposition shall be as directed by
the culturally affiliated tribe(s) pursuant to a Treatment Plan or Treatment
Agreement (or other comparable arrangement) completed and appropriately
implemented before commencement of ground-disturbing activity in the affected
area.
   4.   Confidentiality. Cultural and Tribal resource information and records
are confidential (see Section 6254(r) and 6254.10 of the California Government
Code; Section 21082.3(c)(1) of the Public Resources Code; and Section 15120(d)
of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines.
   5.   Tribal consultation. Pursuant to Section 21080.3.1 of the Public
Resources Code any applications for which a negative declaration, mitigated
negative declaration, or EIR is prepared must comply with Section 21080.3.1(b)
of the Public Resources Code related to Tribal consultation.
   6.   SWRCB Cannabis Cultivation Policies. Applicants and site operations
that require coverage under waste discharge requirements (WDRs) or a waiver of
WDRs discharge waste shall comply with applicable provisions and requirements
of the SWRCB Cannabis Cultivation Policies (Terms 19 through 23 of Order WQ
2019-0001-DWQ) which prohibits cannabis cultivation within 600 feet of a Tribal
cultural resource and includes protection measures for discovered resources.
Notwithstanding this requirement, Section 8-2.1408(E) imposes a larger buffer
by restricting cannabis land uses within 1,000 feet of a Tribal cultural
resource.
   I.   Delivery services. Retail Non-Storefront (cannabis delivery) in the
unincorporated area, whether by retailer with a business address inside or
outside of the unincorporated area, is prohibited without a valid County
Business License.
   J.   Drainage and Storm Water Discharge. Drainage and storm water must be
discharged into approved on-site stormwater management systems. Site drainage,
runoff, and storm water discharge shall comply with the State Water Board
Cannabis Policy and Cannabis General Order and the County Improvement
Standards. All license types shall submit evidence of compliance with DCC
Section 15011(a)(3) related to waste discharge, as applicable.
   K.   Driveway access. Driveway approaches to County and State maintained
roads shall be per current County Improvement Standards or Caltrans
requirements, as applicable. An encroachment permit may be required. Controlled
access entries must provide a rapid entry system (e.g. Knox Box approved by the
local Fire District or fire service provider) for use by emergency personnel
and provide adequate space for vehicles to access the lock without impeding the
right-of-way. A County assigned street address is a requirement. The address
must be posted and adhere to display requirements of the Fire Code. Permittees
must demonstrate safe and adequate driveway access to the satisfaction of the
County or Caltrans, as applicable, in compliance with applicable standards.
Access considerations identified in Section
8-1.802 of the County Code shall apply. Driveways shall have an all-weather
surface, such as compacted gravel.
   L.   Dust control. Permittees shall comply with the requirements of the
Yolo-Solano Air Quality Management District related to control of dust.
Cultivation sites shall ensure dust control in a manner consistent with
standard agricultural practices. Vegetative wind breaks are encouraged.
   M.   Edibles. If edible cannabis products are present or manufactured on
site, or offered for sale or distribution, the facility/operation must secure
any necessary approvals and permits from the Division of Environmental Health
and/or State, as applicable, prior to commencement of operations.
   N.   Employee services. Permittees shall comply with applicable labor
standards including parking, toilets, drinking water, safety stations, shading,
and hand-washing stations. Employee housing (temporary and/or permanent),
including for on-site security, must have all necessary services (e.g.,
approved systems for the provision of water and treatment of wastewater) and
required approvals. The provision of employee housing without required permits/
approvals is grounds for revocation or suspension of the Use Permit. Permittees
shall encourage employee ride-sharing and encourage employees to minimize
trips.
   O.   Energy use. Permittees shall demonstrate availability of adequate
energy, and compliance with applicable local and regional energy saving goals.
A permanent power source is required (e.g., electric utility, or solar/wind
with battery back-up). Permittees shall demonstrate use of energy efficient
best practices for each proposed use type. Onsite generation of energy from
clean and/or renewable sources is encouraged. Permittees shall be conditioned
to achieve VCEA ultra green or equivalent standard (100 percent renewable and
100 percent carbon-free).
   Permittees shall demonstrate compliance with the applicable provisions of
the Yolo County Climate Action Plan (CAP) including energy efficiency measures
for irrigation pumps and water efficiency requirements for buildings. (EIR MM
GHG-1)
   P.   Fencing. See requirements for Screening, Section
8-2.1408(KK).
   Q.   Fire protection. All uses shall comply with the California Building,
Electrical and Fire Codes as adopted by the County, including existing
requirements for adequate access, water availability, and other conditions for
fire protection as applicable for the location and use/activity. Permittees
shall manage vegetation and maintain fire breaks to minimize fire danger.
   R.   Flood protection. The applicant shall identify the applicable standard
for flood protection pursuant to Federal (e.g. Federal Emergency Management
Agency [FEMA]), State, and local requirements, and demonstrate compliance.
Development Agreements may only be entered into in State designated urban and
urbanizing areas where 200-year flood protection is provided or adequate
progress has been made, and/or other applicable State flood protection
requirements are met. Development Agreements may only be entered into in State
designated non-urbanized areas where the FEMA standard of flood protection is
met. Cannabis activities determined by the County to be covered activities
under the Delta Plan must comply with all applicable requirements of the Delta
Plan.
   S.   Functionally equivalent standards. The County decision-making body may
allow compliance with any of the requirements/standards of this Section through
functional equivalent means upon demonstrating appropriate CEQA compliance and
making findings of fact supported by substantial evidence. The County decision-
making body may determine based on documented site-specific conditions or other
relevant facts and circumstances, supported by substantial evidence, that one
or more of the requirements/standards of this Section are not necessary or may
be addressed by alternative means that have an equally effective or better
outcome.
   T.   Generators. Use of generators (including diesel-powered refrigerated
units) as the sole or permanent source of power for equipment and/or facilities
for all cannabis use types is prohibited. All licensees must satisfy applicable
requirements of the Yolo-Solano Air Quality Management District. Cultivators,
nurseries and processing licensees must also demonstrate compliance with
Section 16306, Generator Requirements, of the DCC Regulations.
   U.   Good neighbor communication. Permittees shall make available to
property owners and residents/tenants within 1,000 feet of the property line an
operable method of communication with a local or on-site responsible party
having prompt access to the site/operation/activities. The purpose of this
requirement is to facilitate communication between neighbors related to
conditions at the site and operation of the activity. Permittees shall
generally respond to legitimate neighbor contacts, within one business day. The
method of communication may be a phone number, email, or website (containing
contact information), as proposed by the permittee and approved by the County.
A method that generates written records is recommended (e.g. email). Failure to
reasonably respond to contacts as required by this subsection will be a
consideration in any enforcement action/proceedings, including license renewal,
undertaken in connection with the operation at issue. As a condition of
approval for a Cannabis Use Permit, the County may require mediation as a means
of resolving disputes among neighbors, to be paid by the Permittee.
   V.   Grading/land clearing. No grading or land clearing for cannabis
activities may occur without prior authorization pursuant to an approved
Cannabis Use Permit, and a County Grading Permit if applicable. Grading or land
clearing in advance of permit approval is grounds for denial/revocation of any
County Cannabis Use Permit and/or County Cannabis License. Grading and/or land
clearing requires the issuance of a County Grading Permit, if applicable, and
must be conducted subject to a State construction storm water permit if
applicable. Cultivators, nurseries and processing licensees shall demonstrate
compliance with the principles and guidelines for discharge and water quality
contained in the Cannabis Cultivation Policy of the State Water Resources
Control Board. Excessive grading and disturbance shall be avoided. Cannabis
activities on slopes of ten percent or greater require review and approval by
the County Engineer to ensure the application of appropriate environmental
protections and best management practices to control for erosion,
sedimentation, and water quality to acceptable levels. A geotechnical analysis
by a licensed civil engineer in the State of California may be required at the
County’s discretion, to minimize erosion, sedimentation, and water quality to
acceptable levels.
   W.   Hazardous materials. If the facility handles any hazardous materials in
reportable quantities the facility shall be regulated by the Certified Unified
Program Agency (CUPA) in compliance with State law (Section 25500 of the
California Health and Safety Code). Storage and disposal of hazardous materials
and hazardous waste must be conducted in a manner consistent with Federal,
State, and County laws, regulations, rules, and/or other requirements. Required
disclosures, business plans, storage protocol including fuel storage, and
hazard response plans shall be provided to the County and shall be consistent
with the requirements of the Division of Environmental Health and Title 22
Division 4.5 of the California Code of Regulations.
   X.   Hoop houses. Hoop houses shall be used as temporary structures and
shall be removed after the growing season. No utilities or power, including
portable equipment, shall be allowed in hoop houses. No artificial lighting,
battery powered or otherwise shall be allowed. Hoop houses may not be used for
processing. Hoop houses must be properly maintained.
   Y.   Landscaping. Landscaping and irrigation shall be provided consistent
with the requirements of the zone, Chapter 3, Water Efficient Landscaping, of
Title 8 of the YCC, and applicable State requirements for water conservation
and drought tolerant landscaping. See requirements for Screening (Section
8-2.1408(KK)).
   Z.   Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be operational, full cut-off,
shielded, and downward facing. Lighting shall not spill over onto other
properties, structures, or the night sky. Lighting inside indoor and mixed
light operations shall be fully controlled so that minimal or no light escapes.
Lighting is prohibited in hoop houses. Cultivators, nurseries and processing
licensees must comply with Section 16304(a)(6) of the DCC Regulations. All
lighting for indoor/enclosed spaces shall utilize LED bulbs, or equivalent or
more efficient technology. Mixed light use types of all tiers and sizes shall
ensure that lights used for cultivation are shrouded from sunset to sunrise to
preclude nighttime glow, pursuant to Section 16304(a)(7) of the DCC
Regulations. Nighttime light escape from cannabis greenhouses shall be
controlled to the greatest extent feasible through the use of internal curtains
or other equally or more effective methods that preclude the facility from
emitting nighttime glow.
   AA.   Microbusiness. A microbusiness must comply with the requirements of
this article specific to any of the applicable cannabis activity use types in
which the business engages. For example, if the microbusiness engages in
cultivation activities, it must satisfy all the applicable cultivation
requirements of this article. This applies to manufacturing, distribution, and
retail activities as well. On-site consumption may occur only if approved by
the County as part of the Cannabis Use Permit.
   BB.   Noise control. Permittees shall control interior and exterior noise in
compliance with the Noise chapter of the Health and Safety Element of the
County General Plan including Figure HS-7, Noise Compatibility Guidelines, and
Policy HS-7.1 and HS-7.4.
   The following noise restrictions shall apply:
   1.   From 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., noise levels shall not exceed an average
noise level equivalent (Leq) of eighty (80) decibels (dBA) measured at the
property boundaries of the site. However, noise levels shall not exceed an
average noise level equivalent (Leq) of sixty (60) decibels (dbA) for any
nearby off-site residences or other noise-sensitive land uses.
   2.   From 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., noise levels shall not exceed an average
noise level equivalent (Leq) of sixty-five (65) decibels (dBA) measured at the
property boundaries of the site.
   3.   At no time shall noise levels exceed a community noise equivalent
(CNEL) of sixty (60) decibels (dBA) for any existing residence or other noise-
sensitive land use. An existing residence shall be considered (1) the property
line of any residentially zoned area or (2) in the case of agricultural land,
any occupied residential structure not on the same parcel as the cannabis
operation. Achieving the noise standards may involve setbacks, the use of
quieter equipment adjacent to residences, or other appropriate measures. (EIR
MM NOI-1)
   CC.   Nuisance. Cannabis uses, including personal cultivation, shall not
create a public nuisance or adversely affect the health or safety of nearby
residents or businesses by, among other things, creating dust, light, glare,
heat, noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, unsafe conditions,
or other impacts, in excess of allowable thresholds, or be hazardous due to the
use or storage of materials, processes, products, runoff, unauthorized releases
or illegal disposal of wastes.
   1.   Subject to subsection 7 below, it is unlawful and it shall be a public
nuisance to cause or permit persistent cannabis odors. A persistent cannabis
odor is one which is verified by persons of normal odor sensitivity (as defined
by European Standard EN 13725) to exist for three consecutive days within any
two-week period at a dilution-to-threshold (D/T) ratio of seven parts clean or
filtered air to one-part filtered odorous air (7:1) or stronger at the property
line of the site, as a result of investigations resulting from subsection 2,
below. This D/T standard may be modified by ordinance amendment of the Board of
Supervisors, in its sole discretion, through a duly noticed process. Should
this occur, the new standard would automatically apply to existing and future
permittees, upon becoming effective.
   2.   Subject to subsection 7 below, for the purposes of this subsection,
cannabis odors shall be deemed to be persistent if (i) the County enforcement
officer independently determines that the cannabis odor violates the standards
of subsection 1 above, and/or (ii) the County enforcement officer receives
three or more complaints of cannabis odor representing separate residences or
places of occupied business, of a cannabis odor emanating from the subject
property for three consecutive days within any two-week period, that the
enforcement officer verifies violates the standards of subsection 1 above.
   3.   Subject to subsection 7 below, nothing in this subsection shall be
deemed to require three verified complaints before the County may initiate
enforcement action. The County may determine that a public nuisance exists
under this subsection regardless of whether any complaints are received
provided County officials or employees observe and verify cannabis odor
conditions that violate this subsection.
   4.   Failure to effectively resolve a public nuisance shall result in
enforcement action, up to and including additional conditions, suspension and/
or revocation of the County Cannabis Use Permit and/or County Cannabis License
pursuant to the process below.
   5.   The County applies a three-level enforcement system to cannabis
nuisance violations. Depending on the severity, frequency, or the failure to
resolve the cause of the violation, the County enforcement officer may issue an
alert, a warning citation, or a Notice of Violation. An alert shall identify
the problem, identify relevant code sections, discuss the abatement process,
and identify corrective action. A warning citation shall identify the problem,
document the history, and mandate specific abatement actions including
submittal of a plan and schedule to remedy the problem. A Notice of Violation
shall follow the procedures set forth in Section
12-04.17.
   6.   Subject to subsection 7 below, if at any time during the enforcement
system identified above in subsection 5, the County enforcement officer
determines that a violation of other conditions at the site are deleterious to
the health, safety, or general welfare of any one or more surrounding
properties, or that the permittee and/or landowner is not acting in good faith
or in a manner sufficient to timely address such a matter, the County
enforcement officer may bypass the citation process and take immediate steps to
address the matter, including by abatement or any other lawful means.
   7.   Permittees operating in compliance with this article, in particular
Section
8-2.1408(DD)(1), Odor Control, the terms of their Cannabis Use Permit, and
other applicable laws shall be presumed to not cause or contribute to a public
nuisance.
   8.   The County may elect not to investigate any complaint due to resource
limitations or other matters. In addition, the County may elect not to
investigate complaints submitted by complainants that submit more than three
unsubstantiated complaints within a one-year period.
   DD.   Odor control.
   1.   The allowable threshold for cannabis odor from all cannabis uses,
including personal cultivation, shall be defined as a dilution-to-threshold (D/
T) ratio of less than seven parts clean or filtered air to one-part odorous air
(7:1) at the property line of the site. This D/T standard may be modified by
ordinance amendment of the Board of Supervisors, in its sole discretion,
through a duly noticed process. Should this occur, the new standard would
automatically apply to existing and future permittees, upon becoming effective.
As further defined in Section
8-2.1408(CC), cannabis odor below this threshold shall be considered acceptable
and shall not be considered a nuisance.
   All cannabis uses must maintain compliance with the applicable D/T standard.
If necessary to ensure compliance with the D/T standard, indoor and mixed light
uses must install and maintain the following: an exhaust air filtration system
with odor control that effectively minimizes internal odors from being emitted
externally; an air system that creates negative air pressure between the
facilities interior and exterior so that odors outside of the facility will not
exceed the dilution-to-threshold (allowable threshold), as defined herein; or
other odor control system/methods which effectively minimizes odor to a level
compliant with the allowable threshold.
   Odor control for outdoor activities may include different plant strains,
smaller cultivation areas, relocation of outdoor activities indoors or in a
mixed light facility, use of site design or other technology, use of vegetative
barriers, use of odor mitigating crops, and/or other methods proven to be
effective and accepted by the County.
   2.   Applicants shall submit the following information for all cannabis
types in the form of an Odor Control Plan:
   a.   Identification and description of cannabis odor emitting activities and
nature and characteristics of emissions.
   b.   Description of methods, procedures, and engineering controls for
reducing/controlling odors.
   c.   Certification by a Professional Engineer or Qualified Odor Professional
that: the methods, procedures, and engineering controls proposed to control
cannabis odors are consistent with accepted/available industry-specific best
control technologies and methods designed to abate odor, and will be effective
in abating cannabis odors to the required D/T standard at the property line of
the site.
   d.   A wind pattern evaluation of each Cannabis Use Permit application shall
be submitted as part of the Odor Control Plan. This evaluation shall utilize
wind roses (a circular display of the frequency of wind coming from specific
directions over a specified period of time). The wind pattern evaluation shall
identify sensitive land uses (as defined in Section
8-2.1408 (E)) located downwind of a proposed cannabis use and potentially
affected by nuisance odor for a predominant period of time based on the wind
frequency. (EIR MM AQ-4)
   3.   On a case-by-case basis, at the discretion of the County, in
conjunction with consideration of a Cannabis Use Permit or Cannabis Use Permit
amendment, odor easements on neighboring property(ies) may be considered as an
alternative to compliance with the identified odor threshold. Such easements
must be in a form approved by the Cannabis Unit, be in effect so long as the
Cannabis Use Permit is in effect, and shall be recorded in the chain of title
for the affected property(ies).
   EE.   Operating hours. Outdoor cultivation and indoor or mixed light
cultivation activities may be conducted seven days per week, 24-hours per day.
Operating hours for other cannabis uses are subject to approval pursuant to the
Cannabis Use Permit and may be limited at the discretion of the County.
   FF.   Parking. Parking shall be provided consistent with any minimum
requirements listed for such uses in the County Zoning Regulations, and more
particularly, must meet occupancy requirements for the construction of such
uses as indicated in the California Building Code. Adequate onsite parking for
all employees, residents, loading, and unloading must be provided, including
any reserved overflow parking areas designated for seasonal use. Paved parking
spaces for accessibility shall be as required. Parking areas shall not obstruct
emergency or fire access, and shall not be placed over leach fields and
replacement areas. Parking shall be prohibited on County right-of-way if
operations occur on agriculturally-designated land.
   GG.   Personal use. Personal use is allowed as described in Section 11362.2
of the California Health and Safety Code and Chapter 4 of Title 12 of the Yolo
County Code. Buffers as specified in Section
8-2.1408(E) of this article shall not apply to plants grown for personal use.
Personal use is restricted to medicinal and adult recreational use only, sales
are prohibited, and non-cultivation uses are prohibited.
   HH.   Processing. Permittees engaging in cultivation may also conduct
processing of their own product onsite or may obtain a separate processing
license to perform processing activities at a separate facility/location for
their own product and/or that of third-party cultivators. Processing includes
trimming, drying, curing, grading, storing, packaging, and labeling of non-
manufactured cannabis incidental to the cultivation operation. All processing
activities shall occur indoors within secure permitted buildings/structures, or
may occur outside if screened from the public right-of-way pursuant to Section
8.2-1408 (KK) of this article, and provided odor and security are adequately
addressed.
   II.   Public land. Cannabis activities are prohibited on public land.
   JJ.   Roadways. In accordance with the County’s adopted policies and
standards cannabis operators are strongly encouraged to take affirmative
measures to combine trips, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and minimize
vehicle miles traveled. Policy CI-3.1 of the Circulation Element of the County
General Plan identifies level of service policies intended to retain capacity
on rural roads for agricultural uses, which includes cannabis cultivation.
   If triggered by conditions identified in the Yolo Transportation Impact
Study Guidelines (adopted February 2010; as amended), e.g. 100 new daily trips
or more, applicants will prepare a traffic assessment for consideration as part
of their use permit application. All trips associated with an existing cannabis
licensee shall be considered “new” trips for the purposes of determining
whether a traffic study is required as a part of the Use Permit application. In
situations where a project would substantially and adversely alter physical or
operational conditions on a County roadway, roadway improvements (e.g. safety
improvements) or other circulation improvements will be required as
appropriate.
   The permittee shall install/undertake appropriate roadway improvements to
adequately resolve identified concerns in a manner consistent with adopted
standards and requirements as applied to other similar uses.
   KK.   Screening. Applicants for outdoor (and mixed light if screening is
required) cannabis cultivation shall submit a screening plan (including details
such as location, height, material or species, etc.) that achieves the
following:
   1.   Outdoor cultivation (including hoop houses) shall be screened to the
maximum extent feasible to avoid visibility from public rights-of-way. Mixed
light cultivation and indoor cannabis uses are not required to be screened,
unless determined by the County that screening is necessary for security
purposes.
   2.   Screening may be vegetative or in the form of fencing, at the County’s
discretion, dependent on circumstances at the site and in the surrounding area.
   3.   Vegetative screening is subject to approval by the County Agricultural
Commissioner to ensure proposed species will not harbor agricultural pests.
Native, drought-tolerant species are encouraged. The applicant must demonstrate
that the proposed vegetative screening is reasonably expected to provide the
intended screening within five years.
   4.   Fencing, generally, shall not exceed a height of seven (7) feet.
Requests for height above seven (7) feet may be permitted as part of the
Cannabis Use Permit, if it is found that the size, shape, topography, location
of the site, or orientation of structures on adjacent properties justifies such
modification, and the property where the fencing is modified will not cause
detriment to the surrounding area nor a safety hazard for the use of adjacent
properties or roadways.
   5.   Fencing design and materials shall be consistent with the surrounding
area, remain in good repair, and shall not significantly diminish the visual
quality of the site or surrounding area. Fencing shall be opaque and
constructed of durable materials. Linear barbed wire at the six-foot level or
above may be allowed on a case-by-case basis through the Cannabis Use Permit
process or Cannabis Use Permit amendment process if it is determined to not
diminish the visual quality of the site or surrounding area. Razor wire fencing
is prohibited.
   6.   Sites not visible from public rights-of-way are not required to be
screened, unless determined by the County that screening is necessary for
security purposes.
   LL.   Security. A fully functional, operating, site security system with
cameras operating 24-hours a day, seven days a week, is required. Cannabis Use
Permit applicants shall describe how site and operational security will be
addressed specific to the site and use type, including features that may
consist of access control, alarms, security personnel, guard dogs, fencing, and
building/structural security. All gates, doors, and windows of structures and
facilities used for cannabis activities shall be locked/secured. Permittees are
responsible to prohibit individuals from loitering on the premises if they are
not engaged in activity expressly related to the activity/operations. A
security plan shall be provided to the County and shall be treated as
confidential by the County pursuant to Section 6255(a) of the California
Government Code because the public interest served by maintaining the
confidentiality of such security plans clearly outweighs the public interest
served by disclosing the record. Failure to secure a site pursuant to the
security plan may be grounds for revocation. All license types shall submit
evidence of compliance with DCC Article 5, Security Measures, commencing with
Section 15042, as applicable.
   MM.   Setbacks. Minimum setbacks from property boundaries shall be
consistent with the requirements of the zone. All operations shall satisfy
additional buffer requirements identified in Section
8-2.1408(E), Buffers, of this article. Accessory uses, as defined for each zone
category, may not encroach into required setbacks.
   Permittees shall comply with the minimum 100-foot setback from lakes,
perennial ponds, rivers, creeks, sloughs, and perennial streams, as set forth
in Policy CO-2.22 of the General Plan, as applicable. Cultivators, nurseries
and processing licensees shall comply with the State Regional Water Quality
Control Board required 600-foot setback from Tribal Cultural Resources, as
applicable. Notwithstanding this requirement, Section
8-2.1408(E) imposes a larger buffer by restricting cannabis land uses within
1,000 feet of a Tribal cultural resource.
   NN.   Signage and advertising. Permittees shall comply with applicable sign
standards (see Article 12, Sign Standards, of the County Zoning Regulations).
Advertising shall comply with California Business and Professions Code Chapter
15 (Advertising and Marketing Restrictions).
   OO.   Site design. Site design shall comply with all applicable codes,
standards, regulations, and guidelines, and shall demonstrate consideration of
odor control, air quality, noise control, workflow, safety and security,
lighting, aesthetics, protection of resources (biological, cultural, trees,
etc.) and other appropriate impact mitigation. All required permits shall be
obtained. Operations shall comply with Sections
8-2.1002, Area of Lots, and
8-2.1004, Height Regulations, of the County Zoning Regulations as applicable.
   PP.   Site maintenance (general). Permittee shall at all times maintain,
manage, and operate the site, all improvements and alterations, and all
structures, in good repair, acceptable in appearance, and in a reasonably safe
condition, including securing all necessary licenses and permits for this work.
The site shall be kept free of litter, clutter, graffiti, abandoned buildings,
abandoned structures, and abandoned equipment. The permittee shall prevent and
eliminate conditions that constitute a public nuisance.
   QQ.   Trailers and shipping containers. All required building permits shall
be obtained for trailers and shipping containers for temporary or permanent
use. These uses may not encroach into required setbacks. Permittees shall
comply with Section 8-2.1012 (Commercial Coaches) and Section 8-2.1013
(Manufactured or Mobile Homes and Trailers) of the County Zoning Regulations if
applicable. Use of recreation vehicles, campers, motorhomes, or other such
vehicles for cannabis-related activities is not allowed.
   RR.   Tree protection. Protection of trees is encouraged consistent with
General Plan policies and the County Oak Woodland Conservation and Enhancement
Plan. Protections shall include a prohibition on detrimental activity within
the dripline. Removal of native trees and tree clusters or stands, particularly
oak woodlands, remnant valley oaks, and riparian woodlands, in furtherance of a
cannabis use is prohibited. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this
section prevents the removal of trees in response to a safety, disease, or
similar concern that is verified in writing by an arborist or similarly
qualified individual.
   SS.   Waste management. Cannabis waste, trash, and garbage must be stored so
as not to create a public nuisance and must be regularly removed from the
facility to an appropriately permitted disposal facility. All licensees shall
satisfy the requirements of Section 17223, Waste Management, of the DCC
Regulations (as applicable), which includes submission of a Cannabis Waste
Management Plan.
   TT.   Wastewater discharge. Access to adequate washing and toilet facilities
during operation must be provided and shall meet the requirements of the
Division of Environmental Health (see Section
6-19.601 et seq. of the YCC). If a connection to a public sewer system cannot
be provided, an onsite wastewater treatment system (OWTS) or other approved
wastewater disposal method is required. A permit from the Division of
Environmental Health is required prior to construction of an OWTS or use of an
alternative wastewater disposal method. Wastewater effluent must be discharged
into an approved OWTS or public sewer system. Permittees shall comply with
applicable County and State requirements for wastewater discharge. Applicants
for indoor cultivation and noncultivation cannabis operations shall prepare a
wastewater pre-treatment program that will characterize wastewater generated
and will identify any additional treatment measures required to allow discharge
to a public wastewater system without violating the waste discharge
requirements of the facility. (EIR MM HYDRO-4)
   UU.   Vertical integration. Vertical integration is permitted at the
County’s discretion based on site-specific and project-specific considerations.
Nothing in this article shall prohibit a single individual or entity from
holding or owning more than one category of license use type, other than
laboratory/testing, provided all required licenses and permits are obtained,
and provided the licensee abides by all applicable regulatory requirements.
   VV.   Water supply/use. Access to potable drinking water and water for hand
washing during operation must be provided and shall meet the requirements of
the Division of Environmental Health. Permittees shall identify the source of
all water proposed to be used for the operation, substantiate a legal right to
use the water if from a surface source, and demonstrate that adequate capacity
is available to serve the use on a sustainable basis. If operations will
involve more than 25 persons (including employees, property owners, and
visitors) at least 60 days per year, or other standard applicable under State
or local law, the site must comply with public water system requirements and
obtain a water supply permit from the Division of Environmental Health. All
licensees shall comply with Section 16311, Supplemental Water Source
Information, of the DCC Regulations, as applicable.
(Ord. 1541, eff. October 14, 2021; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1545, eff. January
6, 2022; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1564, eff. December 21, 2023)
Sec. 8-2.1409.   Special cannabis restrictions and concerns.
   A.   Federal legal framework. Cannabis is classified as a Schedule 1
controlled substance under the Federal Controlled Substances Act of 1970.
Individuals engaging in cannabis cultivation and/or other cannabis activities
risk prosecution under Federal law. Federal cannabis law is independent of and
may conflict with this article. This article does not protect any person from
arrest or prosecution under Federal law. Persons engaged in cannabis activities
assume any and all risk and any and all liability that may arise or result
under State and Federal laws from the cultivation, sale, possession,
distribution, use of cannabis and/or any other cannabis activity. All persons
engaged in cannabis activities are subject to possible Federal prosecution,
regardless of State licensure. Operation pursuant to a County Cannabis License
or County Cannabis Use Permit does not assert or provide Federal protection.
   B.   Generally unstable legal framework. Cannabis activities are highly
regulated at all levels of government and those regulations are subject to
rapid change. Permittees are solely responsible for compliance with all
applicable laws.
   C.   Ability of County to deposit cannabis-related funds. All Cannabis Use
Permit applicants and Permittees acknowledge that the County’s cannabis program
and the issuance of any permit under this article is conditioned on the
County’s ability to deposit funds received from cannabis-related businesses,
including for payment of permit fees, applicable taxes, and fines and abatement
costs. If at any time the County is unable to deposit cannabis-related funds as
a result of the federal classification of cannabis as a “Schedule 1” drug
creating legal liability for financial institutions accepting cannabis-related
deposits, the Board of Supervisors may take action to void this article and
revoke Cannabis Use Permits.
   D.   Sensitive/confidential information. Information related to cultural
resources is confidential (see Section 8-2.1408(H)(4) of this article).
Information related to site security is confidential (see Section 8-2.1408(LL)
of this article) and shall not be disclosed without the written permission of
the permittee, landowner, or their representative, or unless compelled to do so
by regulation or court order.
   E.   Limitations on County liability. The following are required as a
condition of any Cannabis Use Permit, and County Counsel shall approve the form
and content of all related conditions:
   1.   Indemnification. Each Permittee shall indemnify the County from all
claims, damages, etc. associated with the issuance of any permit to the
Permittee or the Permittee’s operation of the cannabis activities. As directed
by County Counsel, the indemnification shall satisfy or exceed the requirements
of Section
8-2.212.5, Indemnification, of the County Zoning Regulations.
   2.   Agreement to defend. Each Permittee shall agree to defend, at its sole
expense and with counsel acceptable to the County Counsel, any action against
the County, its agents, officers, and employees related to the approval and
implementation of a Cannabis Use Permit.
   F.   Delta Plan and Delta Land Use and Resource Management Plan (LURMP).
Cannabis activities proposed to occur within the legal Delta must comply with
applicable requirements of the Delta Plan (including demonstrating consistency
through the Certification of Consistency process of the Delta Stewardship
Council) and the Delta Land Use and Resource Management Plan (LURMP).
(Ord. 1541, eff. October 14, 2021)
Sec. 8-2.1410.   Application submittal and processing.
   A.   Applicability No commercial cannabis activities may be undertaken
without having first obtained a Cannabis Use Permit. Cannabis Use Permits,
including amendments and extensions, shall be processed by the County pursuant
to the requirements of this article and, to the extent the requirements thereof
do not conflict with or duplicate requirements of this article, Sections
8-2.217, Use Permits, and
8-2.215, Site Plan Review, of the County Zoning Regulations. Cannabis Use
Permits shall be considered by the Planning Commission, with input from the
appropriate Citizens Advisory Committee(s) (CACs), if any, and subject to
appeal to the Board of Supervisors.
   Pursuant to Section
8-2.1410(I), all cannabis use permits for qualified Existing Licensees in the
Capay Valley are required to be processed as a batch and acted on at the same
hearing. Should an appeal be filed challenging a denial of a cannabis use
permit for an Existing Licensee located in the Capay Valley, this will have the
effect of staying the actions on all cannabis use permits for Existing
Licensees in the Capay Valley. The stay will extend through the end of the
County’s appeal process, but would not extend through any related litigation.
Should an appeal be filed challenging an approval of a cannabis use permit for
an Existing Licensee located in the Capay Valley, this will not result in a
stay on the actions on all cannabis use permits for Existing Licensees in the
Capay Valley.
   The Director is authorized to make administrative policies and procedures
consistent with this article concerning applications, the application process,
the information required of applicants, application procedures, and the
administrative process and procedures to be used and followed in the
application and hearing process. The Director or appropriate County staff shall
review, verify, and investigate all information in the application and prepare
a report for the decision-making body incorporating the findings of the
investigation including, but not limited to, the suitability of the proposed
location and the applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this article.
   B.   Application requirements. Applicants for Cannabis Use Permits shall
submit the following application information:
   1.   State Licensing Application. The applicant shall submit a copy of all
information required by/submitted to the State for a Cannabis License.
   2.   County Licensing Application. The applicant shall submit a copy of all
information required by/submitted to the County for a Cannabis License and
County Business License, if applicable.
   3.   Cannabis Use Permit Application. The applicant shall submit all
information required by Section
8-2.209, Application Requirements, of the County Zoning Regulations. These are
minimum requirements and additional application materials will be required.
Applications shall be processed pursuant to Section
8-2.210, Discretionary Review and Determining Completeness of Development
Applications, and Section
8-2.212, Approval of Projects, of the County Zoning Regulations.
   4.   Detailed Description of Proposed Operation. The applicant must submit a
detailed description of the proposed cannabis activity(ies) of sufficient
detail to allow for an analysis of the merits of the project and CEQA
compliance.
   5.   Pre-Application. All Existing Licensees outside of the Capay Valley
seeking non-cultivation license types shall participate in a Cannabis Pre-
Application Review process. Existing licensees in the Capay Valley, and those
outside of the Capay Valley seeking only cultivation license types are
encouraged to apply for Pre-Application Review, but not required. The purpose
of the Cannabis Pre-Application Review is to determine demand for limited non-
cultivation license types, allow for Tribal Cultural Resources assessment, and
identify potential constraints for relocation sites (e.g., buffers, over-
concentration, electrical supply, etc.).
   C.   Site specific information. In addition to the standard information
required by the County as described in the application for a Use Permit, the
following site-specific information may be required for Cannabis Use Permit
applications:
   1.   Cultural Resource Survey (this survey is not required if minor or no
site grading or soil disturbance will occur).
   2.   Biological Resource Survey
   3.   Phase One Environmental Site Assessment
   4.   Scaled Depiction of Applicable Setbacks and Cannabis Buffers
   5.   Other – as identified by the County
   D.   Operational information required
   1.   24-hour Good Neighbor Contact
   2.   Odor Control Plan
   3.   Security Plan
   4.   Other – As identified by the County
   E.   Payment of monetary or other obligations required. Any monetary or
other obligations of the applicant or property owner to the County must be paid
prior to processing, construction, amendment, renewal, extension, or operation
(as applicable), or acceptable alternative arrangements made. This shall
include all application fees including fees for technical experts, special
studies, and CEQA compliance, license fees, cannabis taxes, property taxes or
other property obligations, Development Agreement public benefit obligations,
penalties and/or fines.
   F.   Misrepresentations. The provision of false or misleading information in
the permitting process will result in rejection of the application and/or
revocation of any issued permit/approval.
   G.   Code compliance (general). The County may refuse to issue any permits,
licenses, or approvals where the property upon which the use or structure is
proposed is in violation of the County Code.
   H.   Application completeness.
   1.   Pursuant to Section 65943 of the California Government Code, the County
shall determine in writing whether an application is complete within 30 days of
acceptance for filing. While conducting this review for completeness, the staff
shall be alert for environmental issues that might require preparation of an
EIR or that may require additional explanation by the applicant (CEQA
Guidelines Section 15060).
   2.   If the application is found to be incomplete within the 30-day review
period, a letter shall be immediately sent to the applicant describing why the
application is incomplete and identifying the actions necessary to ensure
completeness. The applicant has thirty (30) days thereafter to provide the
requested information and the County has 15 days from receipt of such
information to determine whether the application as amended is complete. If the
application is again determined to be incomplete, the applicant shall be
provided with immediate written notice and one final 15-day period to submit
identified information. The County shall determine in writing if the final
submittal constitutes a complete application. If the application remains
incomplete, it shall be deemed withdrawn, and a notice of the withdrawal shall
be sent to the applicant. The applicant may appeal the final determination of
completeness to the Planning Commission pursuant to Section
8-2.225.
   I.   Application Processing in Capay Valley. All cannabis use permits for
qualified Existing Licensees in the Capay Valley shall be processed as a batch
and acted on at the same hearing.
   J.   Development agreements.
   1.   Early Implementation Development Agreements – This term refers to
Development Agreements executed by the County with cannabis cultivators prior
to the effective date of this article, pursuant to the Early Implementation
Development Agreements Policy approved by the County Board of Supervisors on
March 6, 2018. Any application under the Early Implementation Development
Agreements policy for which a CEQA environmental impact report, mitigated
negative declaration, or negative declaration has been released for public
comment prior to the effective date of this article shall be exempt, with the
exception of an applicant that applies for a use permit under the provisions
set forth in Section
8-2.1404(B). At the conclusion of the term of the agreement, or at any point
after adoption of this article that a substantive amendment of an executed
Early Implementation Development Agreement is sought, operations subject to
such agreements shall be brought into compliance with this article.
      a.   If an early Development Agreement applicant seeks a use permit in
compliance with Section
8-2.1404(B), the Early Implementation Development Agreement application shall
be considered null and void.
   2.   Development agreements – Applicants for Cannabis Use Permits may also
request consideration of a Development Agreement pursuant to Chapter 5,
Development Agreements, of Title 8 of the YCC.
   3.   Standard Terms and Requirements – Development Agreements for Cannabis
Use Permits shall utilize standard terms and conditions developed by the
County, and adapted for the particular purpose.
   4.   Voluntary Commitment to Public Benefit Beyond Cannabis Tax –
Development Agreements for Cannabis Use Permits shall include public benefits
beyond those attainable through project conditions or CEQA mitigation measures,
and in addition to payment of the Cannabis tax. Acceptable benefits may
include:
   a.   Unrestricted Monetary Contribution
   b.   Community infrastructure Funding (e.g. public park)
   c.   Local Preference Hiring
   d.   Identification of Location as Place of Business for Purposes of Sale
Tax Collection
   e.   Contributions to Funding for New Farmers
   K.   CEQA Compliance. Cannabis uses that are proposed pursuant to this
article shall be evaluated for CEQA coverage pursuant to the certified
Programmatic Environmental Impact Report prepared for the Yolo County Cannabis
Land Use Ordinance pursuant to Sections 15162, 15168(c), 15183, and/or other
applicable sections of the State CEQA Guidelines.
   L.   Public noticing. Public notice shall comply with Section
8-2.211, Public Notice of the County Zoning Regulations, except that
notification for public meetings and hearings shall extend 1,000 feet from the
property line boundary of the project site.
(Ord. 1541, eff. October 14, 2021; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1545, eff. January
6, 2022; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1564, eff. December 21, 2023)
Sec. 8-2.1411.   Reporting and inspections.
   A.   Annual Reporting. Permittees shall report annually to the County, on
July 1 of each year starting the first July 1 in the year after permit
issuance, using a template or format approved by the County, regarding the
following:
   1.   Compliance with Cannabis Use Permit requirements
   2.   Compliance with CEQA Mitigation Measures, as applicable
   3.   Compliance with Development Agreement requirements, as applicable
   4.   Monthly Inventory Records – These records shall be maintained for four
years from the date created (or any longer period that may be required by state
laws or regulations) and shall be timely provided to the County upon request.
   B.   Inspections.
   1.   Recordings made by security cameras at any cannabis business shall be
maintained for a period of not less than 30 days and shall be made available
and accessible to the County Cannabis Unit and/or Sheriff’s Office and any
other County official charged with enforcing the provisions of the Yolo County
Code immediately upon request for review and copying, even in the absence of a
search warrant, subpoena, or court order.
   2.   Property owners and permittees shall grant the County access to enter
all cannabis businesses unannounced for the purpose of making reasonable
inspections to observe and enforce compliance with this Article and the
Cannabis Use Permit. Such inspections shall be limited to observing the
premises for purposes of determining whether the cannabis business is being
operated or maintained in compliance with this code, State law, and other
applicable laws and regulations.
   3.   Applicants and permittees must cooperate with employees and
investigators of the County who are conducting inspections or investigations
relevant to the enforcement of this Article.
   4.   Interference in the performance of an inspection by any means is
grounds for revocation.
   C.   Presentation to decisionmakers. Pursuant to Section
8-2.1413, every two years County staff will present to the Board of Supervisors
on the cannabis program, the annual reports, annual inspections, complaints
received by the County (if any), and any other pertinent information. The
report may make recommendations for regulatory changes if merited.
   D.   Fees for Annual Reporting and Inspections. Permittees shall pay any
required fees for review and approval of annual reporting, inspections, and
required public meetings or hearings.
(Ord. 1541, eff. October 14, 2021)
Sec. 8-2.1412.   Enforcement.
   A.   Revocation or modification. A Cannabis Use Permit may be revoked or
modified as provided by the provisions of Sec.
8-2.217(f). In addition to the grounds for revocation or modification set forth
in Sec.
8-2.217(f), a Cannabis Use Permit may, following a noticed public hearing, be
revoked or modified for any one or more of the following grounds:
   1.   Any act or omission by a property owner or permittee in contravention
of the provisions of this Article;
   2.   Unresolved violation by the applicant or permittee, or unresolved
violation at the proposed cultivation site, of any provision of the County Code
or State law related to the cannabis use;
   3.   A change in conditions occurring after the original grant of the
approval or the continuation of the use as approved that is contrary to public
health, safety or general welfare;
   4.   Cessation of all uses authorized by the Cannabis Use Permit for a
period of three or more consecutive years;
   5.   Failure to continue to pay monetary or other obligations described in
Section
8-2.1410(E), including applicable taxes, as they become due; or
   6.   Failure to comply with any requirement of this or other applicable
sections of the County Code or with State law.
   B.   Enforcement. The remedies provided by this Article are cumulative and
in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity, including the
County Code Enforcement Ordinance.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision, or to
fail to comply with any of the requirements, of this Article. Any person
violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory
requirements of this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. No proof of
knowledge, intent, or other mental state is required to establish a violation.
   2.   Any condition caused or allowed to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this Article shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall, at the
discretion of County, create a cause of action for penalty pursuant to the
County Code, and any other action authorized by law.
   3.   Each day that a violation of this article exists shall constitute a
separate violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement
measures authorized by the County Code or otherwise authorized by law.
Additionally, any violation of this Article shall be subject to injunctive
relief, disgorgement of any payment to the County of any and all monies
unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement, costs of restoration, costs of
investigation, attorney fees, and any other relief or remedy available at law
or in equity. The County may also pursue any and all remedies and actions
available and applicable under State and local laws for any violations
committed by the cannabis activity or persons related thereto, or associated
with, the cannabis activity.
   C.   Cultivation site restoration. Upon revocation of a Cannabis Use Permit
or abandonment of a permitted cultivation site, the permittee and/or property
owner shall remove all materials, equipment, and improvements on the site that
were used in connection with the cannabis use and that are not adaptable to
non-cannabis permitted use of the site, including but not limited to concrete
foundations and slabs, bags, pots, or other containers, tools, fertilizers,
pesticides, fuels, hoop house frames and coverings, irrigation pipes, water
bladders or tanks, pond liners, electrical lighting fixtures, wiring and
related equipment, fencing, cannabis, cannabis waste products, imported soil or
soil amendments not incorporated into native soil, generators, pumps, and
structures.
   If any of the above described or related material or equipment is to remain,
the permittee and/or property owner shall prepare a plan and description of the
non-cannabis continued use of such material or equipment on the site. The
property owner shall be responsible for execution of the restoration plan,
subject to monitoring and periodic inspection by the County. Failure to
adequately execute the plan shall be subject to the enforcement. For purposes
of this Subsection, “abandonment” shall mean failure to obtain a County
Cannabis License to cultivate on the permitted cultivation site for three
consecutive years.
(Ord. 1541, eff. October 14, 2021)
Sec. 8-2.1413.   Effectiveness.
   Every two years following the effective date of this article, staff shall
present the Board of Supervisors with an assessment of its effectiveness and
any recommendations for change. This evaluation shall include in particular an
assessment of the effectiveness of Section
8-2.1408, Specific Use Requirements and Performance Standards, of this article,
including Section
8-2.1408(E) Buffers, Section
8-2.1408(U) Good Neighbor Communication, Section
8-2.1408(CC) Nuisance, Section
8-2.1408(DD) Odor Control, and Section
8-2.1412 Enforcement. The first assessment of effectiveness will include
consideration of whether the County should further encourage or require indoor
cannabis cultivation.
(Ord. 1541, eff. October 14, 2021)
Chapter 3
WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING ORDINANCE
Sections:
   
8-3.101   Purpose.
   
8-3.102   Definitions.
   
8-3.103   Applicability.
   
8-3.104   Submittal requirements.
   
8-3.105   Approval.
   
8-3.106   Certificate of Completion.
   
8-3.107   Permit issuance and enforcement.
   
8-3.108   Landscaping standards.
   
8-3.109   Irrigation requirements.
   
8-3.110   Public education.
Sec. 8-3.101.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this ordinance is to add provisions to the Yolo County Code
to address permitting requirements for water efficient landscaping. These
changes are necessary to reflect changes in California law (Assembly Bill 1881,
Government Code Section 65591 et seq., and Executive Order No. B-29-15) and to
promote the conservation and efficient use of water. These changes are also
necessary and appropriate to implement the Yolo County General Plan.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 15, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-3.102.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   Backflow prevention device
   Backflow prevention device means a safety device used to prevent pollution
or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the
irrigation system.
   California Invasive Plant Inventory
   California Invasive Plant Inventory means the California Invasive Plant
Inventory maintained by the California Invasive Plant Council.
   Check valve or anti-drain valve
   Check valve or anti-drain valve means a valve located under a sprinkler
head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system
to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.
   Community garden
   Community garden means a piece of property or area of a property that is
dedicated solely to edible plants and gardened by a cooperative group of people
living in the area.
   Community water system
   Community water system means a public water system which serves at least
fifteen (15) service connections used by year-round residents or regularly
serves at least twenty-five (25) year-round residents.
   Developer-installed
   Developer-installed means a landscape project installed by or under the
direction of the developer of a development project.
   Distribution uniformity
   The measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area.
   Ecological restoration project
   Ecological restoration project means a project, where the primary function
of such project is to assist in the recovery of an ecosystem that has been
degraded, damaged, or destroyed. For purposes of this ordinance, restoration
focuses on establishing the composition, structure, pattern, and ecological
processes necessary to make terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems sustainable,
resilient, and healthy under current and future conditions.
   Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU)
   Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU) means the total water used for the
landscape. The ETWU is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation
method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the MAWA.
   ET adjustment factor (ETAF)
   ET adjustment factor (ETAF) means, except for special landscape areas, a
factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, that,
when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and
irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs
to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (non-
rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for
existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.
   Evapotranspiration or ETo
   Evapotranspiration or ETo means a standard measurement of environmental
parameters that affect the water use of plants, and is an estimate of the
Evapotranspiration of a large field of four (4) to seven (7) inch tall, cool-
season grass that is well watered.
   Graywater
   Untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge,
has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes,
and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing,
manufacturing, or operating wastes. Graywater includes, but is not limited to,
wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing
machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks
or dishwashers. Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12. All graywater systems
shall conform to the California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16)
and any applicable local ordinance standards.
   Head to head coverage
   Head to head coverage means full coverage from one sprinkler head to the
next.
   Homeowner-provided landscaping
   Homeowner-provided landscaping means any landscaping either installed by a
private individual for a single family residence or installed by a licensed
contractor hired by a homeowner.
   Hydrozone
   Hydrozone means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar
water needs. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.
   Invasive plant species
   Invasive plant species means species of plants not historically found in
California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or
economic resources. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California
Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database.
   Irrigation audit
   Irrigation audit means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an
irrigation system conducted by a Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor. An
irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up,
system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting
overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation
schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the
Irrigation Association’s Landscape Irrigation Auditor Certification program or
other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency “Watersense” labeled auditing
program.
   Irrigation efficiency (IE)
   Irrigation efficiency (IE) means the measurement of the amount of water
beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency
is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics
and management practices. The irrigation efficiencies for purposes of this
ordinance are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.
   Landscape area
   Landscape area means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features
in a landscape design plan subject to the Maximum Applied Water Allowance
calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or
structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone
walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas
designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native
vegetation, non-irrigated orchards or vineyards).
   Landscape contractor
   Landscape contractor means a person licensed by the State of California to
construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of
landscape systems.
   Landscape project
   Landscape project means total area of landscape in a project as defined in
landscape area for the purposes of this ordinance, meeting requirements under
Section
8-3.103 (Applicability).
   Low volume irrigation
   Low volume irrigation (also point source irrigation) means the application
of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines
and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume
irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water
slowly at or near the root zone of plants.
   Low-head drainage
   Low-head drainage means water that flows out of the system after the valve
turns off due to elevation changes within the system.
   Master shut-off valve
   An automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls
water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed, water will
not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce
any water loss due to a leaky station valve.
   Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA)
   Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA) means the upper limit of annual
applied water for the established landscaped area. It is based upon the area’s
reference evapotranspiration, the ET Adjustment Factor (ETAF), and the size of
the landscape area. The Estimated Total Water Use shall not exceed the Maximum
Applied Water Allowance.
   Mined-land reclamation projects
   Mined-land reclamation projects means any surface mining operation with a
reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation
Act of 1975.
   Mulch
   Mulch means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or
inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, and decomposed granite left
loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing
evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing
soil erosion.
   New construction and/or new development
   New construction and/or new development means, for the purposes of this
ordinance, a new building or structure with a landscape, or other new
landscapes, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated
building.
   Overhead irrigation system
   Overhead irrigation system means a system that delivers water through the
air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).
   Overspray
   Overspray means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target
area.
   Pervious
   Pervious means any surface or material that allows the passage of water
through the material and into underlying soil.
   Plant factor
   Plant factor is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of
water needed by plants. For purposes of this ordinance, the plant factor range
for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water
use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants
is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to
1.0. Plant factors cited in this ordinance are derived from the publication
“Water Use Classification of Landscape Species”. Plant factors may also be
obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or
professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water
Resources (DWR).
   Point source irrigation
   See low volume irrigation.
   Precipitation rate
   Precipitation rate means the rate of application of water measured in inches
per hour.
   Rain sensor
   Rain sensor means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation
event when it rains.
   Recycled water
   Recycled water means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable
for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This
water is not intended for human consumption.
   Rehabilitated landscape
   Rehabilitated landscape means any re-landscaping project that requires a
permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of Section
8-3.103 (Applicability), and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater
than twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet, is fifty percent (50%) of the
total landscape area, and the modifications are completed within one (1) year.
   Runoff
   Runoff means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which
it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result
from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds
infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.
   Special Landscape Area (SLA)
   Special Landscape Area (SLA) means an area of the landscape dedicated solely
to edible plants (food producing gardens), areas irrigated with recycled water,
water features using recycled water, storm water detention basins, and areas
dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where
turf provides a playing surface.
   Subsurface irrigation
   Subsurface irrigation means an irrigation device with a delivery line and
water emitters installed below the soil surface that slowly and frequently emit
small amounts of water into the soil to irrigate plant roots.
   Swing joint
   Swing joint means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-
free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow
movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.
   Turf
   Turf means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky
bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season
grasses. Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass
are warm-season grasses. The meaning of turf does not include landscape areas
planted with non-irrigated native California grasses.
   Water feature
   Water feature means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic
or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls,
fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is
artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the
high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for
on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are
not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are
not water features, and therefore, are not subject to the water budget
calculation.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 15, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-3.103.   Applicability.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all of the following
landscape projects that are provided in conjunction with and/or required as
part of a building permit, grading permit, discretionary permit, or site plan
review:
   (1)   New developer-installed construction and/or development projects with
an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 500 square feet;
   (2)   Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area
equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to the following
landscape projects with significant water needs:
   (1)   Existing landscapes equal to or greater than one acre, with a
dedicated water meter. Such landscapes are limited to preparing a water
efficient landscape worksheet in accordance with the specifications in the
Landscape Documentation Package (see Section
8-3.104, Submittal Requirements). If water use exceeds the Maximum Applied
Water Allowance, the property owner shall consult the Planning, Public Works
and Environmental Services Department for recommendations to reduce water use
and to prevent water waste.
   (2)   New and rehabilitated cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape
management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries shall require
the preparation of a water efficient landscape worksheet and submittal of a
Certificate of Completion. Existing cemeteries are limited to (1) above.
   (c)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (1)   Registered local, State or Federal historical sites;
   (2)   Ecological restoration and similar projects that do not require
permanent irrigation systems;
   (3)   Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require permanent
irrigation systems;
   (4)   Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens, arboretums,
and nature centers open to the public;
   (5)   Community gardens;
   (6)   New or rehabilitated homeowner provided landscapes, unless required by
a discretionary permit.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 15, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-3.104.   Submittal requirements.
   (a)   Prior to commencing construction on a landscape project subject to the
provisions of this chapter, a Landscape Documentation Package shall be
submitted to the County for review and approval.
   (b)   The Landscape Documentation Package shall be filed with the Planning,
Public Works and Environmental Services Department on a County approved
application form. The Landscape Documentation Package application shall include
all required fees and/or deposits, and all plans, specifications, and
submittals required by the Department, including but not limited to:
   (1)   General project information;
   (2)   A water efficient landscape worksheet;
   (3)   A soil management report;
   (4)   A landscape and grading design plan; and
   (5)   An irrigation design plan.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-3.105.   Approval.
   The Landscape Documentation Package application shall only be approved after
the Planning Director verifies that the proposed landscape project complies
with the provisions of this chapter, other applicable provisions of this code,
and any applicable conditions of a discretionary permit or other entitlement.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-3.106.   Certificate of Completion.
   (a)   Following installation of landscaping subject to the provisions of
this chapter, the project applicant shall submit a Certificate of Completion to
the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department for review and
final approval.
   (b)   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final building or
grading permit, the Certificate of Completion shall be submitted to the
Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department on a form
prescribed by the Planning Director that shall include the following
information and documentation:
   (1)   General project information;
   (2)   A certificate of Installation; and
   (3)   A copy of the landscape irrigation audit.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-3.107.   Permit issuance and enforcement.
   (a)   Upon successful completion of the Certificate of Completion, the
County shall notify the property owner/project applicant of its approval of the
Certificate.
   (b)   The County may conduct inspections for the purpose of enforcing this
Ordinance and, as necessary and appropriate, may utilize any of the enforcement
mechanisms set forth in the Yolo County Code or otherwise authorized by law to
address violations.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 15, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-3.108.   Landscaping standards.
   All landscape projects subject to the provisions of this chapter shall
comply with the following landscaping standards:
   (a)   Plant selection and grouping.
   (1)   Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the Estimated
Total Water Use (ETWU) in the landscape area does not exceed the Maximum
Applied Water Allowance (MAWA), and that the plants meet the specifications set
forth in (2), (3), (4), and (5) below.
   (2)   With the exception of Special Landscape Areas, a minimum 25% of
landscape area shall be comprised of native plants.
   (3)   Plants having similar water needs shall be grouped together in
distinct hydrozones. Within distinct hydrozones, plants of moderate and low
water use, or moderate and high water use can be mixed, so long as the plant
factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations. High water use
plants shall not be mixed with low water use plants.
   (4)   Plants shall be selected appropriately based on their adaptability to
the climate, geologic, and topographical conditions of the site. Protection and
preservation of existing native California species and natural areas is
encouraged.
   (5)   The use of invasive plant species, as listed in the California
Invasive Plant Inventory produced by the California Invasive Plant Council, or
as determined by the Director of Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services, is prohibited.
   (6)   Fire prevention needs shall be addressed in fire-prone areas. A
defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per Public
Resources Code Section 4291(a) and (b).
   (7)   High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0,
are prohibited in street medians.
   (b)   Turf requirements.
   (1)   Turf shall be used wisely and in response to functional needs and
shall not be planted if the ETWU exceeds the MAWA.
   (2)   Turf shall not comprise greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the
front yard landscape area of developer-installed single-family landscaping.
   (3)   With the exception of Special Landscape Areas, turf shall not comprise
greater than thirty percent (30%) of non-residential landscaped area.
   (4)   Turf shall not be planted on slopes exceeding twenty-five percent
(25%) where the toe of the slope is adjacent to or within four (4) feet of an
impermeable hardscape (rise divided by run x 100 = slope percent).
   (c)   Soil Amendments, conditioning, and mulching.
   (1)   Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be
transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting
holes need meet this requirement.
   (2)   A minimum three (3) inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all
exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or
rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications.
   (3)   Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet
current engineering standards.
   (4)   Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of
the soil management report and what is appropriate for the plants selected.
   (5)   For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four
(4) cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet of permeable area shall be
incorporated to a depth of six (6) inches into the soil. Soils with greater
than six percent (6%) organic matter in the top six (6) inches of soil are
exempt from adding compost and tilling.
   (d)   Water features.
   (1)   Recirculating water systems shall be used for all water features.
   (2)   The surface area of a water feature shall be indicated on the
landscape plans and included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water
budget calculation.
   (3)   Recycled water shall be used for decorative water features when
available on site.
   (e)   Stormwater Management.
   (1)   The landscape project area shall be graded so that all irrigation and
normal rainfall remains within the property lines and does not drain on to non-
permeable hardscapes.
   (2)   Rain gardens, cisterns, and other landscape features and practices
that increase rainwater capture and create opportunities for infiltration and/
or onsite storage are recommended.
   (3)   Soil compaction in landscape areas is prohibited unless required by
the geotechnical or engineering report.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 15, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-3.109.   Irrigation requirements.
   All landscape projects subject to the provisions of this chapter shall
comply with the following irrigation requirements:
   (a)   Irrigation system.
   (1)   All irrigation systems shall be designed and installed to meet
irrigation efficiency criteria as described in the Maximum Applied Water
Allowance.
   (2)   Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water
supply from contamination by the irrigation system.
   (3)   Manual shut-off valves shall be required, as close as possible to the
point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an
emergency.
   (4)   Weather-based self-adjusting irrigation controllers with rain sensors
shall be required.
   (5)   Pressure regulators and/or booster pumps shall be installed so that
all components of the irrigation system operate at the manufacturer’s
recommended optimal pressure.
   (6)   Irrigation systems shall be designed to prevent runoff or overspray
onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas,
hardscapes, roadways, or structures.
   (7)   Point source irrigation is required where plant height at maturity
will affect the uniformity of an overhead irrigation system.
   (8)   Low volume irrigation is required in mulched planting areas.
   (9)   Areas less than ten (10) feet in width in any direction shall be
irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or
overspray.
   (10)   Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty-four (24)
inches of any non-permeable surface unless the irrigation audit confirms no
overspray or runoff occurs.
   (11)   Slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent shall be irrigated with
point source or other low-volume irrigation technology.
   (12)   Sprinkler heads, rotors, and other emission devices on one valve
shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the
manufacturer’s specifications.
   (13)   Head to head coverage shall be required unless otherwise directed by
the manufacturer’s specifications.
   (14)   Swing joints or other riser protection components shall be required
on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high
traffic areas of turf.
   (15)   Check valves or anti-drain valves shall be required on all sprinkler
heads where low point drainage could occur.
   (16)   When landscape projects are services by a community water system,
landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or
private submeter, shall be installed for all non-residential irrigated
landscapes of one thousand (1,000) square feet but not more than five thousand
(5,000) square feet (the level at which Water Code 535 applies) and residential
irrigated landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or greater. A
landscape water meter may be either a customer service meter dedicated to
landscape use provided by the local water purveyor; or a privately owned meter
or submeter.
   (17)   Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except landscapes
that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of
sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low
pressure shut down features.
   (18)   Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system
damage or malfunction are required for all non-residential landscapes and
residential landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or larger.
   (19)   All irrigation emission devises must meet the requirements set in the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of
Agricultural and Biological Engineers’/ International Code Council’s (ASABE/
ICC) 802-2014 “Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard.” All
sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution
uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/
ICC 802-2014.
   (b)   Hydrozones.
   (1)   Irrigation systems that serve trees shall be exclusively low volume
type, and shall be placed on separate valves except when planted in turf areas.
The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing
irrigation for the tree.
   (2)   Distinct hydrozones shall be irrigated with separate valves.
   (3)   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on
what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 15, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-3.110.   Public education.
   Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of water in
landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design, installation,
management and maintenance that save water is encouraged throughout Yolo
County.
   (a)   Literature and resources. The Yolo County Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department shall make available information to the
general public regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance
of water efficient landscapes on a water budget.
   (b)   Model homes. Landscaping shall be installed, in compliance with this
chapter, for all model homes in subdivisions where a Final Subdivision Map has
been approved by the County. The landscaping for model homes shall incorporate
the policies of this chapter and the developer shall include the following:
   (1)   Signs that identify the model home landscaping as an example of a
water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation
equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme.
Signage shall include information about the site water use as designed per this
chapter; specify who designed and installed the water efficient landscape; and
demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as using native
plants, graywater systems, and rainwater catchment systems.
   (2)   Literature shall be provided to anyone touring a model home that
describes the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water
efficient landscapes.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 15, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Chapter 4
FLOOD PROTECTION
Sections:
Article 1: Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods
   
8-4.101   Statutory authorization.
   
8-4.102   Findings of fact.
   
8-4.103   Purpose.
   
8-4.104   Methods of reducing flood losses.
Article 2: Definitions
   
8-4.201   Definitions.
Article 3: General Provisions
   
8-4.301   Lands to which this chapter applies.
   
8-4.302   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
   
8-4.303   Compliance.
   
8-4.304   Abrogation and greater restrictions.
   
8-4.305   Interpretation.
   
8-4.306   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
Article 4: Administration
   
8-4.401   Floodplain Administrator.
   
8-4.402   Duties of the Floodplain Administrator.
   
8-4.403   Development permit.
   
8-4.404   Flood Hazard Development permit procedures within the CCRMP area.
   
8-4.405   Appeals.
   
8-4.406   Violations, suspension, and revocation.
Article 5: Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
8-4.501   Standards of construction.
   
8-4.502   Standards for utilities.
   
8-4.503   Standards for subdivisions.
   
8-4.504   Standards for manufactured homes.
   
8-4.505   Standards for recreational vehicles.
   
8-4.506   Floodways.
Article 6: Variances
   
8-4.601   Purpose of variances.
   
8-4.602   Conditions for variances.
   
8-4.603   Variance procedures.
Article 1: Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods
Sec. 8-4.101.   Statutory authorization.
   The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections
65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of Yolo County does
hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations.
(Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.102.   Findings of fact.
   (a)   The special flood hazard areas of Yolo County are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (b)   These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities also contribute to the flood loss.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.103.   Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied
uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land
within flood prone, mudslide (i.e. mudflow) or flood related erosion areas.
These regulations are designed to:
   (a)   Protect human life and health;
   (b)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (c)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (d)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (e)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
   (f)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted
areas caused by flood damage;
   (g)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
   (h)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.104.   Methods of reducing flood losses.
   In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes methods and
provisions to:
   (a)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases
in erosion or flood heights or velocities;
   (b)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (c)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   (d)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (e)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Article 2: Definitions
Sec. 8-4.201.   Definitions.
   Unless specifically defined in this article, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   A zone
   See “Special flood hazard area.”
   Accessory structure
   “Accessory structure” means a structure that is either:
   (a)   Solely for the parking of no more than two (2) cars; or
   (b)   A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred
fifty (150) square feet and one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) in
value.
   Accessory use
   “Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   Appeal
   “Appeal” means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   Area of shallow flooding
   “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO Zone on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one (1) to three (3) feet; a
clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   Area of special flood hazard
   See “Special flood hazard area.”
   Base flood
   “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”).
   Base flood elevation
   “Base flood elevation” means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map for Zones AE and AH that indicates the water surface elevation resulting
from a flood that has a one percent (1%) chance of equaling or exceeding that
level in any given year.
   Basement
   “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   Building
   See “Structure”.
   Development
   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials. For the purposes of this chapter, the
following activities shall not be considered development:plowing, seeding,
cultivating, harvesting, field leveling outside defined watercourses,
contouring, and planting, as well as routine maintenance of irrigation ditches.
   Encroachment
   “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth,
fill, excavation, buildings permanent structures or development into a
floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   Existing manufactured home park or subdivision
   “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities serving the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 16, 1980.
   Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
   “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   Flood, or flooding or floodwater
   “Flood, flooding or floodwater” means:
   (a)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and
   (b)   The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.
   Flood Hazard Development Permit (FHDP)
   “Flood Hazard Development Permit” means the approval required pursuant to
Section 8-4.404 for proposed in-channel activities allowed under the Cache
Creek Resources Management Plan (CCRMP)/Cache Creek Improvement Program (CCIP)
that would occur within the special flood hazard area (100-year floodplain) of
Lower Cache Creek.
   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
   “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards, the floodway, and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
   Flood Insurance Study
   “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
   Floodplain or flood-prone area
   “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see “flood, flooding or floodwater”).
   Floodplain Administrator
   “Floodplain Administrator” is the Director of the Yolo County Community
Services Department or their designee.
   Floodplain management
   “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and
enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.
   Floodplain management regulations
   “Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter, zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as floodplain ordinances, grading ordinances and erosion
control ordinances), and other applications of police power which control
development in flood-prone areas. The term describes Federal, State or local
regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing
and reducing flood loss and damage.
   Floodproofing
   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet
floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.
   Floodway
   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1)
foot. Also referred to as “Regulatory Floodway.”
   Floodway fringe
   “Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the
“Regulatory Floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.
   Fraud and victimization
   “Fraud and victimization” as related to Article 6 of this chapter
(Variances), means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or
victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the Floodplain
Administrator will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds
to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty
(50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed
below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased
risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the
community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and
suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners
may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood
damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
   Functionally dependent use
   “Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
   Governing Body
   “Governing body” is the Board of Supervisors and its designees, which are
empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health,
safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
   Hardship
   “Hardship” as related to Article 6 of this chapter (Variances) means the
exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested
variance. Yolo County requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and
peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is
not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps,
personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors otherwise cannot,
as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be
resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   Highest adjacent grade
   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   Historic Structure
   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
   (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
   (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
   (c)   Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
   (d)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
by an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs.
   Levee
   “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   Levee system
   “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   Lowest floor
   “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) (see “Basement”).
   (a)   An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, below the lowest floor
that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor;
provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements including,
but not limited to:
      (1)   The flood openings standard in Section
8-4.501(c)(3);
      (2)   The anchoring standards in Section
8-4.501(a);
      (3)   The construction materials and methods in Section
8-4.501(b); and
      (4)   The standards for utilities in Section
8-4.502.
   (b)   For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited
as they are considered to be basements (see “Basement” definition). This
prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.
   Manufactured home
   “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. For
floodplain management purposes the term “manufactured home” does not include a
“recreational vehicle”.
   Manufactured home park or subdivision
   “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for sale
or rent.
   Market value
   “Market value” is defined in the County of Yolo substantial damage/
improvement procedures. See Section
8-4.402(b)(1).
   Mean sea level
   “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to
which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
   New construction
   “New construction” means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced on or after December 16, 1980 and
includes any subsequent improvement to such structures.
   Natural grade
   “Natural grade” means the grade unaffected by construction techniques such
as fill, landscaping, or berming.
   New manufactured home park or subdivision
   “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after December 16,
1980.
   Obstruction
   “Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across, or
projecting in any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard, or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
   One hundred-year flood or “100-year flood”
   See “Base flood.”
   Program deficiency
   “Program deficiency” means a defect in a community’s floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation
of those floodplain management regulations.
   Public safety and nuisance
   “Public safety and nuisance” as related to Article 6 of this chapter
(Variances), means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything
which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood,
or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage
or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay stream,
canal, or basin.
   Recreational vehicle
   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
   (a)   Built on a single chassis;
   (b)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   (c)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
   (d)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for emergency housing, recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
   Regulatory floodway
   “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
(1) foot.
   Remedy a violation
   “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into
compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this
is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts
may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development
from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the regulations
or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing State or Federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   Riverine
   “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   Sheet flow area
   See "Area of shallow flooding."
   Special flood hazard area (SFHA)
   "Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject
to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is
shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A-99, or AH.
   Start of construction
   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided
the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180)
days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   Structure
   “Structure” means a rigid walled and roofed building that is principally
above ground. This includes a liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
   Substantial damage
   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
   Substantial improvement
   “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the
“start of construction” of the improvement. For purposes of this section, the
cost of all reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a
structure within the one (1) year period prior to the “start of construction”
shall be used to calculate whether the proposed “substantial improvement” would
exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure. “Substantial
improvement” includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,”
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
   (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations or comply with State or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by Yolo County and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic
structure.”
   Variance
   “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by
this chapter.
   Violation
   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
   Water surface elevation
   “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the
floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
   Watercourse
   “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel, or
other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018;
as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Article 3: General Provisions
Sec. 8-4.301.   Lands to which this chapter applies.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of Yolo County.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-4.302.   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Yolo County,
California and Incorporated Areas, dated May 16, 2012, with accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM’s), dated May 16, 2012 and June 18, 2010, and all
subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and attendant
mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be
supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this
chapter and which are approved by the Floodplain Administrator. The Flood
Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Maps are on file at the Yolo County
Community Services Department, 292 West Beamer Street, Woodland, CA, 95695.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.303.   Compliance.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the Board of Supervisors
from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-4.304.   Abrogation and greater restrictions.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another provision of local law, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-4.305.   Interpretation.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (b)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-4.306.   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of Yolo County, any officer or employee
thereof, the State of California, the Federal Insurance Administration, or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 4: Administration
Sec. 8-4.401.   Floodplain Administrator.
   The Director of the Yolo County Community Services Department, or their
designee, is hereby appointed as the Floodplain Administrator and shall
administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with these provisions.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.402.   Duties of the Floodplain Administrator.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to the following:
   (a)   Permit review. Review all development permits to determine that:
      (1)   The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      (2)   All other required State and Federal permits have been obtained;
      (3)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and
      (4)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a
floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely
affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point;
and
      (5)   All Letters of Map Revision (LOMR’s) for flood control projects are
approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building Permits must not
be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMR’s). Approved
CLOMR’s allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land
preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.
   (b)   Development of substantial improvement and substantial damage
procedures.
      (1)   Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, “Answers to Questions About
Substantially Damaged Buildings,” develop detailed procedures for identifying
and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial
damage, to include defining “Market Value.”
      (2)   Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions
and implemented by community staff.
   (c)   Review, use, and development of any other base flood data. When base
flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 8-4.302
the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state
agency, or other source, in order to administer Article 5 of this chapter.
   A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from the
FEMA publication, FEMA 265, “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate
Zone A Areas – A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood
Elevations” dated July 1995.
   (d)   Notification of other agencies.
      (1)   Alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
         (i)   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of
Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation;
         (ii)   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency; and
         (iii)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
      (2)   Base Flood Elevation changes due to physical alterations:
         (i)   Within six (6) months of information becoming available or
project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall
submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data
to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).
         (ii)   All LOMR’s for flood control projects are approved prior to the
issuance of building permits. Building Permits must not be issued based on
Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMR’s). Approved CLOMR’s allow
construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as
specified in the “start of construction” definition. Such submissions are
necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting
flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements
are based on current data.
      (3)   Changes in corporate boundaries:
      Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been
modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the
community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.
   (e)   Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain for
public inspection and make available as needed for the following:
      (1)   The certification required in Section
8-4.501(c)(1) and Section
8-4.504 (lowest floor elevations);
      (2)   The certification required in Section
8-4.501(c)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);
      (3)   The certification required in Section
8-4.501(c)(3) (wet floodproofing standard);
      (4)   The certification required in Section
8-4.503(a)(3) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards);
      (5)   The certification required in Section
8-4.506(b) (floodway encroachments)
      (6)   Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification
for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report
submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (f)   Map determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given
a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section
8-4.404 of this chapter.
   (g)   Remedial action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as
specified in Section
8-4.303 (Compliance).
   (h)   Biennial report. Complete and submit Biennial Report to FEMA.
   (i)   Planning. Assure community’s General Plan is consistent with
floodplain management objectives herein.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 681.229, eff. October 29,
2015; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.403.   Development permit.
   A Development Permit shall be obtained before any construction or other
development begins within any area of special flood hazards established in
Section
8-4.302. Application for a Development Permit shall be made on forms furnished
by Yolo County. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information:
   (a)   Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing:
      (1)   Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question,
existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their
location;
      (2)   Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other
utilities;
      (3)   Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any
proposed fill, and drainage facilities;
      (4)   Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;
      (5)   Base flood elevation information as specified in Section
8-4.302 or Section
8-4.402(c);
      (6)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures; and
      (7)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section
8-4.501(c)(2) of this ordinance and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-
93.
   (b)   Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the
nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in
Section
8-4.501(c)(2).
   (c)   For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of
foundation openings as required in Section
8-4.501(c)(3) of this ordinance and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93
and 7-93.
   (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
   (e)   All appropriate certifications listed in Section
8-4.402(e) of this chapter.
(Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.404.   Flood Hazard Development permit procedures within the CCRMP
area.
   The provisions of this section shall only apply to construction or
development within any area of special flood hazard that occurs within the
boundaries of the Cache Creek Resources Management Plan (CCRMP). The provisions
of this section shall be followed in addition to any other regulations of this
chapter applied to the Flood Hazard Development Permit.
   (a)   Administration. The Director as defined in Section
10-3.204 may be the designee for the Floodplain Administrator, for
consideration of Flood Hazard Development Permits within the boundaries of the
CCRMP.
   (b)   Permit review. All Flood Hazard Development Permit applications shall
be submitted to the Director for review. The Director shall solicit the
recommendations of the Technical Advisory Committee regarding the proposed
Flood Hazard Development Permit for consideration by the Floodplain
Administrator, or designee. Applications for Flood Hazard Development Permits
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   A description of the potential effects of the proposed project on
hydraulic conditions upstream and downstream of the proposed channel
modifications; and
      (2)   A chemical spill prevention and emergency plan (or its equivalent)
filed and approved by the appropriate lead agency for all long-term projects
that involve the use of heavy equipment.
   (c)   Findings. A Flood Hazard Development Permit may be approved pursuant
to this section only if all of the following findings are made:
      (1)   That the proposed channel modification is consistent with any
County-administered general permits from agencies of jurisdiction (e.g.
California Department of Fish and Wildlife, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Regional Water Quality Control Board); or alternatively, that all other State
and Federal permits have been obtained;
      (2)   That any sand and gravel removed from the channel as a result of
the proposed modification is necessary for one or more of the following
reasons:
         (i)   To maintain flood flow capacity,
         (ii)   To protect existing structures, infrastructure, and/or
farmland,
         (iii)   To minimize bank erosion, and
         (iv)   To implement the Channel Form Template;
      (3)   That the proposed channel modification will protect sensitive
biological resources;
      (4)   That the proposed channel modification is consistent with the
requirements of both the CCRMP, the Cache Creek Improvements Program, and Title
10, Chapter 3 of the County Code entitled Cache Creek Area Plan In-Channel
Ordinance; and
      (5)   That existing flooding problems are not exacerbated by the proposed
channel modification.
   (d)   Permit conditions. Documentation shall be submitted, once the project
has been completed, to provide a record of as-built conditions.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018;
as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 8-4.405.   Appeals.
   (a)   Floodplain Administrator appeals. The action of the Floodplain
Administrator on any decision made pursuant to this chapter shall be final
unless, within fifteen (15) days after such action, any person with appropriate
legal standing files a written appeal, and pays the appropriate fee, to the
Clerk of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission of Yolo County shall
hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter. The timely filing of an
appeal shall stay the Floodplain Administrator’s decision, which shall serve as
a recommendation to the Planning Commission. All such appeals shall reference
the decision of the Floodplain Administrator and shall specifically describe
the grounds for the appeal.
   (b)   Planning Commission hearing. The hearing on an appeal of a decision by
the Floodplain Administrator shall be scheduled within sixty (60) days from
when the appeal was filed. The Floodplain Administrator shall provide written
notice of the time, date, and place of the appeal hearing to the applicant and
the appellant not later than ten (10) days preceding the appeal hearing. Upon
hearing the appeal, the Commission shall affirm, reverse, or modify the
appealed decision, or refer the matter back to the Floodplain Administrator for
further action.
   (c)   Planning Commission appeals. The action of the Commission on any
decision made pursuant to this chapter shall be final unless, within fifteen
(15) days after such action, any person with appropriate legal standing files a
written appeal, and pays the appropriate fee, to the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors. The timely filing of an appeal shall stay the Planning
Commission’s decision, which shall serve as a recommendation to the Board of
Supervisors. All such appeals shall reference the decision of the Planning
Commission and shall specifically describe the grounds for the appeals.
   (d)   Board of Supervisors hearing. The hearing on an appeal of a decision
shall be scheduled within sixty (60) days from when the appeal was filed. The
clerk of the Board shall provide written notice of the time, date and place of
the appeal hearing to the applicant and the appellant not later than ten (10)
days preceding the appeal hearing. Upon hearing the appeal, the Board of
Supervisors shall either affirm, reverse, or modify the appealed decision, or
refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further action.
   (e)   Notices. Any notice authorized or required by this chapter shall be
deemed to have been filed, served, and effective for all purposes on the date
when it is personally delivered in writing to the party to whom it is directed
or deposited in the U.S. Mail, first class postage prepaid. Whenever a
provision in this chapter requires a public hearing to be conducted, notice of
the time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be published at least
once not later than ten (10) calendar days in advance of the date of
commencement of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation which is
published within the County.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.406.   Violations, suspension, and revocation.
   (a)   Violation of any of the provisions in this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor and may be subject to fines in accordance with Title 1 of the
County Code.
   (b)   Written notice of violation shall be provided to any person who fails
to comply with the provisions of this chapter or an approved Development
Permit. The violation notice shall specifically describe both the nature of the
violation and the remedial steps required for compliance. Failure to comply
with the notice of violation shall be considered a public nuisance and shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Violations may be remedied by injunction or other
civil proceeding commenced in the name of the County pursuant to direction by
the Board of Supervisors.
   (c)   Any Development Permit issued pursuant to this ordinance may be
suspended during its term upon one or more of the following grounds:
      (1)   The physical state of the property differs from the descriptions,
plans or information furnished to the Floodplain Administrator in the permit
application;
      (2)   The development does not conform to the conditions or terms of the
permit;
      (3)   The development is in violation of this ordinance, other County
ordinances, or state or federal laws.
   (d)   The Floodplain Administrator may suspend or revoke a Development
Permit by issuing a notice of suspension or revocation, stating the reasons
therefor, and serving same, upon the permittee. Upon suspension or revocation
of a permit, in accordance with the provisions of this section, the permittee
shall immediately cause all development to cease until written authorization is
received from the Floodplain Administrator to proceed with the development.
   (e)   The permittee shall have fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of
service of the suspension or revocation in which to file an appeal in
accordance with the provisions of Section
8-4.405. If such an appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall remain
in force and be effective until a final decision on the appeal is issued by the
Board of Supervisors.
   (f)   If the Floodplain Administrator suspends a permit, such permit may
either be reinstated or revoked by the Floodplain Administrator, depending upon
whether the permittee corrects the grounds stated for the suspension in the
notice issued by the Director. If the permittee fails to remedy the grounds for
suspension within a time period specified by the Floodplain Administrator, but
in no event later than sixty (60) calendar days, the Floodplain Administrator
shall revoke the permit.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Article 5: Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec. 8-4.501.   Standards of construction.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
   (a)   Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of
structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
   (b)   Construction materials and methods. All new construction and
substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be
constructed:
      (1)   With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation;
      (2)   Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      (3)   With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding; and
      (4)   Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (c)   Elevation and floodproofing.
      (1)   Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall
have the lowest floor, including basement:
         (i)   In AE, AH, A1-30 Zones, elevated at least one (1) foot above the
base flood elevation.
         (ii)   In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a
height exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM by at least one
(1) foot, or elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade
if no depth number is specified.
         (iii)   In an A Zone, without BFE’s specified on the FIRM [unnumbered
A zone], elevated at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, as
determined under Section
8-4.402(c).
         Prior to the framing of walls and/or floors of the structure, the
elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a
registered professional engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the
County Building Official or their designee, to be properly elevated. Such
certification or verification shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator.
      (2)   Nonresidential construction. All new construction or substantial
improvement of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform
with Section
8-4.501(c)(1), or:
         (i)   Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the elevation recommended under Section
8-4.501(c)(1) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
         (ii)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         (iii)   Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that
the standards of Section
8-4.501(c)(2)(i) & (ii) are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to
the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   Flood openings. All new construction and substantial improvements
with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which
are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria;
         (i)   For non-engineered openings:
            a.   Have a minimum of two (2) openings on different sides having a
total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding;
            b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1)
foot above grade;
            c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwater; and
            d.   Buildings with more than one (1) enclosed area must have
openings on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly
enter; or
         (ii)   Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.
      (4)   Manufactured homes. See Section
8-4.504.
      (5)   Garages and low cost accessory structures.
         (i)   Attached garages.
            a.   A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with
the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the
automatic entry of flood waters. See Section
8-4.501(c)(3). Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood
resistant materials. See Section
8-4.501(b).
            b.   A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the
above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking
areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6.
         (ii)   Detached garages and accessory structures.
            a.   “Accessory structures” used solely for parking (two (2) car
detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as
defined in Section
8-4.201, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood
elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in
accordance with the following requirements:
               1.   Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking
or limited storage;
               2.   The portions of the accessory structure located below the
BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials;
               3.   The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement;
               4.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory
structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE;
               5.   The accessory structure must comply with floodplain
encroachment provisions in Section
8-4.506; and
               6.   The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the
automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with Section
8-4.501(c)(3).
            b.   Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the
above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards
in Section
8-4.501.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.502.   Standards for utilities.
   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate:
   (a)   infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
   (b)   discharge from the systems into flood waters.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.503.   Standards for subdivisions.
   (a)   All preliminary subdivision proposals and other proposed development,
including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:
      (1)   Identify the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) and the Base Flood
Elevation (BFE).
      (2)   Identify the elevations of lowest floors all proposed structures
and pads on the final plans.
      (3)   If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following
as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered
civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application
for a Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F) to the Floodplain
Administrator:
         (i)   Lowest floor elevation.
         (ii)   Pad elevation.
         (iii)   Lowest adjacent grade.
   (b)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (c)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (d)   All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate
drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.504.   Standards for manufactured homes.
   (a)   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved,
within special flood hazard areas, on sites located:
      (1)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,
      (2)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision,
      (3)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or
      (4)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon
which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a
flood, shall
         (i)   Within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest
floor of the manufactured home is elevated to at least one (1) foot above the
base flood elevation and shall be securely fastened to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
   (b)   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH,
and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the
provisions of Section
8-4.504(a) shall be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist floatation collapse, and lateral movement, and shall be
elevated so that either the:
      (1)   Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one (1) foot
above the base flood elevation, or
      (2)   Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade.
      Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor
including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be
properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.505.   Standards for recreational vehicles.
   All recreational vehicles placed on sites within special flood hazard areas
will either:
   (a)   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days, or
   (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions, or
   (c)   Meet the permit requirements of Articles 4 and 5 of this chapter and
the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section
8-4.504(a).
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.506.   Floodways.
   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section
8-4.302 are areas designated as floodways. Since floodways are an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
   (a)   Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction,
substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one (1) foot at any point within the County of Yolo.
   (b)   Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the County of Yolo shall
prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other new development unless certification by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not
result in any increase in the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
   (c)   If subsections (a) and (b) are satisfied, all new construction,
substantial improvements, and other proposed new development shall comply with
all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Article 6: Variances
Sec. 8-4.601.   Purpose of variances.
   (a)   The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only.
Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk
and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.
   (b)   The variance criteria set forth in this article are based on the
general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property
and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of
property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this ordinance would create an exceptional hardship to the
applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself (e.g., size, shape, topography,
location, and/or surroundings), not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the
property owners. Variances shall only be granted when the strict application of
this chapter deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in
the vicinity and located within identical flood zones. In addition, conditions
shall be attached to variances as necessary to ensure that such approvals do
not grant special privileges that are inconsistent with the limitations of
other properties in the vicinity and flood zone in which the proposed
development is located.
   (c)   It is the duty of Yolo County to help protect its citizens from
flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from
the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite
rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can
only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance
guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple
provisions that must be met before a variance can be granted. The criteria are
designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a
variance are more appropriate. Variances may not be granted for any activity
which is not expressly authorized by the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.602.   Conditions for variances.
   (a)   Generally, variances may be issued in the discretion of the Floodplain
Administrator for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed
new development to be erected on a lot of one-half (0.5) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Articles 4 and 5 of this
chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half
(0.5) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
   (b)   Variances may be issued in the discretion of the Floodplain
Administrator for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as
defined in Section
8-4.201 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
   (c)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (d)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
“Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum deviation from the
requirements of this ordinance. For example, in the case of variances to an
elevation requirement, this means that the Floodplain Administrator need not
grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever
elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the
Floodplain Administrator believes will both provide relief and preserve the
integrity of the local ordinance.
   (e)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of the Floodplain Administrator that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25) for each one hundred dollars
($100) of insurance coverage, and
      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risk to life
and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain
Administrator in the Office of the Yolo County Recorder and shall be recorded
in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of
land.
   (f)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances
issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Sec. 8-4.603.   Variance procedures.
   (a)   In passing upon requests for variances, the Floodplain Administrator
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:
      (1)   Danger that materials may be swept into other lands to the injury
of others;
      (2)   Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property;
      (4)   Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
      (5)   Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (6)   Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      (7)   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
      (10)   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and,
      (11)   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.
   (b)   Variances shall only be issued upon a:
      (1)   Showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional “hardship” to the applicant; and
      (3)   Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create a nuisance, cause “fraud and victimization” of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (c)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of this article are
satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in
additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.
   (d)   Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (a) above, and the
purposes of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 1500, eff. July 26, 2018)
Chapter 5
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Sections:
Article 1: Applications
   
8-5.101   Purpose and findings.
   
8-5.102   Forms and information.
   
8-5.103   Qualification as an applicant.
   
8-5.104   Eligibility for development agreement.
   
8-5.105   Filing of application.
   
8-5.106   Review of application.
Article 2: Requirements
   
8-5.201   Contents.
   
8-5.202   Public benefits.
   
8-5.203   Term.
   
8-5.204   Reservation of rights.
   
8-5.205   Construction codes.
   
8-5.206   Parties.
Article 3: Hearings, Standards of Review, Findings and Decision
   
8-5.301   Hearing and recommendation by Planning Commission.
   
8-5.302   Hearing and decision by the Board of Supervisors.
   
8-5.303   Approval of development agreement.
   
8-5.304   Recordation of development agreement.
Article 4: Amendment or Cancellation
   
8-5.401   Amendment or cancellation by mutual consent.
   
8-5.402   Procedure.
Article 5: Review
   
8-5.501   Periodic review.
   
8-5.502   Special review.
   
8-5.503   Procedure.
Article 6: Modifications or Termination
   
8-5.601   Proceedings upon modification or termination.
   
8-5.602   Hearing on modification or termination.
   
8-5.603   Enforcement.
   
8-5.604   Appeal by party other than County.
Article 7: State or Federal Law
   
8-5.701   Modification or suspension by State or Federal law.
Article 1: Applications
Sec. 8-5.101.   Purpose and findings.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedures and
requirements mandated by Article 2.5 of Chapter 4 of the Government Code for
the consideration of development agreements.
   (b)   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the Planning
Commission shall not consider the adoption of, nor shall the Board of
Supervisors approve, any development agreement if the project to which the
development agreement pertains is located within a sphere of influence
established or under consideration by the Local Agency Formation Commission at
the time the development agreement is to be considered by the Planning
Commission pursuant to Section
8-5.201 et seq.
   (c)   The County takes notice that the Legislature, in passing the State
Development Agreement Law, found and declared that:
   (1)    The lack of certainty in the approval of development projects can
result in a waste of resources, escalate the cost of housing and other
development to the consumer, and discourage investment in and commitment to
comprehensive planning which would make maximum efficient utilization of
resources at the least economic cost to the public.
   (2)   Assurance to the applicant for a development project that upon
approval of the project, the applicant may proceed with the project in
accordance with existing policies, rules and regulations, and subject to
conditions of approval, will strengthen the public planning process, encourage
private participation in comprehensive planning, and reduce the economic costs
of development.
   (3)   The lack of public facilities, including, but not limited to, streets,
sewerage, transportation, drinking water, school, utility facilities, is a
serious impediment to the development of new housing. Whenever possible,
applicants and local governments may include provisions in agreements whereby
applicants are reimbursed over time for financing public facilities.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.102.   Forms and information.
   (a)   The Planning Director shall prescribe the form for each application,
notice and document provided for or required under these regulations for the
preparation, review and implementation of development agreements.
   (b)   The Planning Director may require an applicant to submit such
information and supporting data as the Planning Director considers necessary to
process the application.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.103.   Qualification as an applicant.
   Only a qualified applicant may file an application to enter into a
development agreement. A qualified applicant is a person who has legal or
equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the development
agreement. Applicant includes authorized agent. The Planning Director shall
require an applicant to submit proof of this interest in the real property and
of the authority of the agent to act for the applicant. Such proof may include
a preliminary title report issued by a title company licensed to do business in
the State evidencing the requisite interest of the applicant in the real
property. Before processing the application, the Planning Director may obtain
the opinion of County Counsel as to the sufficiency of the applicant’s interest
in the real property to enter into the development agreement.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.104.   Eligibility for Development Agreement.
   (a)   Development proposals which are eligible for consideration for such an
agreement shall be limited to projects in which the developer makes a
significant contribution to infrastructure, open space, affordable housing, or
other public improvements and amenities of benefit to the County that would not
otherwise be obtained through other applicable development approval processes.
   (b)   An application for a development agreement shall be considered only
under the following circumstances:
   (1)   The application is submitted in conjunction with an application for
rezoning, a specific plan, subdivision map, a Use Permit, or other
discretionary land use entitlement authorizing the development which is the
subject of the proposed development agreement; or
   (2)   The application pertains to an area governed by a specific plan
previously adopted by the County.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.105.   Filing of application.
   (a)   The application for a development agreement shall be submitted
together with the applications needed for other required entitlements of the
project. The application must be filed in time for the request to be considered
in the environmental analysis of the project. In no event shall the application
be filed later than the release of the final environmental document in order to
allow staff time to analyze the merits of entering into such an agreement,
prior to preparation of the staff report and staff recommendation.
   (b)   An application for a development agreement may be submitted on any
eligible project that has not received a final approval as of the date the
ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective provided that such
application for such project has been deemed complete by the Planning Director
prior to such date.
   (c)   Each application shall be accompanied by the form of development
agreement proposed by the applicant, if the Community Development Director has
approved a standard form of development agreement, this requirement shall be
met by utilizing such standard form and including specific proposals for
changes in or additions to the language or the standard form.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.106.   Review of application.
   The Planning Director shall endorse on the application the date of receipt,
shall review the application, and may reject it if incomplete or inaccurate. If
the application is complete, the Planning Director shall accept it for filing.
The Planning Director shall determine any additional requirements necessary to
complete the development agreement on the basis of the application as filed.
After receiving all required information, the Planning Director shall prepare a
report and recommendation as to whether or not the development agreement as
proposed, or in amended form, is consistent with the general plan, any
applicable specific plan, and the provisions of these regulations.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 2: Requirements
Sec. 8-5.201.   Contents.
   A proposed development agreement shall include the following:
   (a)   A legal description of the property subject to the development
agreement.
   (b)   The duration of the development agreement, the permitted uses of the
property, the density or intensity of use, the maximum height and size of
proposed buildings, and provisions for reservation or dedication of land for
public purposes.
   (c)   Conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent
County discretionary actions, provided that such conditions, terms,
restrictions and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions shall not
prevent development of the land for the uses and to the density or intensity of
development set forth in the development agreement.
   (d)   The estimated time when construction and/or any other approved
activity on the property will be commenced and completed, including, if
appropriate, a phasing plan.
   (e)   Public benefits proposed as part of the project in accordance with
Section
8-5.202.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.202.   Public benefits.
   (a)   In consideration for entering into a development agreement, the County
shall gain public benefits beyond those already forthcoming through conditions
and mitigations on project approval. Public benefits may include, but are not
limited to, contributions to infrastructure, open space, affordable housing,
increased energy efficiency in existing development, or other public
improvements and amenities of benefit to the County, including reservation,
dedication, and improvement of land for public purposes.
   (b)   Any fees required pursuant to subsection (a) shall be adjusted during
the term of the development agreement to match any adjustments of such fees by
the Board of Supervisors.
   (c)   A development agreement shall not exempt a project from any
subsequently adopted regulatory provisions which may include the use of a fee,
for example, air quality mitigation fee, except to the extent that such
subsequently adopted fee fulfills the same purposes as the fees required
pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.203.   Term.
   (a)   The maximum term of a development agreement shall be negotiated
between the parties, and shall commence from the date of the approval of the
project to which it pertains. A development agreement may, upon request of the
property owner and at the sole discretion of the Board of Supervisors, be
extended for an additional period. Any request for extension shall be noticed
and processed in the same manner as an application for a development agreement.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a), the Board of Supervisors may extend
the initial term of a development agreement upon making the findings in Section
8-5.401, in support thereof.
   (c)   At the end of the term of the development agreement, the development
agreement shall terminate for all purposes except any enforcement action by the
County for nonconformance with the terms of the agreement or condition of the
permit, and the project that was the subject of the development agreement shall
be subject to all laws, rules and regulations applicable to such projects and/
or uses.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.204.   Reservation of rights.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, rules,
regulations, and official policies governing permitted uses of the land,
governing density, and governing design, improvement, and construction
standards and specifications, applicable to development of the property subject
to a development agreement shall be those rules, regulations, and official
policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Section
8-5.204(a), a development agreement shall not prevent the County, in subsequent
actions applicable to the property that were not encompassed by the original
permitted activities, from applying new rules, regulations, and policies which
do not conflict with those rules, regulations, and policies applicable to the
property as set forth herein, nor shall a development agreement prevent the
County from denying or conditionally approving any subsequent development
project application on the basis of such existing or new rules, regulations,
and policies.
   (c)   A development agreement shall not prevent the County from modifying or
suspending the provisions of the development agreement if the Board of
Supervisors finds that the failure of the County to do so would place
residents, businesses, and/or property owners of the County in a condition
dangerous to their health or safety or both.
   (d)   A development agreement shall apply only to a project as that project
is described in an environmental analysis certified, adopted or approved by the
County at or before the time the County enters into the development agreement.
A development agreement shall not apply to a project or portions of a project
not encompassed by the project description in the County’s environmental
analysis.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.205.   Construction codes.
   A development agreement shall contain the acknowledgement of the possibility
of changes in the Uniform Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Electrical, Fire and
Grading Codes, as implemented by the County, during the term of the agreement
and shall provide that any amendments to these codes shall apply to the project
subject to the development agreement.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.206.   Parties.
   All owners of all property included within a development agreement shall be
considered a party to the agreement and shall be a signatory.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 3: Hearings, Standards of Review, Findings and Decision
Sec. 8-5.301.   Hearing and recommendation by Planning Commission.
   (a)   All development agreements shall be considered at a public hearing
before the Planning Commission, which meeting shall be noticed in accordance
with the requirements of Article 2,
Chapter 2, Section
8-2.211 of this title, and Section 65090 et seq. of the California Government
Code. The notices required by this section are in addition to any other notices
required by law for other actions to be considered concurrently with the
development agreement. At the conclusion of the hearing the Planning Commission
shall make recommendation in writing to the Board of Supervisors. This
recommendation shall include the Commission’s determinations as to whether the
proposed project:
   (1)   Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and
programs specified in the General Plan and any applicable specific plan;
   (2)   Is compatible with the uses authorized in, and the regulations
prescribed for, the zoning district in which the real property is or will be
located;
   (3)   Is in conformity with and will promote public convenience, general
welfare and good land use practice;
   (4)   Will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare;
   (5)   Will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or the
preservation of property values; and
   (6)   Will meet the intent of Section
8-5.202(a).
   (7)   Is consistent with the findings required by Government Code 65302.9,
see Section
8-2.306(ae).
   (b)   This recommendation shall also include the Commission’s reasons for
its recommendation.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by Ord. 681.229, eff. October 29,
2015)
Sec. 8-5.302.   Hearing and decision by the Board of Supervisors.
   Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Clerk of
the Board shall set the proposed development agreement for hearing by the Board
of Supervisors, which meeting shall be noticed in accordance with the
requirements of Article 2,
Chapter 2, Section
8-2.211 of this title, and Section 65090 et seq. of the California Government
Code. The notices required by this section are in addition to any other notices
required by law for other actions to be considered concurrently with the
development agreement. After the Board of Supervisors completes its public
hearing it may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning
Commission. A development agreement shall not be approved unless the Board
finds that the provisions of the agreement are consistent with the findings
listed in Section
8-5.101 of these regulations. The decision of the Board shall be final.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.303.   Approval of development agreement.
   A development agreement is a legislative act which shall be approved by
ordinance and is subject to referendum. The ordinance shall refer to and
incorporate by reference the text of the development agreement.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.304.   Recordation of development agreement.
   (a)   Within ten (10) days after the County executes a development
agreement, the Clerk of the Board shall record with the County Clerk/Recorder a
copy of the agreement, which shall describe the land subject thereto.
   (b)   If the parties to the development agreement or their successors in
interest amend or cancel the development agreement as provided in Article 4 of
these regulations and Government Code Section 65868, or if the County
terminates or modifies the development agreement as provided in Article 6 of
these regulations and Government Code Section 65865.1 for failure of the
applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the
development agreement, the Clerk of the Board shall have notice of such action
recorded with the County Clerk/Recorder.
   (c)   From and after the time of the recordation required by this section,
notice shall be imparted as provided by the recording laws of the State. The
burdens of the development agreement shall be binding upon, and the benefits of
the development agreement shall inure to, all successors in interest to the
parties to the development agreement.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 4: Amendment or Cancellation
Sec. 8-5.401.   Amendment or cancellation by mutual consent.
   Any party, or successor in interest, to a development agreement may propose
an amendment or cancellation, in whole or in part, of the development
agreement. Any amendment or cancellation shall be by mutual consent of the
parties or their successors in interest except as provided under Article 6 of
this chapter and Government Code Section 65865.1.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.402.   Procedure.
   The procedure for proposing and adoption of an amendment or cancellation, in
whole or in part, of a development agreement shall be the same as for entering
into the development agreement in the first instance. However, if the County
initiates a proposed amendment or cancellation of the development agreement, it
shall first give written notice by mail to the property owner of its intention
to initiate such proceedings not less than thirty (30) days prior to the giving
of public notice of hearing to consider the amendment or cancellation.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 5: Review
Sec. 8-5.501.   Periodic review.
   The Planning Director shall review each development agreement annually, on
or before the anniversary date of the recordation of the development agreement,
in order to ascertain the good faith compliance by the property owner with the
terms of the development agreement. The property owner shall submit an annual
monitoring report, in a form acceptable to the Planning Director, within thirty
(30) days after written notice from the Planning Director. The annual
monitoring report shall be accompanied by an annual review and administration
fee sufficient to defray the estimated costs of review and administration of
the development agreement during the succeeding year. The amount of the annual
review and administration fee shall be set annually by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.502.   Special review.
   The Board of Supervisors may order a special review of compliance with a
development agreement at any time. The Planning Director shall conduct such
special reviews.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.503.   Procedure.
   (a)   During either a periodic review or a special review, the property
owner shall be required to demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of
the development agreement.
   (b)   Upon completion of a periodic review or a special review, the Planning
Director shall submit a report to the Board of Supervisors setting forth the
evidence concerning good faith compliance by the property owner with the terms
of the development agreement and his recommended finding on that issue.
   (c)   If the staff finds on the basis of substantial evidence that the
property owner has complied with the terms and conditions of the development
agreement, the review shall be concluded.
   (d)   If the Board finds on the basis of substantial evidence that the
property owner has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of
the development agreement, the Board may set a hearing for the purpose of
modifying or terminating the development agreement as provided in Article 6 of
this chapter.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 6: Modifications or Termination
Sec. 8-5.601.   Proceedings upon modification or termination.
   If, upon a finding under Section
8-5.503(d), the County determines to proceed with modification or termination
of a development agreement, the County shall give written notice to the
property owner of its intention to do so. The notice shall contain:
   (a)   The time and place of the hearing;
   (b)   A statement as to whether or not the County proposes to terminate or
to modify the development agreement; and,
   (c)   Such other information as the County considers necessary to inform the
property owner of the nature of the proceeding including the grounds upon which
the proceedings are based.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.602.   Hearing on modification or termination.
   At the time and place set for the hearing on modification or termination,
the property owner shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The property
owner shall be required to substantiate compliance with the terms and
conditions of the development agreement. The burden of proof on this issue
shall be on the property owner. If the Board finds, based upon substantial
evidence, that the property owner has not substantially complied with the terms
or conditions of the agreement, the Board may terminate or modify the
development agreement and impose such conditions as it deems necessary to
protect the interests of the County and the public. The decision of the Board
of Supervisors is final.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.603.   Enforcement.
   Unless amended, canceled, modified, suspended or terminated pursuant to this
chapter, or unless otherwise allowed by this chapter, a development agreement
shall be enforceable by any party thereto notwithstanding any change in any
applicable or specific plan, zoning, subdivision, or building regulation
adopted by the County which alters or amends the rules, regulations or policies
specified in effect at the time the development agreement is executed by the
County.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-5.604.   Appeal by party other than County.
   (a)   Any party to a development agreement, other than the County, seeking
to bring an action to enforce the development agreement pursuant to Section
8-5.603 shall first appeal all matters to be raised in the action to the Board
of Supervisors. The appeal shall be commenced by the filing of a written
statement of issues by the Party appealing setting out in detail the basis for
the appeal. The statement shall be filed with the clerk of the Board and
Planning Director. The Board of Supervisors shall hold a hearing on the issues
raised in the statement no later than forty-five (45) days after the statement
has been filed with the Clerk of the Board and Planning Director.
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors shall make findings on all matters raised in
the appeal. The party shall not commence an action to enforce the development
agreement until after the Board of Supervisors has issued its findings. The
Board of Supervisors shall issue its findings no later than fifteen (15) days
after the hearing.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 7: State or Federal Law
Sec. 8-5.701.   Modification or suspension by State or Federal law.
   In the event that State or Federal laws or regulations, enacted after a
development agreement has been entered into, prevent or preclude compliance
with one or more provisions of the development agreement, such provisions of
the development agreement shall be modified or suspended as may be necessary to
comply with such State or Federal laws or regulations.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ORDINANCE
Sections:
   
8-6.101   Purpose.
   
8-6.102   Definitions.
   
8-6.103   Application requirements.
   
8-6.104   Exemptions.
   
8-6.105   Review of application.
   
8-6.106   Hearing required.
   
8-6.107   Enforcement.
Sec. 8-6.101.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this section is to establish permit requirement and
development standards for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the unincorporated
area of Yolo County.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-6.102.   Definitions.
   Bar
   A business in which alcoholic beverages are sold for on-site consumption and
that is not part of a larger restaurant. A bar includes taverns, pubs, cocktail
lounges, microbreweries, and similar establishments where any food service is
subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. Bars may include entertainment
on a stage, such as a live bands, comedians, etc.
   Off-Sale
   An off-sale license allows for the sale of beer, wine, and spirits (hard
alcohol) for consumption off the premises where sold.
   On-Sale
   An on-sale license allows for the sale of beer, wine, and spirits (hard
alcohol) for consumption on the premises where sold.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-6.103.   Application requirements.
   The establishment of a use that includes the sale of alcoholic beverages
shall submit an application for a Use Permit as follows, unless the use is
specifically exempt from this application requirement as described in Sec.
8-6.104, below:
   (a)   Any person whose application for an on-sale or off-sale alcohol
license is required by the State of California Department of Alcoholic Beverage
Control (“ABC”) to be subject to a determination of public convenience or
necessity (“PCN”) by the County of Yolo, may apply to the County for a
determination that the public convenience and/or necessity would be served by
the granting of such license. Such application shall be made on forms approved
by the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Director or designee
(“the Director”), shall contain such information as required by the Director,
and shall be filed with the appropriate adopted fee to the Planning, Public
Works and Environmental Services Department (“the Department”) for review.
   (b)   In addition to (a), above, regardless of whether a PCN determination
is necessary, any premise or commercial business that desires to sell alcohol
or alcoholic beverages on a permanent basis within Yolo County shall have an
approved Business License and Use Permit, as may be appropriate, together with
all other required local, State, and Federal approvals and permits required for
the operation of such business, unless exempted under Sec.
8-6.104, below.
   (c)   An application for a transfer of an existing on-sale or off-sale
alcohol license within Yolo County is not subject to a PCN determination
pursuant to this ordinance.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-6.104.   Exemptions.
   To facilitate, encourage, and incentivize economic development, agri-
tourism, local agricultural beer and wine production, and support family
farming, the following types of premises that obtain and comply with the ABC
license types described below are exempt from County regulation of alcoholic
beverage sales under this chapter:
   (a)   All existing uses, buildings or structures currently in operation
selling alcohol or alcoholic beverages prior to the adoption of this original
ordinance.
   (b)   Wine, beer, and distilled spirits activities allowed and permitted,
excluding retail sales that are not incidental to tasting or processing, within
the Agricultural Intensive (A-N), Agricultural Extensive (A-X), Agricultural
Industrial (A-I), and Agricultural Commercial (A-C) zone districts, within the
Agricultural District (AD-O) overlay zone districts, and within all of the
commercial and industrial zones, pursuant to Articles 3, 4, 5, and 6 of Chapter
2 of this Title.
   (c)   Local grape growers and manufacturers of wine, beer, or brandy:
Premises of a local grape grower and/or manufacturer where beer, wine, or
brandy are sold to any person in compliance with an existing ABC license for
the sale of beer, wine or brandy to the general public for consumption on or
off the licensed premises. By way of example only, and without limitation, the
local grower and/or manufacturer may sell beer, wine, and brandy produced on
the licensed premises or contiguous properties, regardless of the origin of the
source materials, to the general public for consumption. As a further example,
the local grower and/or manufacturer may conduct beer, wine, or brandy tastings
in compliance with applicable provisions of California law, including Business
and Professional Code Sections 23356.1 and 23357.3. Minors are allowed on the
premises (License Types 01, 02, and 23). Other types of alcoholic beverage
sales and service not specifically described herein are subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
   (d)   Eating and Seasonal Places: Premises such as restaurants or other
eating places where beer, wine, and distilled spirits are sold for consumption
on the licensed premises, as well as similar premises where beer and wine are
sold for consumption off the licensed premises. To qualify for this exemption,
food service is required in a lawful eating place during normal mealtimes, and
minors are allowed on the premises. Normal mealtimes are 6:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m.,
11:00 a.m. - 2:00 p.m., and 6:00 p.m. - 9:00 p.m. Premises that are not open
five (5) days a week must serve meals on the days they are open (License Types
47, and 49). Other types of alcoholic beverage sales and service not
specifically described herein are subject to the requirements of this chapter.
   (e)   Social Clubs: Premises where beer, wine and distilled spirits are sold
solely to members and guests, and solely for consumption on the premises. Food
service is not required, and minors are allowed on the premises (License Type
51). Off-sale privileges and other types of alcoholic beverage sales and
service not specifically described herein are subject to the requirements of
this article.
   (f)   Hotel/Motel Establishments: Premises where beer, wine and distilled
spirits are sold or otherwise furnished for consumption on the premises to the
establishment’s overnight transient occupancy guests or their invitees. Such
premises will typically hold a license issued to “suite-type” hotels and
motels, which exercise the license privileges for guests’ “complimentary” happy
hour. Minors are allowed on the premises (License Type 70). Off-sale privileges
and other types of alcoholic beverage sales and service not specifically
described herein are subject to the requirements of this chapter.
   (g)   Bed and Breakfast Inn (Winery and Vineyards): Premises such as bed and
breakfast inns where wine is sold to registered guests of the establishment for
consumption on the premises. To qualify for this exemption, no beer or
distilled spirits may be sold or otherwise furnished on the premises. Wine
shall not be given away to guests, but the price of the wine may be included in
the price of the accommodation. Removal of wine from the grounds is not
permitted, and minors are allowed on the premises (License Type 67). Off-sale
privileges and other types of alcoholic beverage sales and service not
specifically described herein are subject to the requirements of this chapter.
   (h)   Bed and Breakfast Inn (General): Premises such as bed and breakfast
inns that are not associated with a winery or vineyard where beer, wine and
distilled spirits may be purchased by registered guests of the establishment
for consumption on the premises. Alcoholic beverages shall not be given away to
guests, but the price of the alcoholic beverage may be included in the price of
the accommodation. Removal of alcoholic beverages from the grounds is not
permitted. Minors are allowed on the premises (License Type 80). Off-sale
privileges and other types of alcoholic beverage sales and service not
specifically described herein are subject to the requirements of this chapter.
   (i)   Temporary festivals/events, defined as lasting no more than three (3)
consecutive days, where alcoholic beverages will be served are exempt from
County regulation of alcoholic beverage sales under this chapter. However,
under California law, any temporary festival/event that sells alcoholic
beverages is required to apply for a temporary permit (221 Form) through the
ABC office prior to the event. In addition, if there are more than one thousand
(1,000) persons in attendance, the County requires an application and fee
pursuant to
Title 5, Chapter 12 for permitting of an “Outdoor Festival.”
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 17, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-6.105.   Review of Application.
   Upon receipt of an application for the sale of alcohol, regardless of
whether the application is for a Use Permit, PCN determination, or both, the
Director shall refer such application to the Economic Development Division, the
Sheriff’s Department, Environmental Health Division, Building Division, Fire
District, School District, and citizens advisory committee for review and
comment. If no response is received by the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department from any reviewing agency or interested party
within ten (10) working days from the date the application is forwarded, it
shall be presumed that the agency or party has no objection.
   If any of the following determinations are made during the review of the
application for a PCN determination, the Department shall recommend denial of
the application to the deciding body unless the applicant can demonstrate that
clearly overriding considerations and/or substantial community benefits
resulting from the proposed application outweigh the negative determination(s):
   (a)   The subject premises for the ABC license does not have a Use Permit,
or the applicant has not concurrently applied for a Use Permit, to allow for
the sale of alcohol or alcoholic beverages, unless otherwise exempt under
Section
8-6.104, above.
   (b)   There is a pending code enforcement action regarding the subject
premises for the ABC license that has not been properly abated to the
satisfaction of the appropriate agency.
   (c)   The subject premises for the ABC license does not have a valid
business license or the business license is not currently in good standing.
   (d)   Substantial protests have been lodged with the State ABC in relation
to the applicant’s request for the license.
   (e)   There is a history of law enforcement actions or known criminal
activity at the subject premises or in the area surrounding the subject
premises, as documented by the Sheriff’s Department.
   (f)   The subject premises do not have the appropriate General Plan land use
designation or zoning and/or have not received all required entitlements to
permit the sale of alcoholic beverages described in the application.
   (g)   The proposed application would result in negative economic impacts, as
determined by the Economic Development Division.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-6.106.   Hearing required.
   (a)   Proceedings regarding all Use Permit applications for the sale of
alcohol or alcoholic beverages, including public hearings, shall be scheduled
before the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission. The Zoning
Administrator or the Planning Commission may approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove a Use Permit application for the sale of alcohol or alcoholic
beverages. The Planning Commission shall act on Major Use Permit applications.
The Zoning Administrator shall have the discretion to act on Minor Use Permit
applications or, at his or her sole discretion, may refer the application to
the Planning Commission. Notices of a public hearing shall be given as required
by the Yolo County Code.
   (b)   A noticed public hearing shall also be held in connection with PCN
determinations by the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission,
whichever is authorized to hear Use Permit applications for the sale of alcohol
in the zone where the applicant’s premises are located. Any such hearing shall
be noticed in accordance with the requirements of California Government Code
Section 6061. During a PCN determination hearing, the applicant shall be
required to demonstrate, by substantial evidence, that the public convenience
will be served by the issuance of a license. The applicant shall also be
required to demonstrate, by substantial evidence, that the proposed sale of
alcohol or alcoholic beverages shall be accomplished in a manner to eliminate
or avoid any adverse issues identified through the review process required by
Section
8-6.105, above.
   (c)   The public hearing may be continued from time to time. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the deciding body shall determine whether the public
convenience or necessity will be served by the issuance of a license for the
applicant premises. Written notification signed by the Director of Planning,
Public Works and Environmental Services, mailed to the ABC and the applicant,
shall serve as the determination of public convenience or necessity by the
local agency.
   (d)   The Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission may determine that
the public convenience or necessity will be met only if certain conditions are
imposed upon the applicant through a conditional use permit as part of the
application process in conjunction with the license to sell alcoholic beverages
issued by ABC. Such conditions shall be included in the Zoning Administrator’s
or the Planning Commission’s decision and communicated to the ABC within ninety
(90) days from the date of initial notification by the applicant to the County
regarding the application for a license to sell alcohol within the County.
   The conditions may address any issue relating to the privileges to be
exercised under the Use Permit. Specific conditions of operation may include,
but are not limited to, the following: restrictions on the applicant’s
qualifications; the age of patron(s) allowed on the premises; hours of
operation; maximum occupancy; limitations on live music and dancing; evacuation
planning; security measures; persons loitering on the premises; parking lot
patrols; externally visible advertising signs; and employee training for
responsible beverage sales.
   If conditions are imposed, any finding of public convenience or necessity
shall clearly state that it is contingent upon the imposition of such
conditions through the Use Permit in conjunction with the license issued by the
ABC. In addition to the Use Permit, the County may request that conditions be
imposed on the ABC license through a Letter of Protest and must be filed as
follows:
   (1)   A Letter of Protest must be filed within thirty (30) days from the
“Copies Mailed Date” that appears on the Application for Alcoholic Beverages
License(s) that is filed with ABC; or within thirty (30) days of the placement
of the required posted notification on the subject premises that indicates that
an ABC license is pending; or within thirty (30) days from the date the
applicant provides written notification to the surrounding properties within a
five hundred (500) foot radius of the subject premises, whichever is later.
   (2)   The local agency may request a twenty (20) day extension to the Letter
of Protest notification period.
   (e)   The decisions of the Zoning Administrator are appealable to the
Planning Commission, and then to the Board of Supervisors, and decisions of the
Planning Commission are appealable to the Board of Supervisors, in compliance
with Section
8-2.225 of
Chapter 2 of this title.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-6.107.   Enforcement.
   The enforcement of complaints regarding infractions or violations of the
Business License or Use Permit may result in fines, permit suspension, or
revocation of the Business License or Use Permit, pursuant to Title 1 of the
County Code and other provisions of State and local law.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Chapter 7
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES AND ADULT-RELATED ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:
Article 1: Adult Entertainment Uses
   
8-7.101   Purpose.
   
8-7.102   Definitions.
   
8-7.103   Allowed zones and spacing requirements.
   
8-7.104   Compliance with other laws.
Article 2: Adult-Related Establishments
   
8-7.201   Purpose.
   
8-7.202   Definitions.
   
8-7.203   Allowed zones and spacing requirements.
   
8-7.204   Compliance with other laws.
Article 1: Adult Entertainment Uses
Sec. 8-7.101.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to declare the zones within which adult
entertainment uses, as defined in this article, may be located, and specify
requirements regarding the distance from other types of land uses which must be
maintained by adult entertainment uses, in order to minimize the adverse
impacts associated with the concentration of adult entertainment uses or their
location in residential neighborhoods or near churches or places frequented by
minors.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-7.102.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   Adult entertainment use.
   “Adult entertainment use” shall include all of the following types of
establishments and no other:
   (1)   Adult bookstore. “Adult bookstore” shall mean a retail sales use
having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade books,
magazines, and other periodicals whose dominant or predominant character and
theme is the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section, or a use with a segment
or section devoted to the retail sale or display of such materials.
   (2)   Adult motion picture theater. “Adult motion picture theater” shall
mean an enclosed building and/or a drive-in motion picture theater to which the
public is invited or permitted, either of which is used for presenting filmed
or videotaped materials whose dominant or predominant character and theme are
the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
defined in this section, for observation by six (6) or more patrons of such use
at any one time.
   (3)   Adult picture arcade. “Adult picture arcade” shall mean any place to
which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated, or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled, still or motion
picture machines, projectors, television sets, or other image producing devices
are used to display images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and which images have as a dominant or predominant character and theme
the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as
defined in this section.
   (4)   Nude dancing theater. “Nude dancing theater” shall mean any building
or structure used for the presentation of live dancing or modeling, the
dominant or predominant character and theme of which are the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this
section, and to which the public is permitted or invited.
   (5)   Adult hotel. “Adult hotel” shall mean any hotel wherein material is
presented which is distinguishable or characterized by an emphasis on depicting
or describing specified sexual activities, as defined in this section, and
which establishment restricts admission to such building, or portion thereof,
to adults only. As used in this section, “hotel” shall mean that term as
defined in this Code.
   (6)   Adult-related establishment. “Adult-related establishment” shall mean
any such establishment as defined in this chapter.
   Establishment of an adult entertainment use.
   “Establishment of an adult entertainment use” shall mean and include the
opening of such a business as a new business, the relocation of such business
or the conversion of an existing business, to any adult entertainment use.
   Retail sale.
   “Retail sale” shall mean a sale in which the vendor collects from the
purchaser the State sales tax.
   Specified sexual activity.
   “Specified sexual activity” shall mean and include, and shall be limited to,
the following:
   (1)   Actual or simulated genital or anal sexual intercourse;
   (2)   Oral copulation;
   (3)   Bestiality;
   (4)   Direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals;
   (5)   Masochism;
   (6)   Erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of
pain; or
   (7)   The use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship.
   Specified anatomical areas.
   “Specified anatomical areas” shall mean and include, and shall be limited
to, the following:
   (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, mons pubis,
buttocks, and female breasts below the top of the areola; and/or
   (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
or opaquely covered.
   Use, used.
   “Use” and/or “used” shall mean to practice customarily.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-7.103.   Allowed zones and spacing requirements.
   (a)   Establishment: Allowed zones. The establishment of adult entertainment
uses shall be prohibited in any zone within the County with the exception only
of the General Commercial (C-G), and Highway Services Commercial (C-H) zones;
provided, however, no adult entertainment use may be established in any such
zone unless the entire parcel upon which such use is located is outside all of
the specified distance requirements set forth in subsection (b) of this section
and unless the adult entertainment use complies with all the other regulations
imposed within the zone by this chapter.
   (b)   Spacing requirements. The spacing requirements set forth in this
subsection shall all be observed in the establishment of any adult
entertainment use. Distances shall be measured in a straight line, between the
nearest property line of the parcel on which the adult entertainment use is
located to the nearest zone line or property line of the parcel upon which the
following uses are located:
   (1)   No adult entertainment use shall be established within five hundred
(500) feet of any existing adult entertainment use or any existing adult-
related establishment.
   (2)   No adult entertainment use shall be established within five hundred
(500) feet of any public or private school, publicly-owned park or playground,
or church, synagogue, or other place of worship to which the public is invited
or permitted to attend.
   (3)   No adult entertainment use shall be established on any parcel which
has any part of its boundary contiguous to any part of the boundary of any
parcel which is in the Low Density Residential (R-L), Medium Density
Residential (R-M), or High Density Residential (R-H) zones, as specified in
Article 5 of
Chapter 2, or upon which a residential use exists as the principal permitted
use. For the purposes of this subsection, “contiguous” shall mean physically
touching, and “residential use” shall include mobile home parks, recreational
vehicle campgrounds, and campgrounds, but shall exclude motels. The distance
restrictions set forth in this subsection are cumulative, not separate;
therefore, adult entertainment uses may be established only on parcels which
meet all of the spacing requirements set forth in this subsection.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-7.104.   Compliance with other laws.
   This article and chapter shall not be construed as relieving adult
entertainment uses from any applicable requirement of any Federal or State law,
regulation, or this Code, specifically including building and health
regulations; provided, however, this article is not intended and shall not be
construed as regulating matters preempted by State or Federal laws.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Article 2: Adult-related Establishments
Sec. 8-7.201.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to regulate the location of adult-related
establishments to insure that adverse effects will not contribute to the blight
or downgrading of neighborhoods or deter or interfere with the operation and
development of hotels, motels, and lodging houses and other businesses in the
County, and to adopt regulations and standards that will tend to prevent the
clustering of such establishments.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-7.202.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   Adult entertainment use. “Adult entertainment use” shall mean any such use
as defined in Article 1 of this chapter.
   Adult-related establishment. “Adult-related establishment” shall mean any
bathhouse, escort bureau, introductory service, modeling studio, or sexual
encounter center as defined in this chapter. “Adult-related establishment”
shall also include any other business or establishment which has available for,
or offers any patron, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire, or
reward, services, entertainment, or activities which involve specified sexual
activities or the display of specified anatomical areas. “Adult-related
establishment” shall not include any adult entertainment use. Any use which is
both an adult entertainment use and an adult-related establishment shall be
defined as an adult entertainment use and be subject to all the requirements of
this chapter.
   Bathhouse. “Bathhouse” shall mean an establishment whose primary business is
to provide, for a fee or other consideration, access to any kind of bath
facility, including showers, saunas, and hot tubs.
   Escort. “Escort” shall mean a person who, for hire or reward:
   (1)   Accompanies others to or about social affairs, entertainment, or
places of amusement; or
   (2)   Keeps company with others about any place of public resort or within
any private quarters.
   Escort bureau. “Escort bureau” shall mean a business, which, for a fee or
other consideration, furnishes or offers to furnish escorts.
   Establishment of an adult-related establishment. “Establishment of an adult-
related establishment” shall mean and include the opening of such a business as
a new business, the relocation of such a business, or the conversion of an
existing use to any adult-related establishment.
   Figure model. “Figure model” shall mean any person who, for hire or reward,
poses to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or
otherwise depicted.
   Introductory service. “Introductory service” shall mean a business, which,
for a fee or other consideration, will help persons to meet or become
acquainted with others for social purposes. For the purposes of this
subsection, “others” shall include personnel of the introductory service.
   Modeling studio. “Modeling studio” shall mean a business which provides, for
a fee or other consideration, figure models that display specified anatomical
areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculptured, or otherwise
depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity. “Modeling studio”
shall not include schools maintained pursuant to the standards set by the Board
of Education of the State.
   Outcall massage service. “Outcall massage service” shall mean a business or
establishment where the primary function of such business is to engage in or
carry on massage for pecuniary compensation or consideration, hire, or reward
not at a fixed location but at a location designated by the customer or client.
   Sexual encounter center. “Sexual encounter center” shall mean a business
which provides two (2) or more persons, for pecuniary compensation,
consideration, hire, or reward, with a place to assemble for the purpose of
engaging in specified sexual activities or displaying specified anatomical
areas. “Sexual encounter center” shall not include hotels or motels.
   Specified anatomical areas. “Specified anatomical areas” shall mean such
areas as defined in this chapter.
   Specified sexual activity. “Specified sexual activity” shall mean an
activity as defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by § 18, Ord. 1466, eff. March 24,
2016)
Sec. 8-7.203.   Allowed zones and spacing requirements.
   (a)   Establishment: Allowed zones. The establishment of adult-related
establishments shall be prohibited in any zone within the County with the
exception only of the General Commercial (C-G), and Highway Services Commercial
(C-H) zones; provided, however, no adult-related establishment may be
established in any such zone unless the entire parcel upon which such use is
located is outside all of the specified distance requirements set forth in
subsection (b) of this section and unless the adult-related establishment
complies with all the other regulations imposed within the zone by this
chapter.
   (b)   Spacing requirements. The spacing requirements set forth in this
subsection shall all be observed in the establishment of any adult-related
establishment. Distances shall be measured in a straight line, between the
nearest property line of the parcel on which the adult-related establishment is
located to the nearest zone line or property line of the parcel upon which the
following uses are located:
   (1)   No adult-related establishment shall be established within five
hundred (500) feet of any existing adult entertainment use or adult-related
establishment.
   (2)   No adult-related establishment shall be established within five
hundred (500) feet of any public or private school, publicly owned park or
playground, or church, synagogue, or other place of worship to which the public
is invited or permitted to attend.
   (3)   No adult-related establishment shall be established on any parcel
which has any part of its boundary contiguous to any part of the boundary of
any parcel which is in the Low Density Residential (R-L), Medium Density
Residential (R-M), or High Density Residential (R-H) zones, or upon which a
residential use exists as the principal permitted use. For the purposes of this
subsection, “contiguous” shall mean physically touching, and “residential use”
shall include mobile home parks, recreational vehicle campgrounds, and
campgrounds, but shall exclude motels. The distance restrictions set forth in
this subsection are cumulative, not separate; therefore, adult-related
establishments may be established only on parcels which meet all of the spacing
requirements set forth in this subsection.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-7.204.   Compliance with other laws.
   This chapter shall not be construed as relieving adult-related
establishments from any applicable requirement of any Federal or State law,
regulation, or this Code, specifically including building and health
regulations; provided, however, this chapter is not intended and shall not be
construed as regulating matters preempted by State or Federal laws.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Chapter 8
INCLUSIONARY HOUSING
Sections:
Article 1: Inclusionary Housing Requirements
   
8-8.101   Authority.
   
8-8.102   Purpose.
   
8-8.103   Findings.
   
8-8.104   Provision of affordable housing.
   
8-8.105   Definitions.
   
8-8.106   Affordable for-sale housing requirement.
   
8-8.107   Multifamily rental development affordable housing requirement.
   
8-8.108   Timing and term.
   
8-8.109   Basic design requirements for owner-occupied and rental affordable
units.
   
8-8.110   Equivalency proposals permitted.
   
8-8.111   Alternatives to the standard inclusionary housing component.
   
8-8.112   Inclusionary housing agreements.
   
8-8.113   Agreement checklist.
   
8-8.114   In-lieu fees for small developments.
   
8-8.115   Method of calculating in-lieu fees.
   
8-8.116   Collection and use of in-lieu fees.
   
8-8.117   Primary residence certification.
   
8-8.118   Affordable housing incentives.
   
8-8.119   Administration of affordability control.
   
8-8.120   Procedure for sale of affordable units.
   
8-8.121   Method for sale of affordable units.
   
8-8.122   Limitation of down payment requirement.
   
8-8.123   Calculation of "silent second".
   
8-8.124   Payoff of the silent second.
   
8-8.125   Resale upon close of twenty year occupancy requirement.
   
8-8.126   Subordination policy.
   
8-8.127   Refinancing policy.
   
8-8.128   Affordable rent determinations.
   
8-8.129   Buyer screening.
   
8-8.130   Exempted residential projects.
   
8-8.131   Appeals.
   
8-8.132   Grandfather provisions.
   
8-8.133   Enforcement.
ARTICLE 1: Inclusionary Housing Requirements
Sec. 8-8.101.   Authority.
   This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the general police powers granted to
the County by Article 11, Section 7 of the California State Constitution to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.102.   Purpose.
   This ordinance requires that residential projects within unincorporated Yolo
County contain a defined percentage of housing affordable to very low, low and
moderate income households as defined herein. To help achieve this goal, this
ordinance also establishes a program of incentives to assist in the production
of affordable units. Altogether, this ordinance is intended to satisfy the
Inclusionary Housing Requirement (Program Two: Affordable Housing Requirements
for New Residential Development) of the adopted Yolo County Housing Element.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.103.   Findings.
   The Board of Supervisors, having reviewed and considered Yolo County’s
Inclusionary Housing Ordinance, finds and determines as follows:
   (a)   The State of California requires local governments to plan to meet the
housing needs of all income groups. Specifically, “local governments have the
responsibility to use their powers to facilitate the improvement and
development of housing to meet the housing needs of all economic segments of
the community (Government Code Section 65580) and to assist in the development
of adequate housing to meet the needs of low and moderate income households
(Government Code Section 65583(c)(2)).”
   (b)   It is a public purpose of the County, as expressed in the Housing
Element of the County’s General Plan, “to provide for the county’s regional
share of new housing for all income groups (Yolo County General Plan, Goal
One).”
   (c)   As documented in the Housing Element of the County’s General Plan,
there is a housing shortage for very low and low income households in the
County and a shortage of ownership housing for moderate income households.
Increasingly, very low, low and moderate income persons who work or live within
the County are unable to locate suitable housing at prices they can afford and
are increasingly excluded from living within the County. Federal and State
housing subsidy programs are not sufficient by themselves to satisfy the
housing needs of very low, low-income and moderate-income households.
   (d)   The County finds that newly constructed housing does not, to any
appreciable extent, provide housing affordable to very low, low and moderate
income households. New development, which does not include or otherwise provide
for affordable housing will further aggravate the current housing shortage for
very low and low income households and the shortage of ownership housing for
moderate income households, as it will reduce the supply of developable land
and increase land costs, thus making affordable housing prohibitively difficult
and expensive to develop.
   (e)   This ordinance implements the adopted Housing Element of the County
General Plan and carries out the mandates of State Housing Element law, meeting
the regional fair share housing requirements by ensuring that the benefits of
economic diversity are available to the residents of the County. It is
essential that new residential development contain housing opportunities for
all income levels, and that the County provide a regulatory and incentive
framework, which ensures development of an adequate supply and mix of new
housing to meet the future housing needs of all income segments of the
unincorporated Yolo County population.
   (f)   The County further finds that the housing shortage for very low and
low-income households, and the shortage of ownership housing for moderate
income households, is detrimental to the public health, safety and general
welfare of the County.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.104.   Provision of affordable housing.
   No Building Permit shall be issued for any new residential project unless
such construction has been approved in accordance with the standards and
procedures provided for by this ordinance. The location and type of proposed
affordable housing in a development shall be disclosed in writing by each
seller to each subsequent purchaser of lots or units in the development, until
all the affordable housing unit requirements are constructed.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.105.   Definitions.
   The definitions in this section shall govern the provisions of this
ordinance.
   Affordability Gap
   “Affordability Gap” means the difference between the cost of constructing a
housing unit based on fair market value versus the cost a low-income person can
afford for a housing unit, using accepted housing cost calculations as provided
in this ordinance.
   Affordable Housing
   “Affordable Housing” means affordable for-sale housing or affordable rental
housing. Affordable for-sale housing is housing affordable to very low, low,
and moderate income households as defined herein. Affordable for-sale housing
payments are thirty percent (30%) of gross monthly household target income as
defined in Title 25, Sections 6920 and 6924 of the California Code of
Regulations, including maintenance, homeowners association dues, utilities,
insurance and property taxes. Affordable rental housing is housing affordable
to very low, low, and moderate income households.
   Affordable Housing Cost
   “Affordable Housing Cost” for a purchaser means the monthly amount that is
affordable to a low or moderate-income household. The method for calculating
affordable housing costs is as provided in this ordinance.
   Affordable Purchase Price
   “Affordable Purchase Price” means the maximum sale price a qualified
purchaser may be required to pay for the affordable unit, as described in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
   Annual household income
   “Annual household income” means the combined gross income for all adult
persons living in a dwelling unit as calculated pursuant to Title 25, Section
6932 of the California Code of Regulations, as amended, or its successor.
   Board
   “Board” means the Yolo County Board of Supervisors.
   Building permit
   “Building permit” means a permit issued in accordance with the Yolo County
Code.
   Construction costs
   “Construction costs” means the estimated cost per square foot of
construction, as established by the Uniform Building Code, or its successor,
for use in the setting of regulatory fees, multiplied by the total square
footage to be constructed.
   Density Bonuses
   “Density Bonuses” entitles a developer to build additional residential units
above the maximum number of units permitted by the General Plan, Community
Plan, Specific Plan and Zoning designations in accordance with Government Code
Section 65915 et seq. Density bonus units shall be constructed in the same
development where affordable housing units are located.
   Developer
   “Developer” means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture,
corporation, or other entity or combination of entities, which seeks County
approval(s) for all or part of a residential development.
   Development
   “Development” means one (1) or more projects or groups of projects of
residential units constructed in a contiguous area. A development need not be
limited to an area within an individual parcel or subdivision map.
   Discretionary permit
   “Discretionary permit” shall include Variances, Conditional Use Permits, and
Site Plan Reviews issued in accordance with the Yolo County Code, and the
approval of Tentative Subdivision or Parcel maps pursuant to the Yolo County
Code.
   Dwelling unit
   “Dwelling unit” shall mean any building, or portion thereof, containing one
(1) or more dwelling units designed or used exclusively as a residence or
sleeping place for one (1) or more families, but not including a tent, cabin,
boat, trailer, mobile home, dormitory, labor camp, hotel, or motel.
   Extremely Low-Income
   “Extremely Low-Income” are those households with incomes of less than thirty
percent (30%) of County median income as defined by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
   Family
   “Family” means persons living together as a single, independent and separate
housekeeping unit in one (1) dwelling unit and for the purposes of this
paragraph, the word “family” includes and shall be deemed to include gratuitous
guests and bonafide servants employed as such on the premises containing said
dwelling unit.
   Feasible
   “Feasible” means that even after complying with the requirements of this
ordinance, the residential project as a whole remains reasonably capable of
being financed, built and marketed, given the economic conditions prevailing at
the time of approval of a residential project taking into account the
incentives and alternatives that may be made available to the developer in
accordance with this ordinance. In all cases, feasibility shall be as reviewed
and recommended by the Planning Commission subject to approval by the Board of
Supervisors.
   For-sale units
   “For-sale units” means housing units which provide an ownership opportunity
including, but not limited to, single family dwellings, condominiums,
cooperatives and mutual housing associations, except in circumstances where the
unit is intended for rental use.
   Household
   “Household” means "Family" as defined herein.
   Limited Equity Housing Cooperative
   “Limited Equity Housing Cooperative” means a housing cooperative organized
in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 33007.6 and
Business and Professional Code Section 11003.4. A limited equity housing
cooperative is owned by a non-profit corporation or housing sponsor. Resident-
owners own the cooperative as an individual whole, rather than individuals
units within a development.
   Low income households
   “Low income households” are those households with incomes from fifty-one
percent (51%) to eighty percent (80%) of County median income as defined by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   Market rate units
   “Market rate units” means dwelling units in a residential project, which are
not affordable units for very low, low and moderate-income households.
   Median income
   “Median income” means the median income, adjusted for family size,
applicable to Yolo County as published annually pursuant to Title 25 of the
California Code of Regulations, Section 6932 (or its successor provision) by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   Moderate income households
   “Moderate income households” are those households with incomes from eighty-
one percent (81%) and up to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of County median
income as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   Monthly owner-occupied housing payment
   “Monthly owner-occupied housing payment” shall be that sum equal to the
principal, interest, property taxes, utilities, homeowner’s insurance and
homeowner’s association dues paid on an annual basis divided by twelve (12).
   Notice of Intent to Sell
   “Notice of Intent to Sell” means the notice provided by owners of for-sale
units to the County of their intent to offer their unit for sale. The covenants
recorded against the property on which the unit is located shall provide that
the owner shall provide a Notice of Intent to Sell in the manner prescribed in
this ordinance.
   Planning Commission
   “Planning Commission” shall mean the Yolo County Planning Commission.
   Planning Director
   “Planning Director” means the Director of the Yolo County Planning, Public
Works and Environmental Services Department or the designee of said Director.
   Qualified Purchaser
   “Qualified Purchaser” means a person or household approved for ownership of
an affordable dwelling unit by the Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services Director in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
   Resident controlled nonprofit housing corporation
   “Resident Controlled Nonprofit Housing Corporation” means a housing
corporation established to manage for-sale or rental housing projects
designated for low to moderate income households in which the majority of
households have formed a nonprofit housing cooperation, which need not have an
equity interest in such projects.
   Residential project
   “Residential Project” means a proposed residential development or
subdivision of land, including condominium and timeshare projects, or the
construction of any dwelling unit located within the boundaries of
unincorporated Yolo County for which a tentative map, parcel map, or for a
project not processing a map, a building permit or other County approval is
received after the effective date of this ordinance, unless exempt in
accordance with Article 11 of this ordinance.
   Section
   “Section” unless otherwise indicated, means a section of the Yolo County
Code.
   Self-Help Housing
   “Self-Help Housing” means mutual self help housing constructed for very low,
low, and moderate income families in which prospective home buyers provide
labor to assist in the construction of the units. The intent of this program is
to trade-off hours of labor into equity ("sweat equity") to reduce the purchase
price of the units.
   Targeted income families
   “Targeted income families” means those households that meet the
classification as very-low and low-income households as defined in this
ordinance.
   Very low income households
   “Very low income households” are those households with incomes of up to
fifty percent (50%) of County median income as defined by the U. S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.106.   Affordable for-sale housing requirement.
   A developer of residential for-sale developments of ten (10) or more units
shall provide in each development, twenty percent (20%) of the units for low
and moderate income households as follows: Fifty percent (50%) of the required
affordable units shall be available at affordable sales prices to low-income
households. The remaining fifty-percent (50%) of the affordable units, which
are required to be constructed in connection with the construction of market
rate units intended for owner-occupancy, shall be available at affordable sales
prices to moderate-income households. A plan for the provision of affordable
housing within a for-sale housing development shall be submitted concurrently
with the application for development of residential units subject to this
ordinance. Projects less than ten (10) units shall be subject to the in-lieu
fee option provided in this ordinance.
   For sale affordable housing units that are converted into rental units will
meet the requirements of this ordinance, pursuant to State law, if the rents
meet or do not exceed the affordable housing standards for rental units set
forth in this ordinance and adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
   Each developer shall meet the twenty percent (20%) for sale affordable
housing requirement by one (1) or a combination of the following standard for-
sale affordable housing requirements contained in this ordinance.
   For fractions of affordable units, the developer of the property must either
construct the next higher whole number of affordable units or perform an
alternative action as specified by this ordinance.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.107.   Multifamily rental development affordable housing requirement.
   A developer of multifamily rental developments containing twenty (20) or
more units shall provide at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the units
affordable to very low-income households and at least ten (10%) percent of the
units affordable to low-income households. A developer of multifamily rental
developments containing between seven (7) and nineteen (19) units shall provide
fifteen percent (15%) of the units to very low-income households and ten
percent (10%) to low-income households. Such housing shall be provided by the
construction of units on-site. Projects of less than seven (7) units shall be
subject to the in-lieu fee option provided by this ordinance.
   For fractions of affordable units, the developer of the property must either
construct the next higher whole number of affordable units or perform an
alternative action as specified in this ordinance.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.108.   Timing and term.
   The affordable units shall be constructed on-site concurrently with the
related market rate units, unless one (1) alternative action pursuant to this
ordinance is performed. In the event that the County approves a phased project,
the inclusionary units required by this ordinance shall be constructed in
proportion to the number of units within each phase of the residential
development.
   (a)   For-sale dwelling units shall include a covenant that each dwelling
unit shall be affordable for twenty (20) years. This affordability requirement
of at least twenty (20) years for affordable for-sale units will be reset at
each transfer of title upon re-sale to a qualified buyer for both low-income
and moderate-income purchasers.
   (b)   Multi-family rental housing shall include a covenant that each
dwelling unit shall be permanently affordable.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.109.   Basic design requirements for owner-occupied and rental
affordable units.
   Affordable units shall be comparable in number of bedrooms, exterior
appearance and overall quality of construction to market rate units in the same
development. Subject to the approval of the Planning Director, square footage
of affordable units and interior features in affordable units need not be the
same as or equivalent to those in market rate units in the same residential
project, so long as they are of good quality and are consistent with
contemporary standards for new housing.
   Affordable units shall be dispersed throughout the residential project, or,
subject to the approval of the Planning Director, may be clustered within the
residential project when this furthers affordable housing opportunities.
   The developer shall provide both two (2) and three (3) bedroom affordable
units, in a mix approved by the Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services Director.
   Upon application as provided herein, the County may, to the maximum extent
appropriate in light of project design elements, allow builders to finish the
interior of affordable units with less expensive finishes and appliances than
those present in market rate units.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.110.   Equivalency proposals permitted.
   Only when it is substantiated by the applicant that the standard
inclusionary housing component requirement is infeasible shall equivalency
proposals be considered. Projects proposing to meet the minimum requirement for
affordability through equivalency shall submit an equivalency proposal to the
Planning Commission for recommendation to the Yolo County Board of Supervisors.
Such proposals shall show why compliance with this ordinance is not financially
or otherwise feasible and how the alternative proposal will further affordable
housing opportunities in the County to an equal or greater extent than
compliance with the express requirements contained in this ordinance.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.111.   Alternatives to the standard inclusionary housing component.
   Only when it is substantiated by the applicant that the standard
inclusionary housing component requirement is unfeasible shall alternatives to
the standard inclusionary housing component be considered. A proposal for an
alternative equivalent action may include, but is not limited to the
construction of affordable units on another site, dedication of land, payment
of in-lieu fees or combination thereof.
   (a)   Planning Commission Review. After reviewing the proposal, the
Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department will make a
recommendation to the Planning Commission subject Board of Supervisors
approval. If the off-site proposal, dedication of land, in lieu fees, housing
credits, or combination thereof is accepted or accepted as modified by the
Planning Commission, the relevant elements of the inclusionary housing plan
shall be included in the applicable discretionary and/or legislative approvals
for both the residential development generating the requirement for the
inclusionary housing component and, if applicable, off-site development
project, land dedication, in lieu fees, or combination thereof where all or
part of that requirement is proposed to be met. If the off-site proposal,
dedication of land, in lieu fees, or rehabilitation project is rejected, the
inclusionary housing component shall be applied as provided by this ordinance.
   (b)   Standard for Approval. The Planning Commission may recommend a
proposal submitted under this section only if it is not financially or
otherwise feasible to construct the units within the development and the
alternative would be superior to on-site development from the perspective of
access to transportation, services, public facilities or other applicable
residential planning criteria in the applicable General Plan or Specific Plan.
   (c)   Affordable Units Off-Site. A developer may propose to meet its
obligation under this section through new construction of an off-site proposal
located within the unincorporated County. The developer may satisfy the
requirements of providing inclusionary units as part of the residential
development, in whole or part, by constructing a number of units equal to or
greater than the required number of inclusionary units at a site different than
the site of residential development. A developer may propose another option,
when it is demonstrated that another option may be more effective in providing
affordable housing. In pursuing another option, a developer shall submit an
application to the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department
for recommendation to the Planning Commission.
   (d)   Dedication of Land. A developer may propose to meet its obligation
through an irrevocable offer of dedication to the County or designee of
sufficient land to satisfy the affordability requirement pursuant to this
ordinance, only if: 1) The developer demonstrates to the Planning Commission
that it is not feasible to develop the affordable units on-site as part of the
residential project; or 2) In the judgement of the Planning Commission, the
developer's proposed land dedication would accomplish the objectives of this
ordinance.
   Dedicated sites for residential projects shall be a minimum of two (2) acres
unless the County agrees to a smaller site based on a special housing need in
accordance with the adopted Yolo County Housing Element. The dedicated site
shall be economically feasible to develop, of sufficient size to build the
required number of affordable units, and physically suitable for development of
the required affordable units prior to the dedication of the land. The
dedicated site shall also have the appropriate General Plan designation and
zoning to accommodate the required units. The site shall be fully improved with
infrastructure, frontage improvements (i.e. curb, gutter, planter strip, and
walk), paved street access, utility (i.e. water, gas, sewer, and electric)
service connections stubbed to the property, including paid connection fees for
service connections, and other such off-site improvements as may be necessary
for development of the required affordable units or as required by the County.
   (e)   Small Developments; In-Lieu Fee Option. For developments of less than
ten (10) units for single family developments and seven (7) units for
multifamily developments, the Inclusionary Housing Provisions may be met by the
payment of in-lieu fees pursuant to an adopted fee schedule, rather than
compliance with the affordable housing on-site construction requirement as
shown in Exhibit “1” attached hereto and incorporated herein as reference. Such
fees shall be automatically adjusted on an annual basis based on changes in the
building valuation data as published by the International Building Code for
single family dwellings, type V-N construction and apartment buildings, type V-
1hr construction, standard quality, as locally adjusted. Such fees shall be
reviewed annually by the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Director.
   All in-lieu fees collected shall be earmarked for Very Low and Extremely
Low-Income Households to provide supplemental funding for Affordable Housing
Developers.
   (f)   Housing Credits. After meeting its affordable housing obligation, a
market-rate developer may request the Planning Commission to construct excess
Inclusionary units to obtain affordable housing credits. Units approved as
affordable housing credits shall be subject to the requirements of Section
8-8.109 and may be used by the developer or transferred through private
transaction within five (5) years. Affordable housing credits shall only be
accepted by the County when the development proposing to use the credit(s) is
within three (3) miles of the donating development.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.112.   Inclusionary housing agreements.
   An Inclusionary Housing Agreement shall be executed between the applicant
and the County. An applicant's proposed discretionary permit, if applicable,
will be subject to the conditions of the Inclusionary Housing Agreement. The
Inclusionary Housing Agreement shall be completed and signed prior to approval
of the applicant's project. The Agreement shall contain all information
identified in the Agreement Checklist provided in this article.
   The Agreement must include an acknowledgement that the applicant has
received a copy of the Affordable Housing Ordinance. The Agreement must also
obligate the applicant to provide a copy of the Agreement to anyone to whom the
subject residential lots or units are transferred or sold.
   The Inclusionary Housing Agreement shall provide assurance satisfactory to
the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Director that the
proposed inclusionary housing plan meets the affordable housing obligations set
forth in this ordinance. The Inclusionary Housing Agreement shall be recorded
with the Yolo County Recorder's Office prior to building permit issuance.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.113.   Agreement checklist.
   The Inclusionary Housing Agreement shall contain the following information:
   (a)   Location, zoning designation and ownership of the residential project;
   (b)   The number of affordable dwelling units that the applicant is
responsible for providing at each income level;
   (c)   The exact location of the affordable dwellings units (i.e. identify
specific lots for affordable for-sale units and site/parcel for multifamily
rental projects);
   (d)   The dwelling unit mix and square footage of the affordable dwelling
units as compared to dwelling unit mix and square footage of the market-rate
units;
   (e)   Term of affordability of the affordable dwelling units;
   (f)   Scheduling and phasing of construction of affordable dwelling units;
   (g)   Identification of applicant-funded subsidy or financial assistance, if
any, for affordable for-sale units.
   (h)   Affirmative marketing plan that ensures outreach to income-eligible
households regarding the availability of affordable housing units. Such
affirmative marketing shall at least include advertising in the local newspaper
by sending notices to local government and nonprofit agencies that serve very
low, low-income, and moderate income persons and families, depending upon the
nature of the affordable housing units at issue. The County should maintain an
updated list of these agencies.
   (i)   Specify if any or all of the affordable dwelling units will be special
needs housing for seniors, disabled, homeless persons or other special needs
populations and, if so, the unique features or services that are appropriate
for that special needs population. The County will participate in securing
funding for those projects that provide special needs housing units, if
available. The County's special needs housing demand will be addressed as
guided by the adopted Yolo County Housing Element, and based on information
regarding increased need or demand for special needs housing as it becomes
available from the U.S. Census or other data sources.
   (j)   Detailed description of for-sale affordable units, if different than
market-rate units, including floor plan and list of amenities and features of
the unit.
   In addition, the Inclusionary Housing Agreement shall include the following
terms:
   (k)   Assurances, that the affordable dwelling units will be constructed
concurrently with, or prior to, market-rate units in the residential project.
In phased developments, inclusionary units may be constructed and occupied in
proportion to the number of units in each phase of the residential project. If,
as approved by the County, the affordable housing obligation is proposed to be
satisfied by a separate third party developer (such as a non-profit housing
developer) and it is not feasible to develop the affordable units prior to or
concurrently with the market rate units, the Agreement must identify the
specific residential lots on which the affordable units will be developed.
Developers of for-sale residential projects who construct the required
affordable units concurrent with their market-rate development may receive fee
waivers or deferrals pursuant to this ordinance, subject to Board of
Supervisors approval.
   (l)   Affordable rental dwelling units shall be dispersed throughout the
residential project and shall be indistinguishable from market-rate units
within any project, including identical quality and amenities as the market-
rate units, unless prior approval by the Planning Commission and/or Board of
Supervisors has been granted.
   (m)   Inclusionary Housing Agreements for rental projects shall include the
requirement that the project will be subject to the County's Affordable Housing
Monitoring Program to ensure ongoing compliance with the affordable housing
obligations set forth in this ordinance and the Inclusionary Housing Agreement,
including payment of monitoring fees (fee is based on an hourly rate of staff
time to review Agreements). The Inclusionary Housing Agreement for a rental
residential project shall include the provisions for "Monitoring and Compliance
Requirements for Rental Projects."
   (n)   Mechanisms for reservation, protection, and disclosure of affordable
lots for projects. Description of language in disclosure for use by real estate
agents, and visible and prominent signage at residential projects advertising
the availability of affordable dwelling units.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.114.   In-lieu fees for small developments.
   For small residential projects of less than ten (10) units for single-family
developments and seven (7) units for multifamily developments, the Inclusionary
Housing Provisions may be met by the payment of in-lieu fees, to be established
by separate ordinance pursuant to the County Master Fee Schedule, to satisfy
the developer's affordable housing obligation.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.115.   Method of calculating in-lieu fees.
   At the time of discretionary approval, if applicable, the County will
provide the developer with an estimate of the in-lieu fee for the residential
project. Such in-lieu fees shall be established by separate ordinance in a
manner consistent with California law. This in-lieu fee calculation at the time
of discretionary approval is only an estimate and is subject to revision and
verification prior to the issuance of building permits, as the estimated sales
price of units in the residential project at the discretionary approval stage
may change by the time the project is actually built.
   Except as may otherwise be required by California law, the in-lieu fee shall
equal a percentage of the estimated cost to construct all the Inclusionary
units that would be otherwise required for each residential development
pursuant to Section
8-8.106, and the amount of the fee shall be determined as follows:
   (a)   The estimated cost to construct a single unit of average size for the
residential development shall be determined by multiplying the square footage
of the average size unit by the average cost per square foot to construct the
appropriate type of dwelling as shown on the most recent edition of the
Building Permit Valuation Table in use by the County Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department.
   (b)   The estimated cost to construct all Inclusionary units required for
the residential development shall be determined by multiplying the number of
required Inclusionary units by the estimated cost to construct a single unit of
average size for the residential development.
   (c)   The required percentage used to calculate the in-lieu fee shall be
related to the total number of units in a residential development as specified.
   (d)   The estimated cost to construct Inclusionary units shall include
consideration of local, regional, State, and Federal subsidy sources available
for the development of affordable housing. The fee may be reduced in an amount
not to exceed fifty percent (50%), depending upon the availability of subsidy
funding.
   In-lieu fees shall be paid to the County prior to the issuance of any
Building Permits for the construction of any development subject to this
chapter. The Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department shall
not issue any Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy for the construction
of such development without first receiving payment of the required impact fees
from the applicant.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.116.   Collection and use of in-lieu fees.
   Any monies contributed to the County pursuant to the provisions of this
ordinance shall be payable to the County of Yolo for the purpose of providing
affordable housing. Payment of the fee shall be made in full prior to Filing of
the Final Map, issuance of the first Building Permit, or Issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy, whichever occurs first.
   (a)   In-lieu fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be placed by the
Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department in a separate
interest bearing account identified as "Affordable Housing Program". All fees
collected shall be earmarked to provide supplemental funding for Affordable
Housing Developers.
   (b)   The Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department shall
maintain a register for the Affordable Housing Program indicating the date of
payment of each fee, the amount paid, the name of the payer, and the Assessor's
Parcel Number.
   (c)   The Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department shall
prepare an annual accounting of all fees paid into and withdrawn from each
account, showing the source and amounts collected, the amounts expended, and
the projects for which such expenditures were made.
   (d)   Any fees collected and interest accrued pursuant to this chapter shall
be expended or encumbered within five (5) years of receipt, in accordance with
Government Code Section 66006 et seq. unless the Board of Supervisors
identifies in written findings the extraordinary and compelling reasons for the
County to hold the fees beyond the five (5) year period. Under such
circumstances, the Board of Supervisors shall establish the period of time
within which the impact fees shall be expended or encumbered.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.117.   Primary residence certification.
   Purchasers must certify by submitting a signed affidavit (on a form provided
by the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department) that the
home will be used as their primary residence.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.118.   Affordable housing incentives.
   A developer may request that the County provide inclusionary incentives as
set forth in this ordinance. The goal of these inclusionary incentives is to
apply available incentives to qualifying projects in a manner that, to the
extent feasible, offsets the cost of providing the inclusionary housing
component. The Planning Director shall respond to any inclusionary housing
incentive request and make a determination as to a package of inclusionary
incentives under consideration, subject to the approval of the Planning
Commission and/or Board of Supervisors.
   (a)   Fee Waivers or Deferrals. Upon application as provided herein, the
County shall make available a program of waiver, reduction, or deferral of
development fees, administrative fees, and financing fees for affordable units.
Such a program may include a fifty percent (50%) waiver of development-related
application and processing fees for affordable units constructed in connection
with such residential project, subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors.
In addition, the Board of Supervisors may consider, on a case by case basis,
the provision of additional incentives as provided by law or as stated in the
adopted Housing Element of the Yolo County General Plan.
   (b)   Modification of Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Department Standards. Upon application as provided herein the County may modify
the standards for affordable units, to the extent feasible, in light of the
uses, design, and infrastructure needs of the development, standards relating
to road widths, curbs, and gutters, parking, lot coverage, and minimum lot
sizes.
   (c)   Streamlining and Priority Processing. The Planning Director shall
review and modify, as appropriate, procedures for streamlining and priority
processing which relieve affordable units of permit processing requirements to
the maximum extent feasible consistent with the public health, safety, and
welfare, subject to the final approval by the Board of Supervisors.
   (d)   Density Bonus. The County shall make available to the developer a
density bonus as provided in state density bonus law (Government Code 65915),
however, the affordability requirements to qualify for a density bonus shall be
those required by this ordinance. Units produced as part of such a density
bonus do not give rise to an inclusionary housing requirement.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.119.   Administration of affordability control.
   Prior to the approval of any discretionary permit, if applicable, regulatory
agreements shall be executed between the County and developer. Prior to
Issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, if the affordable units are owner-
occupied, resale restrictions, deeds of trust and/or other documents, all of
which must be acceptable to the Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services Director and consistent with the requirements of this ordinance, shall
be recorded against the parcel having such affordable units and shall be
effective for at least the period of time required by Government Code Section
65915(c) with respect to each affordable unit, but not less than twenty (20)
years.
   The resale restrictions shall provide that in the event of the sale of an
affordable unit intended for owner occupancy, the County shall have a right of
first refusal to purchase such affordable unit at the market price minus the
percentage of the “silent second”, subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
   No persons shall be permitted to occupy an affordable unit, or purchase an
affordable unit for owner-occupancy, unless the County or its designee has
approved the household's eligibility, or has failed to make a determination of
eligibility within the time or other limits provided by a regulatory agreement
or resale restrictions. Households selected to occupy affordable units shall be
selected from the list of eligible households maintained by the County to the
extent provided in the regulatory agreement or resale restrictions.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.120.   Procedure for sale of affordable units.
   Prior to entering into an Inclusionary Housing Agreement, at the request of
the developer of a for-sale residential project, the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Director will assist developers in estimating the
calculations of maximum affordable purchase prices based on the assumptions
provided in this ordinance. These estimates shall only be for the purpose of
projecting the feasibility of the project and shall not be binding, as
prevailing conditions in the housing market and fluctuations in interest rates
that may affect the final calculations of affordable purchase prices. The
timing and procedures for final calculations of affordable purchase prices
shall occur pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.121.   Method for sale of affordable units.
   The method for the sale of affordable units is shown below. The Planning,
Public Works and Environmental Services Director shall review these assumptions
and procedures annually and make revisions as necessary:
   (a)   Units Appraised at Fair Market Value. At the time that the unit will
be marketed and made available for sale, the fair market value of the unit will
be determined. This determination will be made by a qualified appraiser who
will be selected by the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Director and paid for by the developer.
   (b)   Calculation of Affordable Maximum First Mortgage. The sale of
affordable units will be implemented by a "silent second" mortgage program by
the County by recordation of a note and deed of trust, or other designated
document in the County’s favor. After the fair market value of the unit has
been determined, the developer will calculate the affordable maximum first
mortgage amount for a qualified income purchaser of the unit, which shall be
approved by the Planning Director. The following procedure will be used for
determining the affordable maximum first mortgage amount:
   (1)   Determine the family size appropriate for the unit. For purposes of
this calculation, "adjusted for family size appropriate to the unit" means
adjusted for a household of one (1) person in the case of a studio unit; two
(2) persons in the case of a one (1) bedroom unit; three (3) persons in the
case of a two (2) bedroom unit; four (4) persons in the case of a three (3)
bedroom unit; five (5) persons in the case of a four (4) bedroom unit; and six
(6) persons in the case of a five (5) bedroom unit.
   (2)   Determine the household income available for the affordable maximum
first mortgage calculation for a low-income household based on the appropriate
household size using the current HUD Area Median Income figures for Yolo
County. The calculation of available household income should be based on the
Area Median Income for the appropriate household size.
   (3)   Calculate the amount of income available for housing costs by
multiplying the income figure by thirty (30) percent. For the purposes of
determining the affordable purchase price, the cost of utilities, property
taxes, insurance, primary mortgage, insurance, maintenance, and repair costs,
and like expenses are not required to be included in the calculation.
Homeowner's association dues may be included in the calculation of affordable
purchase price if the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Director determines that such costs would place a substantial burden on the
low-income homeowners' ability to purchase a home and make monthly mortgage
payments.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.122.   Limitation of down payment requirement.
   For purposes of this calculation, required down payments for low-income
purchasers shall be limited to no more than five percent (5%) of the purchase
price. The developer/seller may not require a buyer to make a larger down
payment but a buyer may elect to make a larger down payment in order to reduce
the amount of the first mortgage. This limit on the down payment requirement is
intended to provide greater flexibility for low-income homebuyers who might
find it difficult to provide a higher down payment amount.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.123.   Calculation of "silent second".
   The "silent second" will be the difference between 95% of the purchase price
(or purchase price minus down payment amount) and the amount of the affordable
maximum first mortgage. A promissory note and deed of trust, or other
appropriate document, securing the silent second will be recorded and assigned
to the County at the time of sale of each affordable unit. The promissory note
and deed of trust, or other designated document, will remain a lien against the
property, subordinate to the first mortgage. This note will have a thirty (30)
year due date which can be extended at the discretion of the Planning, Public
Works and Environmental Services Director.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.124.   Payoff of the silent second.
   The silent second may not be prepaid during its first twenty (20) years, as
long as the low-income purchaser occupies the unit as their primary residence
during this period. The silent second will be released by the County in thirty
(30) years as long as the low-income purchaser occupies the unit as their
primary residence for this duration. The amount due to the County at the
eventual payoff of the silent second or sale of the affordable unit to a non-
qualified purchaser shall be the amount which bears the equal ratio to the fair
market value at the time the silent second is paid off as the initial value
that the silent second had in relation to the original fair market sales price.
For example, if the original sales price was two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($250,000) and the “affordability gap” was fifty thousand dollars ($50,000),
the original silent second would be fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) (the ratio
would be twenty percent (20%)). If the fair market value at the time of payoff
was four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000), the amount due to the County
would be eighty thousand dollars ($80,000), or twenty percent (20%) of four
hundred thousand dollars ($400,000). In another case, if the property rose in
value to three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000), the twenty percent (20%)
ratio would require the payoff amount to the County to be sixty thousand
dollars ($60,000).
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.125.   Resale upon close of twenty year occupancy requirement.
   The resale restrictions for affordable units shall be removed after a
qualified purchaser has occupied the unit as their primary residence for at
least twenty (20) years. However, the silent second note will remain with the
property secured by the deed of trust or other applicable document for an
additional ten (10) years. The silent second will be released by the County in
thirty (30) years as long as the low-income purchaser occupies the unit as
their primary residence for this duration.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.126.   Subordination policy.
   (a)   Subordination requests shall meet County requirements and policies and
may include the following considerations:
   (1)   The amount of the new loan may only include the current balance of the
senior debt plus debt to pay for all or a portion of the closing costs of the
refinance/2nd with no cash out.
   (2)   The new loan must not have a balloon or negative amortization feature.
   (3)   The new primary loan (fixed interest rate only) is reduced and/or
monthly payment are recorded.
   (4)   If the purpose for the new loan to which the County is to be
subordinate is for home improvements, educational, medical, or similar
purposes, not to exceed ninety percent (90%) of the appraised value that has
been documented by a qualified third party specialist, the borrower may
increase the amount of the new loan with these funds being placed in a
supervised escrow account and relevant bills are to be paid out of this
account.
   (b)   The County of Yolo shall not subordinate its deed of trust to an
increase risk/less security position, except for exceptional/special
circumstances to be determined by the Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services Director. Exceptions are defined as any action that would depart from
policy and procedures stated in the County’s policies. Consideration of an
exception/special circumstance may be initiated by the County or its agent. A
report on the situation will be prepared. This report shall contain a
narrative, including the staff’s recommended course of action and any written
or verbal information supplied by the applicant. The Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Director shall make a determination of the exception/
special circumstances requested at a regular or special meeting of the Planning
Commission.
   (c)   If the borrower and the new loan comply with the above requirements,
the following information will be provided, if applicable:
   (1)   Borrower’s request for subordination, including a statement of the
reason for the refinance and supporting documentation of income, hardship, copy
of loan application, etc.
   (2)   Copy of the Lender’s instructions for escrow purposes, that specifies
proposed use of the borrowed funds, etc.
   (3)   Copy of the new loan documents, (i.e. Promissory Note, Deed of Trust,
and Loan Disclosure to show the amount of the new loan, rate of interest and
terms of the proposed financing).
   (4)   Copy of the current appraisal, credit report, and preliminary title
report.
   (5)   A completed Subordination Agreement for County execution will allow
the County to finish processing the request in the event the subordination is
approved.
   (6)   A Request for Notice of Default or Sale.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.127.   Refinancing policy.
   The County may approve a request to subordinate an Inclusionary Housing
restriction in order for the owner to refinance the property under the
following conditions:
   (a)   The lien position of the County loan will remain the same.
   (b)   The purpose of the new primary loan (fixed rate only) is to reduce the
interest rate being paid and/or reduce the homeowner’s home loan payment.
   (c)   No equity cash out is being taken.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.128.   Affordable rent determinations.
   The Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department will
calculate the initial rents which should be affordable to low and very low
income households at the time that the units will be marketed and made
available for rent. The developer is to provide information on the utilities
that will be included in the rent and the utilities for which the tenants will
be responsible (including the specific type of service).
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.129.   Buyer screening.
   Buyer screening shall be required through a lender certification process or
by the developer in a manner approved by the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Director.
   Resale. The maximum sales price permitted on resale of an inclusionary unit
designated for owner-occupancy shall be the seller's lawful market rate price,
minus the ratio in percent of the silent second at the time of initial
purchase.
   All housing that is subject to this ordinance shall be available to all
persons regardless of race, color, ethnicity, national origin, ancestry,
familial status, disability, gender, marital status, religion, age, sexual
orientation, and source of income. Moreover, no rental units subject to this
ordinance shall discriminate against persons who have federal, state, or local
subsided rental assistance, including but not limited to the Section 8 Housing
Choice Voucher program.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.130.   Exempted residential projects.
   The following residential projects are exempt from this ordinance and
generate no obligation to provide an inclusionary housing component:
   (a)   Single Family Residential projects proposed to contain nine (9) or
fewer residential dwellings at one (1) location may be exempted from the
inclusionary requirement provided that in-lieu fees shall be assessed on a unit
percentage basis;
   (b)   Multifamily Residential projects proposed to contain seven (7) or
fewer residential dwellings at one (1) location may be exempted from the
inclusionary requirement provided that in lieu fees shall be assessed on a unit
percentage basis;
   (c)   Individual single family dwellings for which construction costs do not
exceed those meeting the low income or below requirements as defined in this
ordinance.
   (d)   Replacement of a structure with a new structure of the same gross
floor area and use at the same site or lot when such replacement occurs within
twelve (12) consecutive months of the demolition or destruction of the prior
residence.
   (e)   Replacement of a structure with a new structure that does not exceed
five-hundred (500) square feet.
   (f)   Housing constructed in a self-help housing program that serves owner-
occupants below eighty percent (80%) of area median income.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.131.   Appeals.
   An applicant or any aggrieved person may appeal decisions of the hearing
body as provided by Article 13 of the Yolo County Code, as amended.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.132.   Grandfather provisions.
   Any Sale/Resale Restriction Agreement executed prior to the adoption of this
Inclusionary Housing Ordinance shall conform to the provisions of this
ordinance.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.133.   Enforcement.
   The County may institute any appropriate legal actions or proceedings to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, including but not
limited to: (a) actions to revoke, deny, or suspend any permit, including a
building permit, certificate of occupancy, or discretionary approval; (b)
actions to recover from any violator appropriate civil fines, administrative
penalties, restitution, and/or enforcement costs, including attorney’s fees;
(c) eviction or foreclosure; (d) criminal prosecution of any violator; and (e)
any other appropriate action for injunctive relief or damages. The failure of
the County to fulfill or enforce the requirements of this ordinance shall not
excuse any person, owner, or other party from compliance with the requirements
of this ordinance.
(Ord. 1451, eff. January 1, 2015)
Chapter 9
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS
Sections:
   
8-9.101   Purpose.
   
8-9.102   Applicability.
   
8-9.103   Procedure.
   
8-9.104   Approval findings.
   
8-9.105   Conditions of approval.
   
8-9.106   Appeals.
Sec. 8-9.101.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a procedure for individuals with
disabilities to request reasonable accommodation in seeking equal access to
housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment
and Housing Act (hereafter “Acts”) in the application of zoning laws and other
land use regulations, policies, and procedures.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-9.102.   Applicability.
   (a)   A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with
a disability or their representative, when the application of a requirement of
this zoning code or other County requirement, policy, or practice acts as a
barrier to fair housing opportunities. For the purposes of this chapter, a
“person with a disability” is any person who has a physical, developmental, or
mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life
activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or anyone who has
a record of such impairment. This chapter is intended to apply to those persons
who are defined as disabled under the Acts.
   (b)   A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or
exception to the rules, standards, and practices for the siting, development,
and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate
regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to
housing of their choice.
   (c)   A reasonable accommodation is granted only to the household that needs
the accommodation and does not apply to successors in interest to the site.
   (d)   A reasonable accommodation may be granted in compliance with this
chapter without the need for the approval of a variance.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-9.103.   Procedure.
   (a)   A request for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an
application form provided by the Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services Department or in the form of a letter to the Director of the Planning,
Public Works and Environmental Services Department, and shall contain the
following information:
   (1)   The applicant’s name, address, and telephone number;
   (2)   Address of the property for which the request is being made;
   (3)   The current use of the property;
   (4)   The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled
under the Acts, including verification of such claim;
   (5)   The zoning code provision, regulation, or policy from which reasonable
accommodation is being requested; and
   (6)   Why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific
property accessible to the individual.
   (b)   If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is
being made requires some other discretionary approval (including use permit,
design review, etc.), then the applicant shall file the information required by
subsection (a) of this section for concurrent review with the application for
discretionary approval.
   (c)   A request for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the
Director of the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department or
his/her designee, if no approval is sought other than the request for
reasonable accommodation. The Director or his/her designee shall make a written
determination within forty-five (45) days of the application being deemed
complete and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for
reasonable accommodation.
   (d)   A request for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review
with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission. The written determination on whether to grant or deny the
request for reasonable accommodation shall be made by the Planning Commission
in compliance with the applicable review procedure for the discretionary
review.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-9.104.   Approval findings.
   The written decision to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation
will be consistent with the Acts and shall be based on consideration of the
following factors:
   (a)   Whether the housing in the request will be used by a person with a
disability under the Acts;
   (b)   Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make
specific housing available to a person with a disability under the Acts;
   (c)   Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue
financial, administrative or enforcement burden on the County;
   (d)   Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a
fundamental alteration in the nature of a County program or law, including but
not limited to land use and zoning;
   (e)   Potential impact on surrounding uses;
   (f)   Physical attributes of the property and structures; and
   (g)   Other reasonable accommodations that may provide an equivalent level
of benefit.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-9.105.   Conditions of approval.
   In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the Director of the
Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department or his/her
designee, or the Planning Commission as the case might be, may impose any
conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the
reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings. The conditions shall
also state whether the accommodation granted shall be removed in the event that
the person for whom the accommodation was requested no longer resides on the
site.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-9.106.   Appeals.
   Any person dissatisfied with any action of the Director, or the Planning
Commission, pertaining to this chapter may appeal to the Planning Commission,
or Board of Supervisors, within ten (10) days after written notice of the
Director’s or Planning Commission‘s decision is sent to the applicant,
according to the provisions contained in
Chapter 2, Sec.
8-2.225.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Chapter 10
MOBILE HOME PARK CONVERSION ORDINANCE
Sections:
   
8-10.101   Purpose.
   
8-10.102   Application required.
   
8-10.103   Conversion impact report.
   
8-10.104   Relocation plan.
   
8-10.105   Survey of residents.
   
8-10.106   Required findings.
   
8-10.107   Conditions of approval.
   
8-10.108   No increase in rent.
   
8-10.109   Violations.
Sec. 8-10.101.   Purpose.
   The purpose of the Mobile Home Park Conversion Ordinance is to ensure that
any conversion of these parks to other uses is preceded by adequate notice,
that the social and fiscal impacts of the proposed conversion are adequately
defined prior to consideration of a proposed conversion, and that relocation
and other assistance is provided to park residents when warranted, consistent
with the provisions of this ordinance and the California Government Code,
Sections 65863.7, 65863.8, 66427.4, and 66427.5.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-10.102.   Application required.
   The conversion of an existing mobile home park to another use, or the
closing of a mobile home park, shall require a Major Use Permit to be reviewed
and approved by the Planning Commission. An application for such permit shall
include the following and such other information as may be required by the
Planning Director:
   (a)   A general description of the proposed use to which the mobile home
park is to be converted, including a narrative and site plan.
   (b)   The proposed timetable for implementation of the conversion and
development of the site.
   (c)   A report on the impact of the conversion of the mobile home park on
its residents and a disposition/relocation plan addressing the availability of
replacement housing for existing residents of the mobile home park consistent
with Section 65863.7 of the California Government Code.
   (d)   A survey of support by the residents of the proposed conversions,
consistent with Section 66427.5 of the California Government Code.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-10.103.   Conversion impact report.
   The conversion impact report shall include the following information:
   (a)   Detailed description of the mobile home spaces within the mobile home
park;
   (b)   The monthly rent currently charged for each space, including any
utilities or other costs paid by the present resident(s) thereof to the park
owner;
   (c)   Name and mailing address of the primary resident(s) of each mobile
home;
   (d)   A list of all comparable mobile home parks within the area. This list
shall include the number of spaces and vacancies, a schedule of rents, and the
criteria for acceptance of new tenants and mobile homes.
   (e)   An analysis of the economic impact of the relocation on each resident
including the estimated costs of moving a mobile home and personal property to
a comparable mobile home park.
   (f)   A relocation plan for which the applicant agrees to pay all reasonable
moving expenses to a comparable mobile home park within the area to any mobile
home resident who relocates from the park after County approval of the Use
Permit authorizing conversion of the park.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-10.104.   Relocation plan.
   (a)   The reasonable cost of relocation and moving expenses shall include
the cost of relocating a displaced homeowner’s mobile home; payment of any
security deposit required at the new site; and the reasonable difference (up to
twenty-five percent (25%)) between the rent paid in the existing park and any
higher rent at the new site for the first twelve (12) months of the relocated
tenancy. Relocation assistance shall not exceed the in-place value of a unit.
When any resident has given notice of his intent to move prior to County
approval of the Use Permit, eligibility to receive moving expenses shall be
forfeited.
   (b)   If the Planning Commission determines that a particular mobile home
cannot be relocated to a comparable mobile home park within the area, and the
mobile home owner has elected to sell his or her mobile home, the relocation
plan shall identify those mobile homes, the reasons why the mobile homes cannot
be relocated, then the Planning Commission shall, as a part of the reasonable
cost of relocation as provided for in Government Code Section 65863.7(e)
require the applicant to provide for purchasing the mobile home of a displaced
home owner at its in-place market value.
   Such value shall be determined after consideration of relevant factors,
including the value of the mobile home in its current location including the
blocks and any skirting, siding, porches, decks, storage sheds, cabanas, and
awnings, and assuming the continuation of the mobile home park in a safe,
sanitary, and well maintained condition, and not considering the effect of the
change of use on the value of the mobile home. If a dispute arises as to the
in-place value of a mobile home, the applicant and the homeowner shall have
appraisals prepared by separate, or mutually agreed upon, qualified MAI
appraisers with experience in establishing the value of mobile homes. The
Planning Commission shall determine the in-place value based upon the average
of the appraisals submitted by the applicant and mobile home owner.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-10.105.   Survey of residents.
   The Planning Commission may consider in its deliberations the results of the
survey of support by the residents of the proposed conversion, prepared
consistent with Section 66427.5 of the California Government Code.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-10.106.   Required findings.
   The Planning Commission may approve a Use Permit for a mobile home park
conversion if it finds that the proposed conversion meets the following
requirements, in addition to the requirements of
Chapter 2, Section
8-2.217:
   (a)   That the proposed use of the property is consistent with the General
Plan or any community plan, and all applicable provisions of this ordinance are
met;
   (b)   That the residents of the mobile home park have been adequately
notified of the proposed conversion, including information pertaining to the
anticipated timing of the proposed conversion.
   (c)   That there exists land zoned for new or replacement comparable mobile
home parks or adequate space is available in other comparable mobile home parks
within the area for the residents who will be displaced.
   (d)   That the conversion will not result in the displacement of any
residents without other acceptable options to mitigate loss of housing.
   (e)   That the age, type, size, and style of mobile homes to be displaced as
a result of the conversion will be able to be relocated into other comparable
mobile home parks within the area or that the applicant has agreed to purchase
any mobile home that cannot be relocated at its in-place value as provided for
in this section.
   (f)   That if the mobile home park is to be converted to another residential
use, the mobile home residents to be displaced shall be provided the right of
first refusal to purchase, lease, rent, or otherwise obtain residency in the
replacement dwelling units, and the construction schedule for such replacement
dwelling units shall not result in a displacement of unreasonable length for
those mobile home residents electing to relocate in these replacement units;
   (g)   That any mobile home residents displaced as a result of the conversion
shall be compensated by the applicant for all reasonable costs incurred as a
result of their relocation; and
   (h)   That the relocation plan mitigates the impacts of the displacement of
individuals or households for a reasonable transition period and mitigates the
impacts of any long-term displacement.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-10.107.   Conditions of approval.
   The Planning Commission shall impose the following conditions of approval
for a Use Permit for a mobile home park conversion, in addition to any other
conditions as might be required:
   (a)   The applicant shall implement a relocation plan that shall make
adequate provisions for the relocation of all mobile homes and mobile home
residents to be displaced as a result of the conversion. Such plan shall
include provisions to relocate such mobile homes and mobile home residents in
comparable mobile home parks within the area.
   (b)   The applicant shall bear all reasonable costs of relocating mobile
homes and mobile home residents displaced by the conversion. Such costs may
also include the cost of in place value of mobile homes which cannot be
relocated, pursuant to this section, or establishing a new mobile home park for
the relocation of displaced mobile homes.
   (c)   The Planning Commission shall establish the date on which the permit
for conversion will become effective. Such date shall not be less than one (1)
year from approval of the Use Permit, provided that conversion at an earlier
date may be approved if the Commission receives a written petition requesting
an earlier date signed by a majority of those persons residing in the subject
mobile home park at the time of the public hearing to consider the conversion
application. The effective date of the approval in such a case shall be the
date set forth in the petition. Conversion at the earlier date may be approved
only if the applicant has complied with all the provisions of an approved
relocation plan and submitted evidence of such compliance to the Planning
Director.
   (d)   No building or grading permit shall be issued for the development of a
new use to which a mobile home park is being converted, pursuant to this
chapter unless and until the applicant has filed with the Planning Director a
verified statement made under penalty of perjury that all conditions of
approval have been met or otherwise incorporated into the final project plans
including the payment of all relocation assistance required pursuant to this
section. Such statement shall identify in itemized form each payee, the amount
paid, the date of payment, and the type of relocation or other assistance for
which each such payment was made.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-10.108.   No increase in rent.
   A resident's rent shall not be increased within two (2) months prior to
filing an application for conversion of a mobile home park, nor shall the rent
be increased to an amount greater than the Consumer Price Index for one (1)
year from the date of filing of the conversion application or until relocation
takes place, whichever is later.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-10.109.   Violations.
   In addition to any remedies or penalties for noncompliance with any County
Ordinance as provided elsewhere in the County Code, any park owner or applicant
who violates any rights of any mobile home owner or mobile home resident
established under this section shall be liable to said person for actual
damages caused by such violation, plus costs and reasonable attorney's fees. In
addition, no park owner shall take any willful action to threaten, retaliate
against, or harass any park resident with the intent to prevent such residents
from exercising his or her rights under this section.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Chapter 11
HISTORIC LANDMARKS
Sections:
   
8-11.101   Purpose.
   
8-11.102   Standards for designation of historic landmarks and historic
districts.
   
8-11.103   Procedure for designation of historic landmarks and historic
districts.
   
8-11.104   Permit required.
   
8-11.105   Design review guidelines.
   
8-11.106   Application for permit.
   
8-11.107   Procedure upon applications requiring Commission review.
   
8-11.108   Criteria for evaluating application.
   
8-11.109   Commission restricted to exterior features only.
   
8-11.110   Special considerations.
   
8-11.111   Limit on application within one year.
   
8-11.112   Exemptions from regulations.
   
8-11.113   Pre-existing building permits.
   
8-11.114   Appeals from actions of the Historic Preservation Commission.
   
8-11.115   Appeals from actions of the Director.
   
8-11.116   Regulations enforced by Building Official.
   
8-11.117   Violation is a nuisance and may be abated.
   
8-11.118   Criminal penalty for violation.
   
8-11.119   Remedies are cumulative.
Sec. 8-11.101.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare by providing for the identification, protection, enhancement,
perpetuation and use of improvements, buildings, structures, signs, objects,
features, sites, places and areas within the County that reflect elements of
its cultural, agricultural, social economic, political, aesthetic, military,
maritime, engineering, archaeological, religious, ethnic, natural,
architectural and other heritage for the following reasons:
   (a)   To safeguard the County’s heritage as embodied and reflected in such
resources;
   (b)   To encourage public knowledge, understanding, and appreciation of the
County’s past;
   (c)   To promote their use for the education and welfare of other residents
of the County;
   (d)   To strengthen the economy of the County by protecting and enhancing
the County’s attraction to tourists, visitors and residents;
   (e)   To stabilize and improve property values in historic areas of
structures and objects for the ultimate aesthetic and economic benefit of the
County;
   (f)   To provide increased availability to building owners of construction
code, financing aids and tax benefits permitted under State and Federal laws
when buildings have been designated a historic landmark status or lie within a
designated historic district; and
   (g)   To enhance the visual character of the County by encouraging new
design and construction that complement the County’s historic buildings.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.102.   Standards for designation of historic landmarks and historic
districts.
   (a)   A building, structure, object, particular place, vegetation or
geology, may be designated for preservation as a historic landmark if it meets
one or more of the following criteria:
   (1)   It exemplifies or reflects valued elements of the County’s cultural,
agricultural, social, economic, political, aesthetic, military, religious,
ethnic, natural vegetation, architectural, maritime, engineering,
archaeological or geological history; or
   (2)   It is identified with persons or events important in local, State or
national history; or
   (3)   It reflects significant geographical patterns, including those
associated with different eras of settlement and growth and particular
transportation modes; or
   (4)   It embodies distinguishing characteristics or an architectural style,
type, period, or method of construction or is a valuable example of the use of
indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or
   (5)   It is representative of the notable work of a builder, designer or
architect; or
   (6)   It represents an important natural feature or design element that
provides a visual point of reference to members of the community.
   (b)   An area may be designated as a historic district when it includes at
least two (2) designated historic landmarks in such proximity that they create
a setting historically or culturally significant to the local community, the
state, or the nation, sufficiently distinguishable from other areas of the
County to warrant preservation by such means. Such district may include
structures and sites that individually do not meet criteria for landmark status
but which geographically and visually are located so as to be part of the
setting in which the other structures are viewed.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.103.   Procedure for designation of historic landmarks and historic
districts.
   (a)   For the purposes of this chapter, the Yolo County Planning Commission
is designated and shall act as the Historic Preservation Commission.
   (b)   The Historic Preservation Commission, upon its own initiative or upon
request of any affected property owner or County agency, by resolution may
recommend to the Board of Supervisors designation of a Historic Landmark or
Historic District upon compliance with the following procedure:
   (1)   Information concerning the proposal shall be filed with the Planning
and Public Works Department and shall include:
   (i)   The assessor’s parcel number for the site;
   (ii)   A description detailing the special aesthetic, cultural,
architectural, or engineering interest or value of a historic nature;
   (iii)   A detailed site plan;
   (iv)   Sketches, drawings, photographs or other descriptive material showing
what is to be designated;
   (v)   A statement of condition of the structure, object, or particular
place;
   (vi)   Such other information as reasonably may be requested by the
Commission or the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department.
   (2)   The proposal shall be considered at a public hearing. Notice of the
time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall be given by the Planning, Public
Works and Environmental Services Department in a newspaper of the general
circulation in the County and by mail to each owner of property subject to the
proposed designation as a historic landmark or inclusion in the historic
district, and adjacent property owners not less than fifteen (15) calendar days
prior to the date of hearing. A copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter
shall be mailed to the property owners only.
   (3)   Recommendation of designation of all or part of the proposal shall be
based on enumerated facts which show that the standards contained in this
article for designation as a historic landmark or a historic district have been
met.
   (c)   Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Historic Preservation
Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall approve, modify or disapprove the
recommendation upon compliance with the following procedure:
   (1)   A public hearing on the matter shall be scheduled for the next regular
meeting consistent with demands of the agenda. Notice of the time, place, and
purpose of such hearing shall be given by the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
in a newspaper of general circulation in the County and by mail to each owner
of property subject to the proposed designation not less than fifteen (15)
calendar days prior to the date of hearing.
   (2)   Final approval of the recommendation for designation shall be by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
shall give written notice of such designation to each owner of property subject
to the designation and other persons or agencies requesting notice thereof.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.104.   Permit required.
   No person shall demolish, remove, move, or make alterations which affect the
exterior appearance of, or cause excavations which affect a designated historic
landmark or undertake the same with respect to any structure located in a
designated historic district without first obtaining written approval from the
Historic Preservation Commission; excepting therefrom those items specified in
the design review guidelines or work authorized by the Building Official upon
written approval of the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Department for protection of public safety.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.105.   Design review guidelines.
   The intent of this article is to safeguard the County’s heritage as embodied
and reflected in the historic resources. The County recognizes the need for a
balance between the historic value of a landmark and a property owner’s rights.
Future construction or exterior alterations to historic landmarks will require
design review by either the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Department staff or the Historic Preservation Commission. The criteria for the
method of review of repair or alteration plans is as follows:
   (a)   The following items are exempt from this article. Prior to issuance of
a building permit for any of these items, the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department shall confirm conformity of the project with
these exclusions: house painting; routine maintenance or repair; landscaping
including sprinkler system work; flat concrete work; all interior alterations;
and screens and awnings.
   (b)   The following items do not require review by the Historic Preservation
Commission. Approval by the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Department will be issued upon approval of a building permit. The Department
may refer applications to the Historic Preservation Commission as deemed
reasonably necessary in the discretion of the Department Director: roofing;
front, back and side yard fences or walls; retaining wall; chimney and
foundation work; alterations or replacement of windows and exterior doors;
solar collectors on roof; mechanical systems including air-conditioning and
heating.
   (c)   The following projects which affect the exterior appearance of the
structure shall be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Commission, if the
estimate and construction cost is in excess of Five Hundred and no/100ths
($500.00) Dollars: repairs to replace or replicate original architecture;
surfacing or re-surfacing exterior walls; additions or alterations to porches.
(Building permit fees are exempted for such projects.)
   (d)   The following item requires review by the Historic Preservation
Commission and will require a building permit: room additions to historic
structures.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.106.   Application for permit.
   (a)   A property owner who desires to construct, move, remove or demolish a
designated historic landmark or any structure within a designated historic
district shall file an application with the Planning, Public Works and
Environmental Services Department upon a form prescribed by the County. The
application shall include all necessary information required by the rules of
the Historic Preservation Commission. When the application is filed it shall be
referred to the Historic Preservation Commission.
   (b)   Alterations. A property owner who desires to alter a designated
historic landmark or any structure within a designated historic district is
subject to design review guidelines criteria specified in Section
8-11.105 of this article.
   (c)   Application Contents. The owner shall file an application with the
Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department upon a form
prescribed by the County. The application shall include all necessary
information required by the rules of the Historic Preservation Commission.
   (d)   Process. If the proposed alteration does not require review by the
Historic Preservation Commission, the application shall be referred to the
Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department for review.
   If the proposed alteration requires review by the Historic Preservation
Commission, the application shall be referred to the Historic Preservation
Commission.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.107.   Procedure upon applications requiring Commission review.
   (a)   Upon the filing of an application requiring review by the Historic
Advisory Commission, the Secretary of the Historic Preservation Commission
shall refer the matter to any local Historical Society or Committee, set the
matter for hearing and shall give written notice to the applicant. The
secretary shall cause publication of notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the County of the date, time, and place of the hearing. Any
local Historical Society or Committee shall have thirty (30) days in which to
review and make a recommendation. The Commission shall hold a public hearing
and shall make its decision within ninety (90) days from the date the
application is filed with the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services
Department. The Commission may approve an application for demolition or stay
the application for a period up to ninety (90) days in order to seek an
alternative to demolition. If the Commission fails to act within ninety (90)
days, the application shall be considered approved unless the applicant and the
Commission agree to an extension of time.
   (b)   At the conclusion of the hearing the Commission shall make its
decision and shall file a letter of approval with the Building Official or deny
the application. No person may do any work upon a designated historic landmark
or any structure within a designated historic district which requires
Commission approval, and the Building Official shall not issue a building
permit, until the Commission files a letter of approval.
   (c)   Approved work shall begin within one (1) year from the date of
approval.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.108.   Criteria for evaluating application.
   In reviewing and acting upon each application, the Commission shall
consider:
   (a)   The recommendations of any local Historical Society or Committee;
   (b)   The historical value and significance, or the architectural value and
significance, or both, of the designated historic landmark or of the structure
within a designated historic district and its relation to the historical value
of the surrounding area;
   (c)   The relationship of the exterior architectural features of the
structure to the rest of the structure itself and to the surrounding area;
   (d)   The general compatibility of the exterior design, arrangement, texture
and material which is proposed by the applicant;
   (e)   Plans for structures which have little or no historic value or plans
for new construction for their compatibility with surrounding structures;
   (f)   Conformance with the design review guidelines specified in Section
8-11.105 of this article;
   (g)   Conformance with the Yolo County General Plan or applicable area
general plan.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.109.   Commission restricted to exterior features only.
   The Commission shall consider and pass upon only the exterior features of a
designated historical landmark, or new structures upon sites located within a
designated historic district unless the applicant voluntarily requests that
interior features be included.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.110.   Special considerations.
   (a)   If an application proposes to move, remove, or demolish a structure
which the Commission considers will be a great loss to the County, the
Commission shall not approve the project unless it finds that the project
proponent has been unable to develop any reasonably economically feasible
alternative plan for the preservation of the structure. The owner shall be
required to show documented evidence to the Commission of a good faith attempt
(i.e., seeking funding and advertising the structure for purchase) to save the
property.
   (b)   If the Commission finds that the proposed construction or alteration
will not materially impair the historical and architectural value of the
structure, it shall approve the application.
   (c)   If the Commission finds that the retention of the structure
constitutes a hazard to public safety and the hazard cannot be eliminated by
economic means available to the owner, the Commission shall approve the
application for demolition.
   (d)   The Commission may approve the moving of a structure of historical or
architectural value as a last alternative to demolition if the Commission finds
that all other options for maintaining the structure on the site have been
exhausted.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.111.   Limit on application within one year.
   No application for the same or substantially similar work may be filed
within one (1) year after the Commission has disapproved it.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.112.   Exemptions from regulations.
   The regulations contained herein which require approval by the Historic
Preservation Commission do not apply to work exempted from such review by
Section
8-11.105 of this chapter, design review guidelines.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.113.   Pre-existing building permits.
   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to construction, alteration,
moving, removing, or demolition of a designated historic landmark or a
structure within a designated historic district started under a building permit
issued before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.114.   Appeals from actions of the Historic Preservation Commission.
   (a)   Filing. The action of the Historic Preservation Commission on any
decision made pursuant to this chapter shall be final unless, within fifteen
(15) days after such action, any person with standing to appeal shall appeal
therefrom by filing a written appeal with the Board of Supervisors together
with an appeal fee as established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
Such appeal shall specifically delineate the decision which is appealed and
specifically recite the grounds for the appeal.
   (b)   Hearings; Setting; Notices. At the second regular meeting after the
filing of an appeal, the Board of Supervisors shall set a date for a hearing
upon such appeal and shall give notice thereof to all interested parties in the
manner specified for the hearing of initial applications as set forth in
Section
8-11.103 of this chapter.
   (c)   Decisions. Upon hearing the appeal, the Board of Supervisors shall
either announce its findings and decision or announce its intention and order
the preparation of formal written findings and its decision for subsequent
adoption.
   (d)   Procedures. All appeals pursuant to this article shall be heard by the
Board of Supervisors pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section
8-2.225 of
Chapter 2. No official action such as the issuance of a building permit,
license or other type of permit shall be taken while an appeal or proceedings
for designation are pending.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.115.   Appeals from actions of the Director.
   All decisions of the Director may be appealed to the Historic Preservation
Commission in the same manner and upon the payment of the same fees as provided
for appeals of Zoning Administrator decisions by Section
8-2.225 of this title. No official action such as the issuance of a building
permit, license or other type of permit shall be taken while an appeal or
proceedings for designation are pending.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.116.   Regulations enforced by Building Official.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Building Official of
the County with the aid of persons from such other County departments as may be
requested by the Building Official. The Building Official shall make applicable
the State Historic Building Code (California Administration Code, Title 24,
Part 8) in reviewing all plans, in permitting repairs, alterations and
additions necessary for the preservation, restoration, moving or continued use
of a historic building or structure made under the provision embodied in this
chapter.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.117.   Violation is a nuisance and may be abated.
   A person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of
maintaining a public nuisance. An authorized employee of the Building
Department may mail written notice to the owner that a violation exists. The
owner then shall have thirty (30) days to remedy the violation. The notice
shall state that if the violation is not corrected within the time specified,
legal proceedings to abate the violation shall be instituted. The County may
follow the procedure conferred by Government Code Sections 38773, 38773.5,
Civil Code Section 3494, Code of Civil Procedure Section 731, or other lawful
authority.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.118.   Criminal penalty for violation.
   A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be punished by a fine of up to Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00)
Dollars, imprisonment for up to six (6) months in the County Jail, or both.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-11.119.   Remedies are cumulative.
   The remedies for violation of the provisions of this chapter are alternative
and cumulative rather than exclusive in nature.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Chapter 12
HOUSING DENSITY BONUSES
Sections:
   
8-12.101   Purpose.
   
8-12.102   Definitions.
   
8-12.103   Approval of Density Bonus.
   
8-12.104   Amount of Density Bonus.
   
8-12.105   Incentives or concessions.
   
8-12.106   Development standards.
   
8-12.107   Additional incentives or concessions.
   
8-12.108   Additional density bonus for child care facility.
   
8-12.109   Application review and approval.
   
8-12.110   Resale and occupancy restrictions on target units.
   
8-12.111   Expiration and extension.
Sec. 8-12.101.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this section is to provide housing density bonus incentives
as required by State law (Sections 65915 and 65917 of the California Government
Code) for the production of housing for very low, low, and moderate income
households, and senior households. In enacting this section, it is the intent
of the County to facilitate the development of affordable housing and to
implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the County's Housing Element.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-12.102.   Definitions.
   Nonrestricted unit
   "Nonrestricted unit" means all units within a housing development excluding
the target units.
   Senior citizen housing development
   "Senior citizen housing development" means a residential development
developed, substantially rehabilitated, or substantially renovated for senior
citizens that has at least five (5) dwelling units and complies with the
requirements in Civil Code Section 51.3.
   Target unit
   "Target unit" means a dwelling unit within a housing development which will
be reserved for sale or rent to very low, low, or moderate income households,
as defined in the County’s Inclusionary Housing Requirements Ordinance, or to
senior citizens.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-12.103.   Approval of Density Bonus.
   (a)   The County shall grant a density bonus to an applicant or developer of
a housing development consisting of five (5) or more dwelling units, who agrees
to provide the following:
   (1)   At least another ten (10) percent of the total units of a housing
development for low income households; or
   (2)   At least another five (5) percent of the total units of a housing
development for very low income households; or
   (3)   A senior citizen housing development.
   (b)   All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be
rounded up to the next whole number.
   (c)   In determining the number of target units to be provided pursuant to
this section, the maximum residential density shall be multiplied by .05 where
very low income households are targeted, or by .10 where low income households
are targeted. The density bonus units shall not be included when determining
the total number of target units in the housing development. When calculating
the required number of target units, any fractions of units shall be rounded to
the next larger number.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-12.104.   Amount of Density Bonus.
   (a)   General Density Bonus. The density bonus shall be a density increase
of at least twenty (20) percent, unless a lesser percentage is elected by the
applicant/developer over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density.
The amount of density bonus to which the applicant/developer is entitled shall
vary according to the amount by which the percentage of affordable units
exceeds the percentage set forth in Section
8-12.103(a). For each percent increase above ten (10) percent in the percentage
of units affordable to low income households, the density bonus shall be
increased by one and one-half (1.5) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35)
percent. For each one (1) percent increase above five (5) percent in the
percentage of units affordable to very low income households, the density bonus
shall be increased by two and one-half (2.5) percent up to a maximum of thirty-
five (35) percent. For senior citizen housing developments, the density bonus
shall be a flat twenty (20) percent.
   (b)   Density Bonus for Condominium Projects. If a development does not meet
the requirements set forth above, but the applicant/developer agrees or
proposes to construct a condominium project as defined in subdivision (f) or a
planned development as defined in subdivision (k) of Section 1351 of the Civil
Code, in which at least another ten (10) percent of the total dwelling units
are reserved for persons and families of moderate income as defined in Section
50093 of the Health and Safety Code, a density bonus of at least five (5)
percent shall be granted, unless a lesser percentage is elected by the
applicant, over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density. For each
one (1) percent increase above ten (10) percent of the percentage of units
affordable to moderate-income households, the density bonus shall be increased
by one (1) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent.
   (c)   Density Bonus for Land Dedication. When an applicant for a tentative
subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential approval donates land to the
County and otherwise satisfies the requirements of Government Code Section
65915(g), the applicant shall be entitled to a fifteen (15) percent increase
above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density. For each one (1)
percent increase above the minimum ten (10) percent land donation, the density
bonus shall be increased by one (1) percent, up to a maximum of thirty-five
(35) percent. The land donation density bonus and general density bonus can be
used together, up to a combined maximum of thirty-five (35) percent.
   (d)   Upon request by the applicant, the County shall not require that a
housing development meeting the requirements of this section provide a
vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped parking that exceeds:
   (1)   For studio and one (1) bedroom projects: one (1) on-site parking space
per unit;
   (2)   For two (2) to three (3) bedroom projects: two (2) on-site parking
spaces per unit; and
   (3)   For four (4) and more bedroom projects: two and one-half (2.5) parking
spaces per unit.
   (e)   If the total number of parking spaces required for a housing
development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the
next whole number. For purposes of this subsection, a development may provide
“on-site parking” through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through
on-street parking.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-12.105.   Incentives or concessions.
   (a)   The County shall grant an incentive or concession unless the County
makes one of the following findings:
   (1)   The incentive or concession is not required in order to provide for
affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and
Safety Code, or for affordable rents for the targeted units.
   (2)   The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact, as
defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 65589.5, upon public
health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is
listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there
is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse
impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-
income households.
   (3)   The concession or incentive would be contrary to State or Federal law.
   (b)   In addition to the eligible density bonus percentage described in this
section, and in accordance with Government Code Section 65915(d)(2), the
applicant shall receive the following number of incentive(s) or concession(s):
   (1)   One (1) incentive or concession for projects that include at least ten
(10) percent of the total units for low income households, at least five (5)
percent for very low income households, or at least ten (10) percent for
persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned
development.
   (2)   Two (2) incentives or concessions for projects that include at least
twenty (20) percent of the total units for low income households, at least ten
(10) percent for very low income households, or at least twenty (20) percent
for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned
development.
   (3)   Three (3) incentives or concessions for projects that include at least
thirty (30) percent of the total units for low income households, at least
fifteen (15) percent for very low income households, or at least thirty (30)
percent for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned
development.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-12.106.   Development standards.
   (a)    The site shall be connected to public services, including a public
water and wastewater system.
   (b)   Target units shall be constructed concurrently with nonrestricted
units unless both the County and the applicant/developer agree, in writing, to
an alternative schedule for development.
   (c)   If the applicant/developer is entitled to a density bonus pursuant to
this chapter and the County grants at least one (1) additional incentive, the
applicant/developer shall agree to and ensure the continued affordability of
all low income and very low income target units for a minimum of thirty (30)
years or such longer period of time as required by the construction or mortgage
financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy
program. The target units for low income households shall be affordable at a
rent that does not exceed thirty (30) percent of eighty (80) percent of area
median income. The target units for very low income households shall be
affordable at a rent that does not exceed thirty (30) percent of fifty (50)
percent of area median income.
   (d)   In determining the maximum affordable rent or affordable sales price
of target units, the following household and unit size assumptions shall be
used, unless the housing development is subject to different assumptions
imposed by other governmental regulations:
   (1)   Studio: 1 person;
   (2)   1 bedroom: 2 person;
   (3)   2 bedroom: 3 person;
   (4)   3 bedroom: 4 person;
   (5)   4 bedroom: 5 person.
   (e)   Target units shall be dispersed within the housing development
wherever possible. Where feasible, the number of bedrooms of the target units
shall be equivalent to the bedroom mix of the nontarget units of the housing
development, except that the developer may include a higher proportion of
target units with more bedrooms. The design and appearance of the target units
shall be compatible with the design of the total housing development. Housing
developments shall comply with all applicable development and design standards,
except those which may be modified as provided by this section.
   (f)   Compliance with all of the provisions of this section shall be made a
condition of the discretionary planning permits (e.g., tentative subdivision
maps, tentative parcel maps, site plans, planned development permits,
conditional use permits, etc.) for all housing developments.
   (g)   Applicant/developer shall execute and record any agreements or
documents reasonably deemed necessary by the County to ensure compliance with
and implementation of this section.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-12.107.   Additional incentives or concessions.
   The need for additional incentives or concessions will vary for different
housing developments. Therefore, the allocation of additional incentives or
concessions shall be determined on a case-by-case basis. The additional
incentives or concessions may include any of the following:
   (a)   A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning
code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum
building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as
provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the
Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to:
   (1)   Reduced minimum lot sizes and/or dimensions.
   (2)   Reduced minimum lot setbacks.
   (3)   Reduced minimum outdoor and/or private outdoor living area.
   (4)   Increased maximum lot coverage.
   (5)   Increased maximum building height and/or stories.
   (6)   Reduced on-site parking standards, including the number or size of
spaces and garage requirements.
   (7)   Reduced minimum building separation requirements.
   (b)   Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing
development if commercial, office, industrial, or other non-residential land
uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial,
office, industrial, or other non-residential land uses are compatible with the
housing development and the existing or planned development in the area where
the proposed housing development will be located.
   (c)   Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant/
developer or the city that result in identifiable cost reductions.
   (d)   Priority processing of a housing development that provides income-
restricted units or a senior citizen housing development.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-12.108.   Additional density bonus for child care facility.
   (a)   Housing developments meeting the requirements of this section and
including a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as
part of or adjacent to, the housing development shall receive either of the
following:
   (1)   An additional density bonus that is an amount of square footage of
residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square footage
in the child care facility.
   (2)   An additional incentive or concession to be determined by the County
at its sole and complete discretion that contributes significantly to the
economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility.
   (b)   The density housing bonus agreement for the housing development shall
ensure that:
   (1)   The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time
that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the target
units are required to remain affordable.
   (2)   Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of
very low income households, low income households, or moderate income
households shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the
percentage of target units that are required pursuant to this section.
   (c)   The County shall not be required to provide a density bonus or
incentive or concession for a child care facility if it makes a written
finding, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child
care facilities.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-12.109.   Application review and approval.
   (a)   An application submitted pursuant to this section for a density bonus
and an additional incentive or concession shall be processed concurrently with
and in the same manner as any other application(s) required for the housing
development unless the development is granted priority processing. Final
approval or denial of a request for an additional incentive or concession shall
be made by the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   If an applicant/developer is requesting a waiver or modification of
development and zoning standards on the grounds that existing development and
zoning standards would otherwise inhibit utilization of a density bonus, such
request shall be made concurrently with any request for an additional incentive
or concession and shall be processed with and approved or denied in accordance
with the provisions herein. Waiver or modification of development and zoning
standards shall only be approved if the waiver or modification is necessary to
make the housing units economically feasible.
   (c)   Any approval or denial of a request for a waiver or modification of
development and zoning standards or an additional incentive or concession shall
be supported by written findings in support of such approval or denial.
   (d)   Nothing in this section requires the County to waive or reduce
development standards if the waiver or reduction would have a specific, adverse
impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon health,
safety, or the physical environment and for which there is no feasible method
to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact, or if the
waiver or reduction would have an adverse impact on any real property listed in
the California Register of Historic Resources or be contrary to State or
Federal law.
   (e)   An applicant/developer is strongly encouraged to submit a Pre-
application for the housing development prior to the submittal of any formal
requests for rezoning, subdivision map, Use Permit, or other approvals.
   (f)   If a waiver or modification of development and zoning standards is
requested, the application shall demonstrate how the existing development and
zoning standards inhibit the utilization of the density bonus on the specific
site and that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units
economically feasible.
   (g)   If an additional incentive or concession is requested, the application
shall describe why the additional incentive or concession is necessary to
provide the target units in accordance with this section.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-12.110.   Resale and occupancy restrictions on target units.
   An applicant shall agree to, and the City shall ensure that the initial
occupant of target units that are directly related to the receipt of the
density bonus in a housing project are persons and families of moderate income,
as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093, and that the units are
offered at an affordable housing cost, as defined in Health and Safety Code
Section 50052.5. Upon resale of the unit, the City shall enforce an equity
sharing agreement in accordance with Government Code section 65915.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-12.111.   Expiration and extension.
   (a)   Any waiver or modification of development and zoning standards and/or
the granting of additional incentives or concessions is project specific. In
any case where a housing development with approved waivers or modifications of
development and zoning standards and/or additional incentives or concessions
has not commenced construction within the time limit set by the Board of
Supervisors or within one (1) year, if no specific time limit has been set,
then without further action such waivers or modifications of development and
zoning standards and/or additional incentives or concessions shall be null and
void. Construction is deemed commenced, for purposes of this section, upon
issuance of a building permit for an approved dwelling unit.
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors may extend the deadline for commencement of
construction for a period or periods not to exceed twelve (12) months upon
receipt of a written request which shall include the reason for the delay and
the requested extension and any other information as reasonably deemed
necessary by the Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Director.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Chapter 13
ADDRESSING SYSTEM
Sections:
   
8-13.101   Purpose.
   
8-13.102   System description and maps.
   
8-13.103   Administration.
   
8-13.104   Assignment of numbers.
   
8-13.105   Display of numbers.
   
8-13.106   Names of roads.
   
8-13.107   Road naming requirements.
   
8-13.108   Road signs.
   
8-13.109   Penalties and appeals.
Sec. 8-13.101.   Purpose.
   This article is adopted to provide a Countywide comprehensive address
numbering system to enable emergency vehicles from fire, sheriff, and ambulance
services to respond quickly to calls and to facilitate postal and other
delivery service. A positive identification system that eliminates error and
confusion and aids prompt response is deemed to be in the public interest and
necessary to protect the public health, general welfare, and safety of the
citizens of the County.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-13.102.   System description and maps.
   (a)   The Yolo County Master Address Numbering System shall consist of index
lines corresponding to the Township Section Line System within the County. The
northwest corner of Section 4, T12N, R5W shall be designated as the point of
origin of the Yolo County Master Address Numbering System and is hereby
assigned the North-South grid reference number 1000 and the East-West grid
reference number 4000. One thousand numbers shall be allocated sequentially for
each Sectional increment to the east and south from the point of origin.
   (b)   The Yolo County Master Address Numbering System shall be delineated on
a series of maps at a scale of one (1) inch equals sixteen hundred (1,600)
feet. The maps shall show the grid index system and the address numbers
assigned. Maps at a scale other than one (1) inch equals sixteen hundred
(1,600) feet may be substituted in areas requiring greater precision or graphic
clarity. Copies of said maps shall be kept at the offices of the Planning,
Public Works and Environmental Services Department.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-13.103.   Administration.
   The system shall be implemented within the unincorporated areas of the
County by the Planning Director and supersedes any system used prior to its
implementation. Private road sign installation and fee reception shall be
accomplished by the Director of Planning, Public Works and Environmental
Services pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Technical assistance and
information shall be mutually exchanged among all County departments as may be
required in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. Funds, if any,
collected from fees pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained by the
Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-13.104.   Assignment of numbers.
   (a)   The Planning Director shall determine and assign all address numbers
to single-family dwellings, duplex residences, properties, and business
establishments and issue the same to property owners and occupants without
charge in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A record of all
numbers assigned pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained by the Planning
Director and open for inspection by the public during business hours.
   (b)   Multiple units within a residential, industrial, or commercial
building or complex shall be identified with a sequential numerical suffix and
shall be classified as apartment, suite, unit, or other classification as
determined to be appropriate by the Planning Director. There shall be no
duplications of identifiers within any building or complex.
   (c)   An address number for a particular location shall be assigned to the
principal access based on the incremental distance between index grid lines as
determined by the Planning Director.
   (d)   Odd numbers shall be assigned to the westerly and northerly sides of
all roads and even numbers assigned to the easterly and southerly sides of all
roads.
   (e)   The predominant direction of curvilinear and diagonal roads and
applicable index increments shall be determined by the Planning Director.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-13.105.   Display of numbers.
   (a)   Upon receipt of the address number from the Planning Director, the
owner of the property or building shall cause the number to be displayed upon
the building or land in such a manner as to be visible from the road upon which
the land or building fronts, and shall remove or obscure from public view any
old or obsolete number not in accordance with the system.
   (b)   In areas where buildings and/or property front roads where mail
delivery is provided, the number and street name shall be displayed upon
mailboxes or receptacles designed for receipt of mail.
   (c)   Where residences and/or properties front upon roads not receiving mail
delivery, the number and road name upon which the building and/or property
fronts shall be displayed upon mailboxes or receptacles at the intersection of
the frontage road and the road where mail delivery is provided.
   (d)   Where residences and/or properties are not clearly visible from the
road, access identification other than mailboxes shall be on four (4) inch by
four (4) inch wood posts, metal stakes, or equivalent markers elevated at least
three (3) feet for clear visibility and rapid directional identification.
   (e)   Residence and/or building address numbers shall be conspicuous to
ensure positive identification and placed at front doors, on lamp posts, near
garage doors, at driveway entrances, or other areas of similar proximity and
visibility.
   (f)   All address numbers shall be a minimum height of four (4) inches for
residential structures and six (6) inches for commercial structures, of
reflective and/or a color contrasting with the surface where placed.
   (g)   Before final inspection can be completed on new construction,
including additions and alterations, the building address and any unit
addresses assigned by the Planning Director shall be posted in accordance to
minimum standards.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-13.106.   Names of roads.
   (a)   The following process applies to naming of County roads:
   (1)   Any County road may be officially named or the official name may be
changed by the Board of Supervisors upon petition of sixty (60) percent of the
property owners whose property is serviced by the County road proposed to be
affected, upon recommendation by the Planning Director, or upon resolution of
intention by the Board of Supervisors.
   (2)   The Board of Supervisors may refer the proposed County road name to
the Planning Commission for report and recommendation. The petition,
recommendation, or resolution shall be set for hearing and notice posted at a
conspicuous place along the County road to be affected. Such posting is to be
made at least ten (10) days before the hearing. At the hearing or continued
hearing, the Board shall hear and consider all name proposals for such County
road, and upon the adoption or change thereof shall make an order in its
minutes officially designating the name for said County road. Thereafter, such
County road shall be known by the name so designated.
   (3)   Upon motion of the Board and without any resolution, hearing, or
notice, any County road which has not been officially named by the Board of
Supervisors shall be named by an order duly made and entered on the minutes of
the Board. Thereafter the road shall be known by the name thus designated.
   (b)   The following process applies to naming of private roads:
   (1)   Private road names shall be assigned to every access road that serves
four (4) or more dwellings and/or business establishments or combination
thereof, except in shopping centers, apartment-type developments, and other
multiuse developments as may be determined by the Planning Director.
   (2)   When naming or renaming private roads, the Planning Director shall
contact one property owner on the road, access road, or easement to circulate a
petition for selecting a name. If within thirty (30) days a new name has not
been submitted to the Planning Director, the County shall have the right to
select a name or new name for the road, access road, or easement.
   (3)   Any private road within the unincorporated area of the County may be
officially named or the existing name be changed by the Board of Supervisors
upon petition of sixty (60) percent of the property owners whose property is
serviced by the private road proposed to be affected, upon recommendation by
the Planning Director or upon a resolution of intention by the Board of
Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors may refer the proposed private road name
to the Planning Commission for report and recommendation. The petition shall be
set for hearing and notice posted at a conspicuous place along the private road
proposed to be affected. Such posting is to be made at least ten (10) days
before the hearing. At the hearing or continued hearing, the Board shall hear
and consider all name proposals for such private roads, and upon the adoption
or change thereof shall make an order in its minutes officially designating the
name for the private road. Thereafter such private road shall be known by the
name so designated.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-13.107.   Road naming requirements.
   (a)   Road name selections shall be made on the basis of appropriateness and
shall not exceed a length of seventeen (17) letters.
   (b)   Each road shall be known by the same name for its entire length, and
where roads change directions by an angle greater than ninety (90) degrees,
each directional segment shall be known by a different name, unless and except
for those roads deemed by the Director of Planning as meandering.
   (c)   An alphabetical list of all City streets and County road names in the
County shall be established and known as the Yolo County Master Road Index. The
list shall be compiled and maintained by the Planning Director. To provide
future road names which are easily understood in verbal and written
communications, new road names shall not be approved which have a similar
spelling or sound to names in the Yolo County Master Road Index or do not
conform to the specifications of this article.
   (d)   Road naming exceptions may be granted where general naming integrity
is otherwise preserved and name confusion is not likely to result.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-13.108.   Road signs.
   (a)   Private road signs shall be identical in design to that of public road
signs except the background color shall be brown for private road signs.
   (b)   The fee for private road signs, including the installation thereof,
shall be determined by the Board by resolution. All signs shall be installed by
the County Planning, Public Works and Environmental Services Department.
   (c)   Signs shall be required as a condition of approval for all private
roads created through the subdivision process. A fee as established by the
Board of Supervisors by resolution shall be imposed for each sign required.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-13.109.   Penalties and appeals.
   (a)   Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent,
employee, or otherwise, failing to comply with the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred ($300.00) dollars.
   (b)   Any individual whose property is affected by the implementation of
this article and who is dissatisfied with implementation as it applies to his/
her property may submit a written request for hearing by the Planning
Commission to the Planning Director. Such request must be received by the
Director or postmarked no later than fifteen (15) days after the Director sent
the individual notice of the Planning Director’s action. The appeal shall be
governed by the procedures set forth in Section
8-2.225 of
Chapter 2 of this title.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Chapter 14
DEFINITIONS
Sections:
   
8-14.101   Purpose.
   
8-14.102   Definitions.
Sec. 8-14.101.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to list all the definitions that apply to
this title in one place, including the definitions that have already been
inserted into individual chapters, articles, or sections.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014)
Sec. 8-14.102.   Definitions.
   Abutting
   “Abutting” shall mean land having a common property line or separated only
by an alley,
easement or private street.
   Accessory use
   “Accessory use” shall mean a use lawfully permitted in the zone, which use
is incidental to, and subordinate to, the principal use of the site or of a
main building on the site and serving a purpose which does not change the
character of the principal use, and which is compatible with other principal
uses in the same zone and with the purpose of such zone.
   Ancillary
   “Ancillary” shall mean subordinate to a main or principal use, or that which
serves as an aid.
   Appurtenant
   “Appurtenant” shall mean an addition to, an adjunct of, or attached to a
more important thing and passing with it upon sale, transfer, or conveyance.
   Building
   “Building” shall mean any structure having a roof, which structure is used,
or intended to be used, for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or
property. When such structure is divided into separate parts by one or more
unpierced walls extending from the ground or foundation up, each part shall be
deemed a separate building, except for minimum side yard requirements. The word
“building” shall include the word “structure.”
   Building, accessory
   “Accessory building” shall mean a detached subordinate building located on
the same building site as the main building and designed and intended for a use
which is subordinate to the use of the main building.
   Building height
   “Building height” shall mean the vertical distance from the average contact
ground level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the
roof, except that structures built in a special flood hazard area may use the
vertical distance from the base flood elevation, as defined in Section
8-4.201, to the highest point of the roof.
   Building, main
   “Main building” shall mean a building in which is conducted the principal
use of the building site on which such building is situated.
   Conditional use
   “Conditional use” shall mean a principal or accessory use of land or of
structures thereon, which use may be essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare in one or more zones, but which use may also impair the
integrity and character of the zone restrictions on the location and extent of
the use are imposed and enforced. Such use shall become a principal permitted
use or accessory use when all specific additional restrictions are completed
and permanently satisfied in conformance with an approved use permit. Should
such restrictions be of a continuing nature, the use shall remain conditional
so long as the restrictions are complied with but shall become an unlawful use
whenever and so long as the restrictions are not complied with. A conditional
use shall require a use permit from the appropriate authority.
   Incidental
   “Incidental” shall mean a use or activity that is accompanying but not a
major part of a primary use.
   Lot or ground coverage
   “Lot or ground coverage” shall mean the percentage of the total lot area
which is covered by structures.
   Lot area
   “Lot area” shall mean the total horizontal area included within lot lines
but excluding any portion of such area which has been dedicated for public
right-of-way purposes.
   Lot, corner
   “Corner lot” shall mean a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their
intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street, such streets or parts of
the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five
(135) degrees.
   Lot depth
   “Lot depth” shall mean the total horizontal area included within lot lines,
but excluding any portion of such area which has been dedicated for public
right-of-way purposes.
   Lot, interior
   “Interior lot” shall mean a lot other than a corner lot.
   Lot, key
   “Key lot” shall mean the first lot to the rear of a corner lot, the front
line of which key lot is a continuation of the side line of the corner lot
(exclusive of any alley) and fronting on the street which intersects or
intercepts the street upon which the corner lot fronts.
   Lot lines
   “Lot lines” shall mean the property lines bounding a lot. The definitions
set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to lots which are basically
square or rectangular in shape. When such definitions are not applicable due to
irregularity in the shape of the lot, as would be the case with a triangular or
wedge-shaped lot, “lot lines” shall be as determined by the Planning Director,
subject to appeal and review by the Commission.
   Lot line, front
   “Front lot line” shall mean, in the case of an interior lot, the line
separating the lot from the street right-of-way and, in the case of a corner
lot, the shorter street frontage.
   Lot line, rear
   “Rear lot line” shall mean the lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.
   Lot line, side
   “Side lot line” shall mean any lot boundary which is not a front or rear
yard line.
   Lot line, side street
   “Side street lot line” shall mean a side lot line separating a lot from a
street.
   Lot width
   “Lot width” shall mean the horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at right angles to the depth of the lot at the front yard setback
line. Whenever such definition cannot be applied due to irregularity in the
shape of the lot, the lot width shall be as determined by the Planning
Director, subject to appeal and review by the Commission.
   Principal use
   “Principal use” shall mean the primary use of land or a main building, which
use is compatible with the purpose of the zone and which is permitted in the
zone. If a use is listed in a specific zone as a principal permitted use, it
shall mean that the owner, lessee, or other person who has a legal right to use
the land, can conduct such principal permitted use, subject to general
limitations, such as health, safety, parking, drainage, utilities, access, site
plan and building permit review, approval, or conditional approved, and such
other limitations are generally applied to similarly situated uses in such
zone.
   Primary Dwelling
   “Primary Dwelling” shall mean a structure designed, intended, and use for
residential purposes, as elsewhere provided for herein. It shall not include
Ancillary Dwelling; Secondary Dwelling; Guest House; or Living Quarters.
   Residential density, gross
   “Gross residential density” or “residential units per gross acre” shall mean
the average number of units on one acre of land in a given area where the
acreage is based upon the total land in the area, including nonresidential
uses.
   Residential density, net
   “Net residential density” or “residential units per net acre” shall mean the
average number of residential units on one acre of land used or available for
residential purposes, subtracting out land used for non-residential purposes,
e.g., parking, landscaping, drainage or improvement areas, swimming pools,
garages, etc.
   Setback or setback line
   “Setback” or “setback line” shall mean a line established by the provisions
of this title or other provisions of this Code to govern the placement of
buildings or structures with respect to lot lines, streets, or alleys.
   Story
   “Story” shall mean that portion of a building included between the surface
of any floor and the surface next above such floor or, if there is no floor
above such floor, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above the
floor.
   Street line
   “Street line” shall mean the boundary between a street right-of-way and
abutting property,
   Structural alteration
   “Structural alteration” shall mean any change in the structural members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
   Structure
   “Structure” shall mean anything constructed, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground, including swimming pools, but excluding
driveways, patios, or parking spaces where the area is unobstructed from the
ground up (also see “Building”).
   Vehicle charging station
   “Vehicle charging station” shall mean one or more publicly available parking
spaces served by electric vehicle service equipment, as defined by state law.
   Yard
   “Yard” shall mean an open space, other than a court, on the same site with a
building, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward except for landscaping or as set forth elsewhere in this title, but not
including any portion of any street, alley, or road right-of-way except as set
forth elsewhere in this chapter.
   Yard, front
   “Front yard” shall mean a yard of uniform depth extending across the full
width of the lot between the front lot line and the nearest vertical support or
wall of the main building or enclosed or covered porch attached thereto. The
front yard of a corner lot shall mean the yard adjacent to the shorter street
frontage.
   Yard, rear
   “Rear yard” shall mean a yard of uniform depth extending across the full
width of the lot between the rear lot line and the nearest vertical support or
wall of the main building or enclosed or covered porch attached thereto;
provided, however, the rear yard of a corner lot shall extend only to the side
yard adjacent to the street.
   Yard, side
   “Side yard” shall mean a yard on each side of the main building extending
from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of each yard being measured
between the side line on the lot and the nearest vertical support or main wall
of each building or enclosed or covered porch attached thereto. A side yard on
the street side of a corner lot shall extend from the front yard to the rear
lot line.
(Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; as amended by §§ 2–3, Ord. 1522, eff. August
6, 2020)
Title 9
PARKS AND RECREATION
Chapters:
1.   Boating and Water Skiing
2.   Public Boating Facilities
3.   Park Regulations
4.   Speed Limits on the Sacramento River
5.   Streams and Rivers Commercial Boating
6.   Vessel Sanitation and Mooring
Chapter 1
BOATING AND WATER SKIING
Sections:
   
9-1.01   Scope.
   
9-1.02   Definitions.
   
9-1.03   Boats: Equipment.
   
9-1.04   Boats: Overloading.
   
9-1.05   Boats and other watercraft: Registration.
   
9-1.06   Boats and aquaplanes: Speed and manner of operation.
   
9-1.07   Boats and water skis: Reckless operation.
   
9-1.08   Boats, aquaplanes, and water skis: Operation in swimming areas.
   
9-1.09   Boats: Riding on gunwales and bows.
   
9-1.10   Boats: Operation by persons under influence of alcohol or narcotics.
   
9-1.11   Boats: Operation without consent.
   
9-1.12   Boats: Anchoring in passageways and channels. (Repealed).
   
9-1.13   Boats: Interference with navigation aids.
   
9-1.14   Boats: Use of sirens.
   
9-1.15   Aquaplaning and water skiing.
   
9-1.16   Designation and marking of certain areas.
   
9-1.17   Swimming in prohibited areas.
   
9-1.18   Dumping debris in water. (Repealed).
   
9-1.19   Shooting firearms across water.
   
9-1.20   Authorized boat races.
   
9-1.21   Authorized water shows.
   
9-1.22   Enforcement.
   
9-1.22.1   Wearing personal flotation device.
   
9-1.23   Violations.
Sec. 9-1.01.   Scope.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to and govern all public
waters, including, but not limited to, lakes and rivers, or portions thereof,
situated within the boundaries of the County over which the County has police
power jurisdiction, either exclusively or concurrently with the United States
or the State, or both, insofar as the provisions of this chapter do not
conflict with applicable statutes or regulations of the United States or the
State; provided, however, the provisions of this chapter shall not be held to
apply to documented vessels and their tows. (§ 1, Ord. 360)
Sec. 9-1.02.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Aquaplane” shall mean any device used for the transportation of one
or more persons upon the surface of the water, which device is pulled or towed
by any boat, vehicle, or other motive power by means of a rope, chain, cable,
wire, or other flexible connection, including, but not limited to, any plank,
surfboard, or water ski.
   (b)   “Boat” shall mean any undocumented vessel or device, except an
aquaplane or water ski, in or upon which vessel or device persons or property
may be transported upon, under, or over the surface of the water, including,
but not limited to, any boat, raft, barge, canoe, skiff, dinghy, rowboat,
sailboat, sailing vessel, yacht, motorboat, motor vessel, float, pontoon,
commercial boat, launch, or ship.
   (c)   “Documented vessel” shall mean any boat, commercial boat, barge,
sailing vessel, yacht, motorboat, launch, or ship documented by the United
States Coast Guard in accordance with the rules and regulations for the
navigation of inland waterways established by the Federal government.
   (d)   “Marked swimming area” shall mean any beach or water area set aside as
a swimming or bathing area, the boundaries of which are marked by buoys painted
orange and permanently anchored approximately 100 feet apart or conspicuously
posted from the shore by signs.
   (e)   “Motorboat” shall mean any boat propelled in whole or in part by a
motor, engine, or mechanical device of any kind, except oars or sails,
including boats temporarily equipped with detachable outboard motors.
   (f)   “Operate” shall mean the steering of a boat in any manner, or the
operation or manipulation of any outboard or inboard engine or motor used to
propel such boat, or the operation, use, or manipulation of oars, sails, or
other devices used as the propulsion of such boat.
   (g)   “Person” shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, estate, trust, or organization of any kind.
   (h)   “Approved” shall mean approved by the Commandant of the United States
Coast Guard. (§ 2, Ord. 360, as amended by § 1, Ord. 750, eff. March 10, 1976)
Sec. 9-1.03.   Boats: Equipment.
   (a)   Life preservers.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any
boat which is not equipped with at least one United States Coast Guard approved
life preserver, ring buoy, or buoyant cushion for each person on board, so
placed as to be readily accessible, and of appropriate size for each passenger.
No inflatable life preserver shall be deemed to comply with the provisions of
this subsection.
   No person shall use a recreational boat less than sixteen (16’) feet in
length or a canoe or kayak unless at least one personal flotation device of the
following types is on board for each person:
   (1)   Type I;
   (2)   Type II;
   (3)   Type III; and
   (4)   Type IV.
   No person shall use a recreational boat sixteen (16’) feet or more in
length, except a canoe or kayak, unless at least one personal flotation device
of the following types is on board for each person:
   (1)   Type I;
   (2)   Type II; and
   (3)   Type III.
   No person shall use a recreational boat sixteen (16’) feet or more in
length, except a canoe or kayak, unless at least one Type IV personal flotation
device is on board in addition to the personal flotation devices otherwise
required.
   (b)   Lights, whistles, bells, flame arrestors, and ventilators. The
following equipment shall be required on boats, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to operate any boat between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and
one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise, or moor any boat except in a designated
mooring area, unless such boat is equipped with, and is showing prominently,
the lights required by the United States Coast Guard as set forth in the
following chart:
EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR BOATS
                Class A        Class 1         Class 2         Class 3
Equipment       0 to Less Than 16 to Less Than 26 to Less Than 40 to Not More
                16 Feet        26 Feet         40 Feet         Than 65 Feet
                1 in fore part of boat,
Combination     showing red to port And green
Light           to starboard from right ahead  None            None
                to 2 points abaft the beam,
                visible at least 1 mile
                                               1 on port side, properly
Port Side Light None           None            screened to show red from right
                                               ahead to 2 points abaft the
                                               beam, visible at least 1 mile
                                               1 on starboard side, properly
Starboard Side                                 screened to show green from
Light           None           None            right ahead to 2 points abaft
                                               the beam, visible at least 1
                                               mile
Stem Light      1 bright white light aft showing all around the horizon,
                visible at least 2 miles
                                               1 bright white light in fore
                                               part of boat, showing from right
Bow Light       None           None            ahead to 2 points abaft the beam
                                               on both sides, visible at least
                                               2 miles
Whistle*        None           None            1 hand or 1 power-Operated,
                                               audible at least 1 mile
*Commercial fishing motorboats may carry any such specified devices.
                                               1 which produces, when struck, a
Bell            None           None            clear, bell-like tone of full
                                               round characteristics
Flame Arrestors 1, approved, on each carburetor of all gasoline engines
                installed after April 25, 1940
                At least 2 ventilators with cowls or equivalent, capable of
                removing gases from The bilges in the engine and fuel tank
Ventilators     compartment of boats constructed or decked after April 25,
                1940, using gasoline or other fuel of a flash point less than
                110 degrees Fahrenheit
 
   (c)   Motorboats: Fire extinguishers. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate any motorboat which is not equipped with a portable fire extinguisher
of a type approved by the United States Coast Guard, which fire extinguisher
shall be in an easily accessible place in such boat; provided, however, no such
fire extinguisher shall be required for a motorboat, the motor of which is
portable and detachable from the boat, commonly known as an outboard motor, and
such boat has no covered deck.
   (d)   Motorboats: Ventilators. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate any motorboat which uses gasoline or other fuel having a flash point of
less than 110 degrees Fahrenheit unless such motorboat is equipped with at
least two (2) ventilators fitted with cowls or their equivalent which will
properly and efficiently remove any inflammable or explosive gas from the
bilges of every engine and fuel tank compartment; provided, however,
ventilation shall not be required in any motorboat which has the greater
portion of the bilges of every engine and fuel tank compartment open to the
natural atmosphere. All ventilation equipment shall be as prescribed in the
chart set forth in subsection (b)of this section.
   (e)   Motorboats: Carburetors. Every gasoline engine installed in a
motorboat, except outboard motorboats, shall be equipped with one of the
following:
   (1)   An approved backfire flame arrestor, suitably secured to the air
intake with a flame-tight connection;
   (2)   An approved engine air and fuel induction system; or
   (3)   Any attachment to the carburetor or location of the engine air
induction system by means of which flames caused by engine backfire will be
dispersed to the atmosphere outside the vessel in such a manner that the flames
will not endanger the vessel, persons on board, or nearby vessels and
structures. All attachments shall be of metallic construction with flame-tight
connections and shall be firmly secured to withstand vibration, shock, and
engine backfire. (§§ 3, 4, 5, 22, and 23, Ord. 360, as amended by §§ 2, 3, 4,
and 5, Ord. 750, eff. March 10, 1976)
Sec. 9-1.04.   Boats: Overloading.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to load or to operate any boat loaded
with passengers or cargo in excess of its safe carrying capacity. For the
purposes of this section, a violation of the following components shall
constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this
section: the maximum safe carrying capacity, in pounds, of any rowboat or any
boat propelled by an outboard motor, except racing models, shall equal the
product of six and one-half (6 1/2) times the total length of the boat in feet,
times the greatest width of the boat in feet, times the greatest depth of the
boat in feet. (§ 10, Ord. 360)
Sec. 9-1.05.   Boats and other watercraft: Registration.
   Every boat or watercraft operated within the County shall be registered
pursuant to the provisions of Sections 3101 through 3112 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State, which sections are hereby referred to and
incorporated in this chapter by reference as though fully set forth in this
chapter for all purposes. (§ 30, Ord. 360, as amended by § 6, Ord. 750, eff.
March 10, 1976)
Sec. 9-1.06.   Boats and aquaplanes: Speed and manner of operation.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any boat or aquaplane in a
manner or at a rate of speed which endangers the life, limb, or property of any
person, taking into account weather conditions, light conditions, the ordinary
use of water navigated, any supervised and authorized boat race or water show,
the depth of the water, the proximity to shore, docks, boat launching and
landing ramps, swimmers, boats, and other obstacles, the condition of the boat
operated, and any other factor which a reasonable, prudent person would
consider in the safe operation of such boat. The operation of a boat or
aquaplane under any of the following conditions shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the same is being operated in violation of the provisions of this
section:
   (a)   At a speed greater than will permit the boat or aquaplane to be fully
stopped by the exercise of reasonable care within the assured clear distance
ahead; or
   (b)   At a speed in excess of five (5) statute miles per hour on any public
waterway in any of the following areas:
   (1)   Within 100 feet of any person who is bathing or swimming;
   (2)   Within 100 feet of any person riding water skis or an aquaplane where
the course of the boat is such as to bring it within fifty (50’) feet of the
rider should he at anytime fall;
   (3)   Within 200 feet of any swimming float, diving platform, lifeline, or
designated swimming area;
   (4)   Within 200 feet of any dock, wharf, dam, way, or landing float to
which boats are landed or made fast or which is used for the embarkation or
discharge of passengers;
   (5)   Within 100 feet of the shore at any place except while in the act of
launching or landing an aquaplane or water skier;
   (6)   Within 100 feet of any watercraft, sixteen (16’) feet in length or
smaller, which might be seriously endangered by the action caused by the wake
created by the passing vessel;
   (7)   Within 200 feet of any area designed as an emergency area by the
Sheriff-Coroner or any authorized boat while such boat is in the act of rescue
operations or dragging for bodies or equipment provided such boats are marked;
   (8)   Within 200 feet of the boundaries of any fish spawning area marked or
designated as such by the Department of Fish and Game of the State; and
   (9)   Within 200 feet of trolling fishing boats to avoid fouling of trolling
lines. Trolling boats shall display a white flag not less than two (2’) feet in
size to give adequate warning of trolling activities. (§ 6, Ord. 360)
Sec. 9-1.07.   Boats and water skis: Reckless operation.
   The failure to observe any of the following rules shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the violation of the provisions of this section:
   (a)   Any person operating a boat or water ski shall observe the Federal
navigation rules for harbors, rivers, and inland waters.
   (b)   Any person operating a boat or water ski shall at all times be
responsible for the wake of the boat and shall take care to avoid disturbing,
by wake, wash, or suction, any person or property in or on a waterway.
   (c)   Any person operating a boat or water ski shall at all times do so in
such manner as to protect the life, limb, and property of persons and shall not
operate such boat or ski in such a manner as to unreasonably or unnecessarily
interfere with any other documented or undocumented boat engaged in proper
navigation. (§ 7, Ord. 360)
Sec. 9-1.08.   Boats, aquaplanes, and water skis: Operation in swimming areas.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorboat or sailboat, or
to ride, pull, or tow any aquaplane or water ski within any designated swimming
area or within fifty (50’) feet of the exterior boundaries of any designated
swimming area. (§ 12, Ord. 360)
Sec. 9-1.09.   Boats: Riding on gunwales and bows.
   It shall be unlawful for any person operating any boat, except a sailboat,
to permit any person to ride, sit, or stand, or for such person to ride, sit,
or stand, upon either the gunwale of a boat or upon the decking over the bow of
a boat unless such boat is provided with adequate guards or railings to prevent
such persons from being lost overboard. The provisions of this section shall
not be construed to mean that a person on a boat may not stand on the decking
of the bow of the boat to moor or cast off or for any other necessary purpose.
(§ 8, Ord. 360)
Sec. 9-1.10.   Boats: Operation by persons under influence of alcohol or
narcotics.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any boat while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs. (§ 9, Ord. 360)
Sec. 9-1.11.   Boats: Operation without consent.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, take, or operate any boat
without the written consent of the owner or person in charge thereof or to be
an accessory to the taking, use, or operation of any boat without the consent
of the owner or person in charge thereof. The consent of the owner or person in
charge of a boat to its taking, use, or operation shall not be presumed or
implied because of such consent on a previous occasion to the taking, use, or
operation of such boat by the same or a different person. (§ 11, Ord. 360)
Sec. 9-1.12.   Boats: Anchoring in passageways and channels.
   (§ 13, Ord. 360; repealed by § 1, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016)
Sec. 9-1.13.   Boats: Interference with navigation aids.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to moor or attach any boat to any buoy,
beacon, or marker, except mooring buoys, placed in the water by any public
agency or to remove, change, obstruct, damage, or in any way interfere with
buoys or navigation aids established by a public agency. (§ 14, Ord. 360)
Sec. 9-1.14.   Boats: Use of sirens.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or sound a siren on any boat
except for necessary or emergency purposes. (§ 24, Ord. 360)
Sec. 9-1.15.   Aquaplaning and water skiing.
   (a)   At night. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a boat,
vehicle, or other motive power which is pulling or towing any aquaplane or
water skier, or for any person to ride any aquaplane or water ski, between
sunset and sunrise.
   (b)   Takeoff and approaches. It shall be unlawful to take off from or
approach shore when engaged in water skiing in any other manner than by keeping
the shore on the starboard or right-hand side.
   (c)   Careful operation of boats.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate any boat engaged in the pulling or towing of an aquaplane or water
skier except in a careful and prudent manner, at a reasonable distance, and
with due caution for the life, limb, and property of other persons.
   (d)   Attendants on boats. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
any boat or other vehicle which is pulling or towing an aquaplane or water
skier unless there is in such boat or vehicle, in addition to the operator,
another person at least twelve (12) years of age who is attending and observing
the aquaplane or water skier at all times while the aquaplane or water skier is
being towed.
   (e)   Towlines. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any boat or
other vehicle which is pulling or towing an aquaplane or water skier unless
such operator employs, when towing any such aquaplane or water skier, a towline
not in excess of ninety (90’) feet in length. (§§ 15, 16, 17, and 21, Ord. 360,
as amended by §§ 7 and 8, Ord. 750, eff. March 10, 1976)
Sec. 9-1.16.   Designation and marking of certain areas.
   (a)   Authorized. The Board, by resolution, as to water under its
jurisdiction, and the authorized representative of any other public agency, as
to water under its jurisdiction, may designate and cause to be appropriately
marked boat launching areas, areas designed exclusively for swimming, areas
where swimming is prohibited, areas where boats are prohibited, areas of
restricted speed, or emergency areas and may designate boating and personnel
control signs and devices and change the same from time to time as the public
safety and welfare require. When so marked, it shall be unlawful for any person
to fail to comply with such designations. Such designations shall be reported
to the United States Corps of Engineers for notification to mariners.
   (b)   Boating on Putah Creek. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
any vessel in the waters of Putah Creek westerly of County Road 86 at such
times that:
   (1)   The flow of water at Monticello Dam exceeds the rate of 750 cubic feet
per second; and
   (2)   Control signs or devices prohibiting boating are posted at the Putah
Creek Fishing Access Area.
   For the purposes of this subsection, “vessel” is defined as set forth in
subsection (c)of Section 651 of the Harbors and Navigations Code of the State.
   (c)   Signs. The Director of Parks shall cause control signs or devices
prohibiting boating to be posted at the Putah Creek Fishing Access Area at such
times as the flow of water at Monticello Dam exceeds the rate of 750 cubic feet
per second. (§ 27, Ord. 360, as amended by § 1, Ord. 628, eff. February 16,
1970, § 1, Ord. 631, eff. April 29, 1970, and § 1, Ord. 954, eff. June 30,
1983)
Sec. 9-1.17.   Swimming in prohibited areas.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to swim in any area designated as a non-
swimming area, or more than 200 feet from the shore, or outside the boundaries
of a marked swimming area, or in a location or in such a manner as to create a
hazardous or dangerous condition to the swimmer or any other person or object;
provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not be construed to
limit skin diving when areas for such activity are properly marked. (§ 20, Ord.
360)
Sec. 9-1.18.   Dumping debris in water.
   (§ 18, Ord. 360; repealed by § 2, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016)
Sec. 9-1.19.   Shooting firearms across water.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any firearm or gun operated by
compressed gases or a spring from any boat across or over any portion of the
waters or any lake or reservoir; provided, however, the provisions of this
section shall not prohibit the shooting of a shotgun from a boat or across lake
or reservoir waters for the purpose of killing waterfowl during the lawful
waterfowl hunting season. (§ 19, Ord. 360)
Sec. 9-1.20.   Authorized boat races.
   No provision of this chapter, except Section
9-1.10 prohibiting the operation of a boat while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs, shall be construed to prohibit or
restrict the operation of any boat actually competing in a race or regatta over
a marked course which has been previously authorized in writing and which is
actively supervised by the public agency or its duly authorized agent having
jurisdiction over the waters of such racing course for such purpose, nor to
conflict with any of the rules adopted by the agency or its agent supervising
such race, which rules govern the type, size, construction, and equipment of
the boats, the navigation regulations, and other rules governing the conduct of
such races. (§ 25, Ord. 360)
Sec. 9-1.21.   Authorized water shows.
   No provision of this chapter shall be construed to prohibit or restrict the
operation of any boat, aquaplane, or water skier actually participating in a
water show which has been previously authorized in writing and which is
actively supervised by the public agency or its duly authorized agent having
jurisdiction over the waters on which the water show is conducted for such
purpose. (§ 26, Ord. 360)
Sec. 9-1.22.   Enforcement.
   It shall be the duty of the Sheriff-Coroner to enforce the provisions of
this chapter. (§ 31, Ord. 360)
Sec. 9-1.22.1.   Wearing personal flotation device.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to traverse the waters within the County
on an innertube, air mattress, or any other device capable of transporting a
person on the water without wearing correctly a Coast Guard approved wearable
Type I, Type II, or Type III personal flotation device; provided, however, the
provisions of this section shall not apply if any State law or administrative
regulation otherwise requires the carrying or exempts the carrying on board the
vessel or device in question of other personal flotation devices. (§ 9, Ord.
750, eff. March 10, 1976)
Sec. 9-1.23.   Violations.
   (a)   Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
   (b)   Notices to appear. Whenever a person is arrested for the violation of
the provisions of this chapter and such person is not immediately taken before
a magistrate, as is more fully set forth in the Penal Code of the State, the
arresting officer shall prepare, in duplicate, a written notice to appear in
court containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and
the time when and place where such person shall appear in court. The time set
forth in the notice to appear shall be at least five (5) days after such
arrest. The place set forth in the notice to appear shall be before a judge of
any court having jurisdiction of the offense who is nearest and most accessible
with reference to the place where the arrest was made.
   (c)   Promises to appear. The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice
to appear to the arrested person, and the arrested person, in order to secure
release, shall give his written promise so to appear in court by signing the
notice, which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the arresting
officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody.
   (d)   Bail: Appearance in court. The officer shall, as soon as practicable,
file the notice with the magistrate specified therein. Thereupon the magistrate
shall fix the amount of bail which, in his judgment, in accordance with the
provisions of Section 853.6 of the Penal Code of the State, shall be reasonable
and sufficient for the appearance of the defendant and shall endorse upon the
bottom a statement signed by him in the form set forth in Section 853.6 of the
Penal Code of the State. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he
promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail
thus set. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment
before the magistrate, if the defendant shall not appear, either in person or
by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and may, in his
discretion, order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. Upon
the making of such order that no further proceedings shall be had, all sums
deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the County treasury.
   (e)   Failure to appear: Warrants for arrest. Any person willfully violating
his written promise to appear in court shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally
arrested. When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place
set forth therein, and has not posted bail as provided in said Penal Code, and
fails to appear at the time and place specified, a warrant for his arrest shall
be issued by the magistrate within twenty (20) days after the failure of such
person to appear as promised. (§§ 28 and 29, Ord. 360)
Chapter 2
PUBLIC BOATING FACILITIES
Sections:
   
9-2.01   Adoption: Purpose.
   
9-2.02   Definitions.
   
9-2.03   Signs: Required.
   
9-2.04   Signs: Construction: Form.
   
9-2.05   Signs: Display.
   
9-2.06   Signs: Purposes of establishment.
   
9-2.07   Enforcement.
Sec. 9-2.01.   Adoption: Purpose.
   The provisions of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the provisions of
Section 660 of the Harbors and Navigation Code of the State for the purpose of
establishing and maintaining boating regulation signs at public boating
facilities along the Sacramento River. (§ 1, Ord. 552)
Sec. 9-2.02.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Powerboat” shall mean any vessel propelled by machinery, whether or
not such machinery is the principal source of propulsion.
   (b)   “Public boating facility” shall mean any marina, way, landing float,
launching site, wharf, runway, dock, or other place commonly used for
embarkation upon, or debarkation from, the Sacramento River by powerboat, which
facility is available for the use of the public, either with or without the
payment of consideration. (§§ 2 and 3, Ord. 552)
Sec. 9-2.03.   Signs: Required.
   Every person conducting, operating, or maintaining a public boating facility
shall, by June 15, 1966, install and thereafter maintain boating regulation
signs, as provided in this chapter, on the premises of such public boating
facility. (§ 4, Ord. 552)
Sec. 9-2.04.   Signs: Construction: Form.
   The Parks Department shall have prepared boating regulation signs in
sufficient number to supply all the public boating facilities which are located
within the County. The signs shall be constructed of metal and shall be twenty-
four (24”) inches by eighteen (18”) inches in dimensions. The following legend
shall be printed on such signs in black on a white background surrounded by a
one and one-half (1 1/2”) inch orange border:
   NOTICE TO BOATERS
   State law makes it a misdemeanor to operate your powerboat in excess of five
(5) nautical miles per hour when you are:
   (1)   Within 100 feet of bathers;
   (2)   Within 200 feet of a bathing beach;
   (3)   Within 200 feet of a swimming float, diving platform, or lifeline; or
   (4)   Within 200 feet of a way or landing float to which boats are made fast
or which is used for the embarkation or debarkation of passengers.
   Observe these rules.
(§ 5, Ord. 552)
Sec. 9-2.05.   Signs: Display.
   Boating regulation signs shall be prominently displayed in such a manner as
to be clearly visible to all persons embarking upon the river by boat. (§ 4,
Ord. 552)
Sec. 9-2.06.   Signs: Purposes of establishment.
   The Board hereby finds and declares that the establishment and maintenance
of boating regulation signs, as provided in this chapter, is necessary and
appropriate for establish the preservation and protection of the public health,
safety, and general welfare for the following reasons:
   (a)   Powerboats moving at a high speed constitute an extreme danger to
persons engaged in bathing, swimming, or diving who may be struck by a moving
boat. Powerboats moving at a high speed also create wakes and turbulence in the
water which in turn cause the movement and surge of landing floats, making
conditions dangerous for persons embarking or disembarking from their own
craft.
   (b)   Although Section 267 of the Harbors and Navigation Code of the State
sets forth special speed limits for powerboats operated upon navigable waters,
and although such speed limits are applicable to the waters of the Sacramento
River located within the County, many persons who operate powerboats are
unaware of the provisions of said Section 267.
   (c)   In recent years there have been numerous reports by citizens of
violations of the provisions of Section 267 of the Harbors and Navigation Code
of the State along and upon the waters of the Sacramento River within the
County. By posting the provisions of said Section 267 in places used by the
boating public, potential violations of said Section 267 may be averted through
the education of persons who are ignorant of the existing speed limits.
   (d)   The posting of the provisions of Section 267 of the Harbors and
Navigation Code of the State, as provided in this chapter, has been approved by
the United States Corps of Army Engineers, the United States Coast Guard, and
the Division of Small Craft Harbors of the Department of Parks and Recreation
of the State. (§ 6, Ord. 552)
Sec. 9-2.07.   Enforcement.
   The Sheriff-Coroner shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (§ 9, Ord.
552)
Chapter 3
PARK REGULATIONS
Sections:
Article 1. General Provisions
   
9-3.101   Purpose.
   
9-3.102   Definitions.
Article 2. General Rules and Restrictions
   
9-3.201   Enforcement Rules and Regulations.
   
9-3.202   Penalty.
   
9-3.203   Authority of Parks Division—Closing or Restricting Use of Parks and
Facilities.
   
9-3.204   Lands and Facilities Open to the Public.
   
9-3.205   Parks in General.
   
9-3.206   Dumping, Littering, and Cleanliness.
   
9-3.207   General Cleanliness of Campsites and Picnic Areas.
   
9-3.208   Camping.
   
9-3.209   Vandalism Prohibited.
   
9-3.210   Use of Restrooms.
   
9-3.211   Unauthorized Structures, Encroachments and Signs.
   
9-3.212   Abandoned and Unattended Property; Pet Remains.
   
9-3.213   Commercial Activities.
   
9-3.214   Fires; Fireworks.
   
9-3.215   Permits and Fees.
   
9-3.216   Firearms, Traps and Other Weapons.
   
9-3.217   Motor Vehicles and Off-highway Vehicles.
   
9-3.218   Bicycles and Similar Vehicles.
   
9-3.219   Equestrian Use on Trails.
   
9-3.220   Drones and Unmanned Aircraft.
   
9-3.221   Prohibited Conduct.
Article 3. Natural Resource Protection
   
9-3.301   Introducing or Gathering Plants, Wood, or Any Other Vegetation is
Prohibited.
   
9-3.302   Injuring, Killing or Harassing Animals.
   
9-3.303   Removing Materials.
   
9-3.304   Pets and Animals in Parks.
   
9-3.305   Harassing Livestock Prohibited.
   
9-3.306   Hunting Prohibited.
   
9-3.307   Fishing Permissions and Restrictions.
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 9-3.101.   Purpose.
   This chapter regulates and shall apply to management and administration of
County parks, as defined herein, by the Parks Division of the Yolo County
General Services Department. Unless expressly stated otherwise, the
restrictions on certain activities and uses do not apply to the Parks Division
when managing County Parks.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.102.   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   “Community park” means a category of park that serves a broader
purpose than a neighborhood, or mini park. These parks are designed to engage
families and visitors for an entire day with multiple and diverse activities
and amenities throughout.
   (b)   “Department” means the Yolo County Department of General Services.
   (c)   “Director” means the Director of the General Services Department and,
unless otherwise expressly stated, shall include their authorized designee(s).
   (d)   “Discretion” shall mean, in reference to authority granted to the
Director, the exercise of judgment and experience to determine the appropriate
course of action in specific situations that are not directly addressed in this
chapter, considering public health and safety, the need to safeguard County
property, protection of environmental resources, and other matters consistent
with the public interest.
   (e)   “Drone” means a small, unmanned aircraft system (sUAS) weighing under
55 pounds, as defined by the Federal Aviation Administration, that is operated
without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the
aircraft.
   (f)   “Electric bicycle” is a bicycle equipped with fully operable pedals
and an electric motor of less than 750 watts per the California Vehicle Code.
   (g)   “Motorcycle” means any motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a
seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground and weighing less than 1,500 pounds,
except that four wheels may be in contact with the ground when two of the
wheels are a functional part of a sidecar.
   (h)   “Motor vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be
propelled, moved or drawn over land, excepting a device moved by human power.
   (i)   “Off-highway vehicle” shall have the meaning set forth in section
38006 of the California Vehicle Code, and shall include motorcycles designed
for off-road use, sand buggies, dune buggies, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs),
jeeps, go-carts, and other similar vehicles.
   (j)   “Open space park” means a designated park that has areas of
essentially undeveloped natural landscape, such as ridges, streams, hillsides,
canyons, riparian areas, and grasslands that are under management and control
of the Parks Division.
   (k)   “Park” shall refer to and include every open space park, community
park, and other public facility under the management and control of the Parks
Division.
   (l)   “Park authority” means the employee of the Parks Division designated
by the Director to exercise such powers and perform such duties to enforce the
regulations herein.
   (m)   “Park waters” means any lake, reservoir, pond, river, stream, or other
body of water within a park or under the management, protection, or control of
the Parks Division.
   (n)   “Permission” as referred to in this code means written permission
granted by the Director or their designee.
   (o)   “Person” means any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, trust, or organization of any kind.
   (p)   “Take” or “taking” means but is not limited to hunting, pursuing,
catching, capturing, possessing or killing, or attempting to hunt, pursue,
catch, capture, possess or kill any wild bird, mammal, reptile, amphibian or
parts thereof.
   (q)   “Valid permit” or “permit” means a permit issued by the Director,
subject to revocation, suspension, or modification, that gives the organization
or person(s) named on the permit permission to engage in some activity, use, or
event. Valid permits have a date or date range during which the permittee may
engage in the listed activity, unless the permit is revoked, suspended, or
modified by the Director. The expiration of such date range renders the permit
void. References to “valid permit” or “permit” shall not be deemed to indicate
that such permissions are generally available upon proper application; their
availability may be limited to specific locations, seasons, or other conditions
in the Discretion of the Director. “Permit” shall also include any management
or restoration plan approved by the Director or the Board of Supervisors.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Article 2.
General Rules and Restrictions
Sec. 9-3.201.   Enforcement of Rules and Regulations.
   (a)   The Yolo County Sheriff’s Office shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter or any other local, state, or federal law or regulation within a park.
   (b)   The Director is authorized to enforce this chapter and to remove any
person acting in violation of this chapter or any other provision of the Yolo
County Code from parks or otherwise revoke their permission or permit to use
such lands or facilities.
   (c)   The Yolo County Board of Supervisors additionally authorizes the
Director, any Deputy Director with responsibility for parks, and any Park
Authority to issue citations for misdemeanors or infractions committed within
parks and within their presence pursuant to California Public Resources Code
Section 5380.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.202.   Penalty.
   With the exception of matters that constitute a misdemeanor or felony under
California law, any person violating any provision of Chapters 1 to 2 of Title
9 shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as set forth in Section 25132 of the California Government Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.203.   Authority of Parks Division— Closing or Restricting Use of
Parks and Facilities.
   Parks may be closed to the public or have public uses restricted during an
emergency or for health, safety, maintenance, or management purposes in the
sole Discretion of the Director.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.204.   Lands and Facilities Open to the Public.
   Parks are open to the public for use during daylight hours, or as otherwise
permitted, in accordance with this chapter. Generally, open space parks will be
open during daylight hours, and community parks may be open until 9:00 p.m. The
Director is authorized in their sole discretion to revise the hours during
which any park and internal building, road, ground, or other facility is open
to the public. Notice of the hours for each park shall be prominently posted at
each public entrance, or in any other manner reasonably determined by the
Director to afford notice to the public.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.205.   Parks in General.
   All persons entering a park must follow the park’s rules and regulations,
the laws of the State of California, and all applicable provisions of this
chapter and the Yolo County Code. While in the park, visitors must also follow
the instructions of the Director and Park Authority and comply with any rules
that are clearly posted.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.206.   Dumping, Littering, and Cleanliness.
   No person shall:
   (a)   Dispose of bottles, broken glass, ashes, wastepaper, or other rubbish
except in designated receptacles;
   (b)   Place garbage, including garbage generated outside the park, in
receptacles not authorized for such use;
   (c)   Dispose of household waste, including appliances, on Park grounds or
in park receptacles;
   (d)   Dump or abandon any other waste matter, including dirt, rocks,
vegetation, or debris, in any park.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.207.   General Cleanliness of Campsites and Picnic Areas.
   Each person shall keep campsites and picnic areas in an orderly and clean
state, free from rubbish and litter of any kind at all times.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.208.   Camping.
   Other than designated camping areas, no person shall camp or park motor
vehicles overnight within park without a permit.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.209.   Vandalism Prohibited.
   No person shall damage, deface, paint, tamper with or remove any park
property or facility, including buildings, signs, gates, fences, equipment,
markers, trash receptacles, paving material, utilities, or water lines.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.210.   Use of Restrooms.
   No person shall deposit any bodily waste within any park except in a public
restroom. No person shall occupy or use any public restroom within any park for
a period of time in excess of thirty minutes during any consecutive two-hour
period.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.211.   Unauthorized Structures, Encroachments and Signs.
   No person shall erect any temporary or permanent obstruction, structure,
monument, facility, physical improvement, encroachment or sign at or within any
park. Any such item may be impounded or demolished by the Parks Division in
accordance with County policy.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.212.   Abandoned and Unattended Property; Pet Remains.
   No person may abandon or leave unattended or without permission any personal
property or device within any park for a period longer than twelve hours. Any
property or device so abandoned or unattended may be impounded and disposed of
in accordance with the law. The burial or other disposal of pet remains,
including but not limited to ashes, is prohibited in County parks.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.213.   Commercial Activities.
   No person shall do any of the following within a park without a valid permit
or other authorization:
   (a)   Sell, hawk, or peddle any food, goods, merchandise or services;
   (b)   Station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for display of food,
goods, merchandise, or services;
   (c)   Distribute, circulate or post any handbill, pamphlet or other
advertisement regarding sale of goods, merchandise or services;
   (d)   Conduct any commercial filming or photography or actively related to
commercial filming or photography except by written permission from the
Director;
   (e)   Conduct any activity of a commercial nature except by written
permission from the Director or concessionaire agreement.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.214.   Fires; Fireworks.
   Fires shall be strictly prohibited in all parks except as follows:
   (a)   If specifically permitted, in a camp stove or fireplace provided in
areas designated for such purposes.
   (b)   All campfires must be extinguished before leaving any park area.
   (c)   No fires shall be made during a red flag warning day as defined by the
National Weather Service.
   (d)   In their sole discretion, the Director may restrict or prohibit fire
use in parks where fires may otherwise be allowed. Each person in a park area
shall comply with these restrictions.
   (e)   No person shall possess or use any fireworks or pyrotechnic device of
any kind in any park area, except by valid permit issued by the Director.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.215.   Permits and Fees.
   For events and uses that will not damage park resources or otherwise cause
any detriment, the Department may issue permits for special events and uses and
may charge fees in connection with such matters. The Director may impose any
conditions that are, in their sole discretion, reasonably necessary for the
protection of the park or considerations of public health, safety, and welfare.
Charges for permits shall be determined by adopted fee schedule, and may
include admission fees, parking fees, facility use fees, and charges for
expenses incurred by the Department, such as labor, equipment costs, overhead,
etc. Permits are not transferable and may be revoked for failure to comply with
any provision of the permit or applicable portions of these regulations. When
issued, permits must be carried as directed at all times when using parks.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.216.   Firearms, Traps and Other Weapons.
   No person shall possess, use, carry, discharge or cause to be discharged any
gun, firearm or weapon while within parks, including any air or gas weapon,
spring gun, spear, bow and arrow, crossbow, sling shot, animal trap, knife with
blade over five inches long, explosive or any other form of weapon potentially
dangerous to wildlife or human safety except by valid permit issued by the
Director. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any firearm or
weapon onto or across parks from outside park boundaries. Authorized use of the
archery range at Grasslands Regional Park is covered by a concessionaire
agreement and, for so long as such agreement remains in effect, such use is not
subject to the restrictions in this section.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.217.   Motor Vehicles and Off- highway Vehicles.
   (a)   In accordance with Yolo County Code Chapter 12, except as authorized
by Sections 10-12.103(b) and 10-12.104(b), no person shall operate a motor
vehicle or off-highway vehicle on the beds of Cache Creek. Notice of this
prohibition shall be posted at legal public access points to Cache Creek.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or off-highway vehicle within
any park except to access public roads, internal roads established and
maintained for public vehicular use, and parking.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section, emergency vehicles and County
maintenance vehicles, battery-powered wheelchairs and other power-driven
mobility devices being used by individuals with mobility disabilities are
exempted, subject to limitations and regulations on their use in accordance
with legitimate safety requirements.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.218.   Bicycles and Similar Vehicles.
   (a)   Park trails and roads may be used by any person possessing or
operating a bicycle, including an electric bicycle, in the manner consistent
with the posted designation. Unless specifically designated by a posted sign,
motorcycles are prohibited on park trails and roads.
   (b)   The Director may temporarily prohibit the operation of any type of
bicycle on any park trail or road.
   (c)   No person shall operate or possess a bicycle or electric bicycle
within any park area except:
      (1)   For bicycles, on trails and roads designated for such use or with
other similar signage or symbol;
      (2)   For electric bicycles, on trails and roads where appropriate
signage allows for such use.
   (d)   No person shall operate or posses any type of bicycle in any park area
in a manner that is:
      (1)   Negligent, unsafe, or reckless, or in any way that endangers any
person or property;
      (2)   At a speed greater than 15 miles per hour;
      (3)   At a speed which is greater than is reasonable or prudent having
due regard for weather, visibility, the traffic on, and the surface and width
of, a road or bicycle trail or at a speed which endangers the safety of persons
or property; or
      (4)   In violation of any applicable provision of the California Vehicle
Code.
   (e)   Pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 21212, persons under the
age of 18 operating any type of bicycle, non-motorized scooter, or skateboard
must wear an ANSI or other state-approved helmet for head protection in all
parks.
   (f)   A person operating a bicycle, electric bicycle, non-motorized scooter,
rollerblades, roller skates, skateboard, or other non-motorized device in a
park area shall yield to all equestrians, pedestrians, and hikers. When
approaching equestrians, pedestrians, or hikers from the rear, the person
operating the bicycle, electric bicycle, non-motorized scooter, roller skates,
rollerblades, skateboard, or other non-motorized device shall audibly warn of
their presence and shall exercise due care when passing.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.219.   Equestrian Use on Trails.
   No person shall ride, lead, or leave standing any horse or animal-pulled
cart or wagon on any trail or in any park other than in areas or on trails
authorized for such use.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.220.   Drones and Unmanned Aircraft.
   The recreational flying and operation of drones and other unmanned aircraft
in County parks is allowed except where prohibited by a posted order at the
entrance to a park or nearby parking or access point. Small drones less than 55
pounds can be flown recreationally when following 49 USC 44809, and is subject
to California Civil Code Section 1708.8, and the Federal Aviation
Administration rules and regulations. Commercial or other uses are not allowed
except by written authorization or by permit by the Director. At no time shall
pilots operate a drone that presents a nuisance to others or wildlife.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.221.   Prohibited Conduct.
   No person shall do any of the following within parks;
   (a)   Harass or otherwise disturb others;
   (b)   Be under the influence of intoxicating liquor or substances in such a
condition that the individual is unable to exercise care for their own safety
or the safety of others;
   (c)   Engage in disorderly conduct as outlined in Section 647 of the
California Penal Code;
   (d)   Play any music or percussion instrument, television, radio, or bring
or operate any sound amplifying equipment, loudspeaker, or microphone, except
in accordance with a permit issued by the Director;
   (e)   Smoke, to include vapes and e-cigarettes.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Article 3.
Natural Resource Protection
Sec. 9-3.301.   Introducing or Gathering Plants, Wood, or Any Other Vegetation
is Prohibited.
   (a)   No person shall gather flowers, foliage, berries, herbs, fruit, seeds,
or cut, break, dig up or in any way mutilate, injure, or transplant any tree,
shrub, plant, fern, grass, turf, landscaping, natural feature, railing, seat,
fence equipment, structure, or other object or device within any park, except
by permit issued by the Director.
   (b)   No person shall introduce or abandon any plant or plant parts in any
park area except by permit issued by the Director.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.302.   Injuring, Killing or Harassing Animals.
   (a)   No person shall injure, take, kill or harass any bird, mammal, fish,
reptile or any other animal or disturb its habitat including its nest and/or
eggs in any park except by permit issued by the Director. This section does not
apply to fish or other aquatic forms permitted to be taken under Section
9-3.307.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a), the taking of any bird, mammal,
reptile, amphibian, or parts thereof by any person or persons duly appointed
and authorized by the County to perform such services to control disease or
prevent other similar harm, prevent excessive damage to park facilities, for
the wellbeing of the animal taken, or for other good cause, and where such
taking occurs while said person or persons are acting within the course and
scope of the authorized services.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.303.   Removing Materials.
   No person shall:
   (a)   Dig up or remove any dirt, stones, sand, rocks, minerals, or other
materials or substance whatever, or make any excavation, quarry any stone or
lay or set off any blast or explosion or cause or assist in doing any such
activity within any park except by permit issued by the Director.
   (b)   Disturb, remove or destroy articles or artifacts of a historical,
archaeological, cultural or paleontological nature in, or from any park, except
by permit issued by the Director.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.304.   Pets and Animals in Parks.
   No person shall be permitted to bring, carry, entice or transport a dog, cat
or other animal into the park unless such animal is securely leashed on a
maximum six-foot leash and in immediate control by the person at all times. An
animal is securely leashed within the meaning of this section when said animal
is securely tied or otherwise fastened, or attached to one end of a chain,
cord, rope, strap or other restraint, the other end of which is securely
retained in the possession of a person and animal is prevented from running at
large. A dog may be permitted to be off-leash in areas which are officially set
aside for that purpose provided that the person or keeper of the dog keeps it
under control at all times, does not allow the dog to go beyond the boundary of
the set aside area, and follows posted rules at all times.
   (a)   No person shall bring or keep a noisy, vicious or dangerous dog or
animal or one which is disturbing other persons in the park and remain therein
after the owners have been asked by the Park Authority to leave;
   (b)   No person shall leave or deposit dogs, cats, or other animals, fish or
birds within the boundaries of the park;
   (c)   No personal shall bring a dog into, permit a dog to enter or remain,
or possess a dog in the park unless the person presents proof that the dog has
a valid rabies inoculation or the person presents a valid license for the dog;
   (d)   All persons in possession of an animal at the parks shall immediately
clean up any animal waste produced;
   (e)   No person shall feed or provide care for any animal, bird, or fish
that occurs or exists with the boundaries of the park.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.305.   Harassing Livestock Prohibited.
   No person shall harass, injure, or kill livestock in any part of portion of
any park area. No person who brings a dog or any animal to any park area shall
permit their dog or animal to harass, injure, or kill livestock in any part or
portion of any park area.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.306.   Hunting Prohibited.
   No person shall hunt in the parks.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Sec. 9-3.307.   Fishing Permissions and Restrictions.
   A person authorized by the state of California to fish are permitted to fish
in parks and park waters, except where fishing is expressly prohibited or
limited as indicated on conspicuously posted signs or per local, state, and
federal laws. When fishing is authorized within a park or park waters, each
person fishing must fully comply with all local, state, and federal laws
regulating or prohibiting a taking regardless of any indication of the presence
of such protected species or habitat.
(§ 2, Ord. 1581, eff. December 18, 2025)
Chapter 4
SPEED LIMITS ON THE SACRAMENTO RIVER
Sections:
   
9-4.01   Adoption: Authority.
   
9-4.02   Definitions.
   
9-4.03   Speed limits on the Sacramento River.
   
9-4.04   Exceptions.
   
9-4.05   Violations: Misdemeanors.
Sec. 9-4.01.   Adoption: Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by Section 660
of the Harbors and Navigation Code of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 978, eff. June 14,
1984)
Sec. 9-4.02.   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning, all words shall have the meanings as provided in Section 651 of the
Harbors and Navigation Code of the State, including any amendment made thereto
subsequent to May 15, 1984. (§ 1, Ord. 978, eff. June 14, 1984)
Sec. 9-4.03.   Speed limits on the Sacramento River.
   No person shall operate any motor boat or other motor powered vessel at a
speed in excess of five (5) miles per hour relative to the stream bottom for
upstream speeds and relative to the water surface for downstream speeds on that
part of the waters of the Sacramento River located between the I Street Bridge
and the Tower Street Bridge within the County. (§ 1, Ord. 978, eff. June 14,
1984)
Sec. 9-4.04.   Exceptions.
   This chapter shall not apply to any vessel being used by a peace officer of
any Federal, State, or local agency while engaged in law enforcement activities
for which the use of such vessel is reasonably necessary, nor to vessels
operated by the State, or any agency thereof, in the performance of official
duties. (§ 1, Ord. 978, eff. June 14, 1984)
Sec. 9-4.05.   Violations: Misdemeanors.
   Any person violating the provisions of Section
9-4.03 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 978, eff. June 14, 1984)
Chapter 5
STREAMS AND RIVERS COMMERCIAL BOATING
Sections:
   
9-5.01   Title.
   
9-5.02   Purpose.
   
9-5.03   Definitions.
   
9-5.04   Agreement Required.
   
9-5.05   Agreement Procedure.
   
9-5.06   Agreement Term, Annual Review and Consideration.
   
9-5.07   River Use Plan Contents.
   
9-5.08   No Vested Right.
   
9-5.09   Revocation, Denial, or Non-Renewal of Agreement.
   
9-5.10   Safety Equipment and Standards.
   
9-5.11   Littering and Trespass.
   
9-5.12   Penalty and Enforcement.
Sec. 9-5.01.   Title.
   This chapter shall be referred to as the Streams and Rivers Commercial
Boating Ordinance. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
Sec. 9-5.02.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to address operating requirements for
commercial boating, as defined herein, on local streams and rivers. The Board
of Supervisors recognizes that recreational use of the County’s streams and
rivers includes the use of streams and rivers by rafts, kayaks, and other
floating devices. It is necessary to manage commercial river use that includes
rafts, kayaks and other floating recreational devices to protect the riparian
environment and the safety, health, and welfare of river users and riparian
landowners. The provisions added to the Yolo County Code by this Chapter
regulate commercial river use in a manner that is consistent with the policies
and purposes of the 2006 Yolo County Parks and Open Space Master Plan, as it
may be amended from time to time. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
Sec. 9-5.03.   Definitions.
   A.   “Boat rental” means the lease, rental, loan or bailment for
consideration of any floating device for use on any stream or river in Yolo
County. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   B.   “Commercial Outfitter” or “Commercial Use” means any operation that
meets any of the following criteria:
   1.   Where fees, charges, and other compensation are collected in excess of
the actual costs of the river trips or where the fees are typically paid to one
member or organization that does not share equally in the costs among the trip
members
   2.   Where fees and charges are collected for financial gain for salaries or
benefit for any of the group, its leaders, or sponsors.
   3.   Where other compensation is received, such as capital increases in
equipment or facilities used for the trip.
   4.   Where guides, managers, drivers, and any other employees are paid by
salary, wages, or any other form of compensation. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31,
2012)
   C.   “Commercial River Use” means any operation of a boat rental or
commercial outfitter. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   D.   “Commercial River Use Agreement” or “Agreement” means an agreement
between the commercial outfitter and the County that entitles the permitted
entity to engage in commercial river use. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   E.   “County Parks” means the parks and park facilities operated, owned or
maintained by Yolo County. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   F.   “Floating Device” means any raft, kayak, canoe, inner tube, kickboard,
water wheel, or similar object, or any “vessel” as defined by section 21 of the
California Harbors and Navigation Code, as it may be amended from time to time.
“Floating device” expressly excludes U.S Coast Guard approved personal
floatation devices, types 1 through 5. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   G.   “River Use Plan” means a map of the river or stream identifying areas
proposed for use by the Commercial Outfitter and any other relevant information
requested by the County pursuant to this Chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31,
2012)
Sec. 9-5.04.   Agreement Required.
   No person or entity shall engage in Commercial River Use on Yolo County
rivers and streams except as authorized by a valid Commercial River Use
Agreement in good standing. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
Sec. 9-5.05.   Agreement Procedure.
   Commercial River Use Agreements shall be issued by the Yolo County Parks
Division unless the division, in its sole discretion, refers a proposed
Agreement to the Board of Supervisors for consideration. The procedure to
obtain an Agreement is as follows:
   A.   The Commercial Outfitter shall contact the Yolo County Parks Division,
submit a River Use Plan, and arrange a meeting with staff to discuss the
potential Agreement at least two months (and preferably more) prior to the
planned date for the commencement of Commercial Use of the stream. The County
and Commercial Outfitter shall then work in good faith to complete the River
Use Plan in accordance with the standards of this Chapter. The Commercial River
Use Agreement must be signed by all parties before the Commercial Outfitter may
use the stream. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   B.   Upon request from the Commercial Outfitter in writing to Yolo County
Parks for such an Agreement the County will prepare a draft Commercial River
Use Agreement for review by the Commercial Outfitter within 30 days. County
Counsel shall also review the draft Agreement after review from the Commercial
Outfitter. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   C.   After reasonable efforts have been made to negotiate an agreement, the
County shall either approve or deny the proposed Agreement based upon a
determination that the Agreement and any related materials, including the River
Use Plan, are consistent (or in the case of denial, inconsistent) with the
purpose and requirements of this Chapter. Brief written findings shall be
issued in connection with this decision. Actions taken by the Parks Division on
an application may be appealed to the Board of Supervisors in the time and
manner provided in Title 1, Chapter 4 of the Yolo County Code, which shall
govern all aspects of such appeals. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   D.   A fully executed Commercial River Use Agreement constitutes a permit
authorizing the Commercial Outfitter to non-exclusive use of the stream in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the Agreement. Each Agreement is
unique to the Commercial Outfitter based on the amount, location, and type of
use proposed. Upon receipt of the fully executed Commercial River Use
Agreement, including all required documents per the terms of the Agreement, the
Commercial Outfitter may begin to use the stream according to the terms of the
Agreement. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
Sec. 9-5.06.   Agreement Term, Annual Review and Consideration.
   A.   Commercial River Use Agreements are initially issued for one season or
one year as specified within the final fully executed Agreement. Multiple-year
contracts shall be provided as requested for Commercial Outfitters in good
standing based on the annual review described in Section
9-5.06 B below. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   B.   Each year, the County shall review any violations or complaints
regarding a Commercial Outfitter and require the Commercial Outfitter to
provide statements regarding any complaints or violations received. The County
reserves the right to refuse to enter into future Agreements with any
Commercial Outfitter who continually violates any rules that govern the
Commercial Outfitter, including the Agreement, or who receives numerous
justified complaints. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   C.   Fees for commercial use of the river plan area will be divided into a
three tiered system of collection as follows:
   1.    Base Fee: The first tier of fees will apply to all commercial
outfitters using local rivers and streams. First-tier fees shall be based upon
a good faith estimate of the amount necessary for the County to process
applications, develop and issue agreements, enforce and administer the
provisions of this Chapter, and to otherwise cover the reasonable regulatory
costs of the program implemented by this Chapter.
   2.   Park Use Fee: The second tier of fees will only apply to commercial
outfitters using County parklands to facilitate their operations, including but
not limited to using parklands for parking of vehicles, camping, picnicking,
stopping or other similar and related activities. Second-tier fees shall be
based on a good faith estimate of the amount necessary to offset the impacts of
the level of use proposed by a commercial outfitter. The amount of the fee
shall be sufficient to fully cover the cost of providing the additional level
of operations, maintenance and repair of park facilities and real property
(including habitat features) that the Director determines, in his or her
discretion, is reasonably necessary to offset the impacts of the level of use
proposed by a commercial outfitter. Such fees are authorized by California
Government Code Section 50402 and other provisions of California law.
   3.   Park Improvement Fee: The third tier of fees will only apply to
commercial outfitters using County parklands to facilitate their operations,
including but not limited to using parklands for parking of vehicles, camping,
picnicking, stopping or other similar and related activities. Third-tier fees
shall be based on a good faith estimate of the amount necessary to plan and
build new park facilities or additions to existing facilities and real property
(including habitat features) that the Director determines, in his or her
discretion, are reasonably necessary to accommodate the level of use proposed
by a commercial outfitter. The operation, maintenance, and repair of such new
or expanded park facilities and real property shall be covered by the Park Use
Fee, described above, following the completion of construction. Such fees are
authorized by California Government Code Section 50402 and other provisions of
California law.
   4.   Fee Payment: Fee revenues may be placed into discrete funds that may be
used exclusively for the purposes described in this subsection. Generally, fees
that apply to more than one commercial outfitter shall be apportioned between
the outfitters in a manner that reasonably reflects each Commercial Outfitter’s
proportional share of costs of the program implemented by this Chapter. The
apportionment formula may be based upon the payment of a percentage of each
Commercial Outfitter’s gross receipts for Commercial River Use or,
alternatively, may be based upon a set fee per customer. If either of these
approaches to fee apportionment and payment is utilized, then either the
percentage of use must be reported each month or the number of persons
commercially rafting must be reported using the County reporting document
specified in the Agreement and the associated fees paid monthly to the County
Parks Division. Generally, fees within tiers that apply to all Commercial
Outfitters shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors. The Director is
authorized to develop and include other categories of fees in individual
Agreements, consistent with the fee structure set forth above, provided such
fees are both consistent with this subsection and reasonably related to the
benefits and burdens of the activities of the Commercial Outfitter to which the
fees apply. Any dispute between the Director and a Commercial Outfitter
regarding such fees may be referred to the Board of Supervisors for resolution.
(§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
Sec. 9-5.07.   River Use Plan Contents.
   The River Use Plan required by Section
9-5.05 shall include, but need not be limited to, the following information:
   A.   Applicant’s name, business name, mailing address, website if available,
email and location of place of business. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   B.   If the place of business is not located in Yolo County, the name,
address, telephone number, and other relevant contact information of an agent
who will be available in the event of emergencies or other problems. (§ 2, Ord.
1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   C.   Full descriptions of all activities proposed to be conducted under the
Commercial River Use Agreement being sought including but not limited to
duration of all activities, camping, food service, waste removal and
maintenance. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   D.   Full description, including location, of all planned ingress and egress
from the water, as well as all rest stops, lunch stops, or other planned non-
emergency stops on adjoining lands. All lands so specified must be a County
Park or property for which the outfitter or private landowner has secured a use
permit (if required under the County Code) that allows the planned use, or
property owned by a state or federal agency. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31,
2012)
   E.   Full description, including location, of the parking facilities for the
Commercial Outfitter’s commercial vehicles, employees, clients, and guests. All
lands specified for parking facilities must be a County Park or property for
which the outfitter or private landowner has secured a use permit that allows
the planned use, or property owned by a state or federal agency. (§ 2, Ord.
1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   F.   Written proof that the applicant has obtained the landowner’s or
managing public agency’s permission for the activities planned on all lands
specified in response to subparagraphs D and E, if the applicant is not the
landowner. Written proof of permission is not required for ’’’’County’ ’’Park’’
locations. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   G. Written confirmation that the Commercial Outfitter will provide shuttle
transportation services to and from all points of ingress and egress. Vehicles
used by the commercial outfitter to transport clients, employees, or equipment
shall meet all current California Vehicle Code requirements. (§ 2, Ord. 1421,
eff. May 31, 2012)
   H.   Full description of planned safety measures for river users that meet
those standards of Section
9-5.10. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   I.   Full description of a name or logo identification, to be utilized on
all floatation devices that are satisfactory to the County. (§ 2, Ord. 1421,
eff. May 31, 2012)
   J.   Written statement that the Commercial Outfitter will provide the
required County insurance for the duration of the Agreement. A copy of the
   County Insurance requirements will be provided to the Commercial Outfitter.
(§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   K.   A copy of a certificate of compliance for CPR and First Aid training
from the American Red Cross or other equivalent training certification approved
by the County for all employees and owners serving as river guides. (§ 2, Ord.
1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
Sec. 9-5.08.   No Vested Right.
   The granting of a Commercial River Use Agreement does not vest any right or
entitlement to an extension or renewal beyond the agreement period. (§ 2, Ord.
1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
Sec. 9-5.09.   Revocation, or Denial of Agreement.
   A.   A Commercial River Use Agreement may be revoked or denied by the
County, according to the terms of the Agreement or, if the Agreement is silent,
in accordance with the provisions of the County Code and state laws governing
the revocation of use permits. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   B.   A Commercial River Use Agreement may be reapplied for prior to the
beginning of the next season and the stated termination date of the Agreement.
As stated in Section
9-5.06.B., above, the County has the discretion to refuse to enter into an
agreement with any Commercial Outfitter who is not in good standing with the
County. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
Sec. 9-5.10.   Safety Equipment and Standards.
   Each Commercial Outfitter shall undertake the safety measures as outlined in
the Commercial River Use Agreement and as follows:
   A.   The Commercial Outfitter shall provide and require all customers to
wear a United States Coast Guard approved personal flotation device at all
times while in or on the stream. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
   B.   The number of persons using a floating device shall not exceed the
floating device’s design capacity, except in an emergency or rescue situation.
(§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
Sec. 9-5.11.   Littering and Trespass.
   All persons, groups or business entities that use the streams and rivers of
the county for recreational or commercial purposes shall be subject to state
law regarding littering and trespass. (§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
Sec. 9-5.12.   Penalty and Enforcement.
   Violations of any provision of this Chapter shall be an infraction and
punishable by means set forth Section 25132 of the California Government Code.
The County may also enforce this Chapter by bringing an action for injunctive
relief and/or other appropriate remedies in the Yolo Superior Court.
(§ 2, Ord. 1421, eff. May 31, 2012)
Chapter 6
VESSEL SANITATION AND MOORING
Sections:
   
9-6.01   Title.
Vessels and Water Safety
   
9-6.02   Definitions.
   
9-6.03   Prohibitions.
   
9-6.04   Enforcement.
   
9-6.05   Vessel Removal.
   
9-6.06   Vessel Disposition.
   
9-6.07   Charges.
   
9-6.08   Sanitation and Pollution.
   
9-6.09   Sunken Vessels.
Mooring and Anchoring Regulations
   
9-6.10   General Restriction.
   
9-6.11   Vessel Requirements.
   
9-6.12   Services.
   
9-6.13   Equipment.
   
9-6.14   Administrative Civil Penalties.
Sec. 9-6.01.   Title.
   This Chapter shall be referred to as the Vessel Sanitation and Mooring
Ordinance.
(§ 3, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016)
VESSELS AND WATER SAFETY
Sec. 9-6.02.   Definitions.
   Unless otherwise specified, the words and phrases used in this Chapter have
the meanings given them in Chapter 5 of Division 3 (Section 650 et seq.) of the
California Harbors and Navigation Code. The following words have the following
meanings for purposes of this Chapter:
   A.   "Floating home" or "floating structure" means a watercraft or structure
that has the following characteristics:
   1.   It is a stationary structure in, on, or above the water that is:
   a.   permanently grounded; or
   b.   supported by a flotation system and held in place by piling or mooring
devices; or
   c.   placed on or otherwise affixed to a foundation, dock, piling, walkway,
gangway, pier, barge, or other permanent structure.
   2.   It is incapable of being used for self-propelled navigation.
   3.   It is designed and built to be used, or is modified to be used, or is
used, to serve purposes or provide services typically associated with a
structure on or other improvement to real property. The term "floating home" or
"floating structure" includes a structure that is used as a residence, place of
business or office with public access, hotel or motel, restaurant or lounge,
clubhouse, meeting facility, storage or parking facility, mining platform, or
similar facility or structure represented as such.
   Incidental or limited movement of a structure upon water or resting
partially or entirely on the bottom does not preclude the structure from being
classified as a floating home or floating structure for purposes of this
Chapter. Registration of a structure as a vessel with the California Department
of Motor Vehicles does not preclude the structure from being classified as a
floating home or floating structure for purposes of this Chapter. Floating
homes and floating structures are expressly excluded from the definition of the
term "vessel" provided in this section.
   B.   "Garbage" has the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code Section
117475.
   C.   "Houseboat", as used in this Chapter, means a vessel that has either a
pontoon or flat-bottomed hull configuration, and has a permanent enclosed
superstructure with sleeping and/or cooking facilities.
   D.   "Marine Sanitation Device" (MSD) is any Type I, II or III device
approved under 33 Code of Federal Regulations Section 159.3 for the treatment
or storage of sewage or waste from sewage.
   E.   "Moor" means to make fast, tie up, or otherwise secure a vessel other
than by anchoring. "Moor" includes to attach to a dock, pilings, spud, walkway,
gangway, pier, or other structure or to tie up to any actual object or feature.
   F.   "Permitted Dock" or "Permitted Marina" is any structure, floating
platform or building, attached to land or floating on piles driven into the
bottom of the waterway, designed for and used as a place to moor a vessel, and
has received a County Use Permit or similar entitlement for that use.
   G.   "Seaworthy" means;
   1.   Capable of traveling on the waters within Yolo County under its own
sailing or mechanical propulsion system and is able to maneuver and rescue
itself should that be required to prevent it from sinking, grounding or
becoming awash; or
   2.   Not in a deteriorated condition that would create a likelihood the
vessel may sink or become awash; and,
   3.   Not creating a pollution or sanitation hazard should the vessel sink or
become awash.
   4.   Not in a deteriorated condition that includes, but is not limited to,
structural damage such as rot or delamination, or is taking on water and cannot
maintain floatation.
   H.   "Sewage" has the meaning set forth in Harbors and Navigation Code
Section 775.5(d).
   I.   "Shore" means that part of the land in immediate contact with a
waterway, including the area between high-tide and low-tide marks or between
high-water and low- water marks.
   J.   "To anchor" means to secure a vessel within a waterway by dropping an
anchor, anchors or other ground tackle including blocks or pulleys, chain,
cable or other types of anchor rode to the bottom of the waterway.
   K.   "Transitory vessel" means a vessel that is not regularly and lawfully
moored or renting a mooring at a permitted marina or dock in Yolo County, or is
transiting or vacationing in the waters of Yolo County, including trailered
recreational vessels.
   L.   "Vessel" means every description of watercraft used or capable of being
used as a means of transportation on the water, including a seaplane on the
water. Exceptions are watercraft specifically designed to operate on a
permanently fixed course, the movement of which is restricted to a fixed track
or arm to which the watercraft is attached or by which the watercraft is
controlled. A "vessel" includes a barge, a dredge, a towboat and its tow, and a
houseboat.
   M.   "Waterway" means any water, lake, river, creek, canal, lagoon, bay,
inlet, slough, channel, or tributary situated within the county, or any water
area situated within the county providing access for vessels to move from one
place to another.
(§ 3, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1513, eff.
October 24, 2019)
Sec. 9-6.03.   Prohibitions.
   A.   No person owning, possessing, or in charge of any vessel, or property
owner or manager where a vessel is attached, shall permit the vessel to be
operated or located in violation of this Chapter.
   B.   All vessels are subject to all applicable provisions of this Chapter
and to all other applicable provisions of county ordinances and state and
federal law.
   C.   A floating home or floating structure is not allowed at any location in
the County unless it meets all applicable zoning, building, health, sanitation,
and other applicable provisions of this Chapter, and meets all applicable
provisions of state and federal law.
   D.   Every vessel entering Yolo County waterways must be registered and
numbered as provided by the laws of the state of California or any other state,
or documented under the laws of the United States. All vessels must remain
currently registered by the state of California or any other state, or
documented by the United States while located in Yolo County waterways.
   E.   No person shall abandon or permit to be abandoned a vessel on any
county highway or on other public property. A vessel is "abandoned" if it is
left on a highway or on public property in such an inoperable or neglected
condition that it may reasonably be concluded that the owner intends to
relinquish all further rights or interests in it. In reaching a reasonable
conclusion, one must consider the amount of time the vessel has not been moved,
its condition, statements from the owner and witnesses, etc.
(§ 3, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1513, eff.
October 24, 2019)
Sec. 9-6.04.   Enforcement.
   A.   The first three violations of this Chapter by any person shall be
punishable as an infraction. The fourth and subsequent violations of this
Chapter by that person shall be punishable as misdemeanors or infractions, at
the District Attorney's discretion. The person is guilty of a separate offense
for each and every day on which a violation of this Chapter occurs.
   B.   Public Nuisance. Violations of this Chapter are a public nuisance and
the county counsel is authorized to prosecute an action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to enjoin the violations and recover costs.
   C.   Enforcement. In addition to any other remedies allowed by law, any
person who violates any provisions of this Chapter is subject to criminal
sanctions, civil actions, and administrative penalties.
   D.   Immediate Threat to Public Health and Safety. Nothing in this Chapter
is intended to alter, affect or restrict the right of the Sheriff to remove any
vessel to address an immediate threat to public health and safety or emergency
condition or situation.
   E.   The Sheriff, code enforcement officer, or any peace officer is
authorized to enforce this Chapter.
   F.   All notices issued by the Sheriff, code enforcement officer or peace
officer pursuant to this Chapter shall be transmitted to the registered vessel
owner by first class mail and shall be attached to the vessel in a conspicuous
place so as to be easily observed by the person in charge of the vessel or by
the agent of the owner, or by personal service by the Sheriff, code enforcement
officer, or peace officer.
   G.   Vessel owner(s) shall be responsible to pay any costs incurred by the
County enforcing provisions of this Chapter.
(§ 3, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1513, eff.
October 24, 2019)
Sec. 9-6.05.   Vessel Removal.
   A.   If the Sheriff determines a vessel is moored, anchored or abandoned in
violation of this Chapter, the Sheriff may issue a Notice to Remove. The notice
will provide a date, 48 hours from the date the Notice to Remove is issued, by
which the vessel's owner must remove the vessel from the waterway, county
highway or public property. When the vessel is on a waterway, removal requires
that the vessel be moved for a minimum of 48 hours and at least 500 yards
beyond the County line. When the vessel is on a county highway or other public
property, the vessel must be moved off any county highway or public property.
   B.   If the vessel's owner does not remove the vessel in accordance with
subsection A, or cause the vessel to be removed after receiving a Notice to
Remove, the Sheriff may remove and store the vessel. The vessel may be
recovered upon proof of ownership and payment of all costs incident to
recovery, movement, impounding, and storage, or may be disposed of in
accordance with Yolo County Code section
9-6.06.
(§ 3, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1513, eff.
October 24, 2019)
Sec. 9-6.06.   Vessel Disposition.
   A.   A vessel removed and stored by the Sheriff in accordance with section
9-6.05 above may be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Article 4
of Chapter 2 of Division 3 of the Harbors and Navigation Code (Boaters Lien
Law). The owner of the vessel will be civilly liable to the County for all
costs, fees, damages and expenses incurred by the County in removing, storing
and selling the vessel.
   B.   Wrecked and abandoned vessels are subject to disposal in accordance
with Chapter 3 of Division 3 of the Harbors and Navigation Code.
(§ 3, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1513, eff.
October 24, 2019)
Sec. 9-6.07.   Charges.
   Charges imposed by the County for services under this Chapter will include
the recovery, movement, impounding, and storage of vessels, and will be in
accordance with the cost recovery rate of the department(s) providing these
services.
(§ 3, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1513, eff.
October 24, 2019)
Sec. 9-6.08.   Sanitation and Pollution.
   A person shall not do any of the following:
   A.   Place, deposit or dump any garbage on or adjacent to the bulkheads,
docks, piers, gangways, or wharves of any waterway where the material is likely
to be washed or otherwise deposited into a waterway by tides, floods, storms,
waves, or accidental displacement;
   B.   Discharge or allow the release of any raw or untreated sewage or oily
waste water from any vessel in the waters of Yolo County;
   C.   Cause any mooring line, water hose, electrical cable or other service
line to extend across a dock, pier, or gangway so as to create a hazardous
condition that could cause accident or injury; or cause or allow any object
such as ladders, tools, canvas, vessels, boat gear, or other materials or
equipment to obstruct free passage along any dock, pier, or gangway; or create
any other hazardous condition on a dock, pier, or gangway that could cause
accident or injury; or
   D.   Leave or store on any dock pier or gangway, or wharf of a waterway any
empty tanks or containers previously used for flammable or combustible liquids,
unless free from explosive vapors, except that empty safety containers may be
kept in storage.
(§ 3, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1513, eff.
October 24, 2019)
Sec. 9-6.09.   Sunken Vessels.
   A.   Whenever a vessel is wrecked or sunk in a waterway, accidentally or
otherwise, the owner shall immediately notify the Sheriff and United States
Coast Guard and mark the vessel's position by a buoy or beacon by day, and by
an electric light visible for at least 100 yards by night, and maintain such
markings until the obstruction is removed. The owner of such a wrecked or
sunken vessel shall immediately commence removal of the vessel and prosecute
the removal diligently to completion, and the failure to do so shall constitute
an abandonment of the vessel and subject the vessel to removal and disposition
in accordance with the provisions of section
9-6.05 and section
9-6.06. No person shall return a wrecked or sunken vessel to its berth within
the waterway without the prior approval of the Sheriff. The owner of a sunken
or wrecked vessel shall be liable for any damage which results to County
property or other vessels in the waterway.
   B.   In accordance with subdivision A, a vessel that is not properly marked,
or a vessel where removal does not commence immediately and is not completed
within 14 days, is subject to removal, storage, and disposal in accordance with
Yolo County Code section
9-6.05 and section
9-6.06.
(§ 3, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1513, eff.
October 24, 2019)
MOORING AND ANCHORING REGULATIONS
Sec. 9-6.10.   General Restriction.
   A.   Mooring and Anchoring. Except as otherwise permitted by this Chapter,
no person shall moor, anchor, ground, place, or otherwise locate any vessel in
any waterway for more than 96 consecutive hours.
   B.   Permitted Mooring Locations. Notwithstanding subsection A of this
section, a vessel may be moored at the following locations to the extent
permitted by law:
   1.   A marina, provided the marina and the vessel are in compliance with all
applicable laws; or
   2.   A boat slip or berth, provided the boat slip or berth and the vessel
are in compliance with all applicable laws; or
   3.   A wharf, dock, or pier, provided the wharf, dock, or pier and the
vessel are in compliance with all applicable laws and the property owner, or
owner's authorized representative, has consented to the vessel being moored at
the location.
   C.   Vacating the Waterway. Upon notice of a violation of subsection A of
this section, the owner or operator shall either move the vessel to a location
described in subsection B of this section or leave the County of Yolo waterway
for at least 48 consecutive hours, and at least 500 yards beyond the County
line, before returning the vessel to the waterway.
   D.   Services. No person shall furnish or supply electrical services,
natural gas, fresh water, or a sewer connection to any vessel anchored or
moored in violation of this section.
   E.   Lights. No person shall anchor or moor a vessel between sunset and
sunrise without displaying lights as prescribed by federal and state laws,
rules, and regulations regarding anchor lights in inland waters.
   F.   Buoys. No person shall moor a vessel at a buoy in violation of
California Harbors and Navigation Code Sections 307 and 308.
   G.   Exemptions. Subsection A of this section does not apply to any vessel
operated by the United States of America, the state of California, or any
governmental entity, its agencies, or instrumentalities, or any vessel
operating on behalf of any of these entities in connection with the dredging of
any waterway, channel, harbor, or marina; flood protection projects; or levee
repair, maintenance, or construction.
(§ 3, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1513, eff.
October 24, 2019)
Sec. 9-6.11.   Vessel Requirements.
   A.   A vessel may be moored in a marina if all of the following requirements
are met:
   1.   The vessel is in a seaworthy condition in accordance with Yolo County
Code section
9-6.02(G), and poses no threat of pollution or sanitation hazard;
   2.   The vessel is capable of self-propelled navigation in accordance with
Yolo County Code section
9-6.02(G), and poses no threat of pollution or sanitation hazard;
   3.   The vessel is moored in compliance with all applicable permit
conditions imposed on the marina;
   4.   The owner permits on-site inspections of the vessel for compliance with
this Chapter, including that it is in a seaworthy condition in accordance with
Yolo County Code section
9-6.02(G), by law enforcement or other County personnel during reasonable
hours; and
   5.   The vessel is moored in compliance with all applicable state and
federal laws.
   B.   A vessel may be moored at a permitted dock to the extent permitted by
law if all of the following requirements are met:
   1.   The vessel is in a seaworthy condition in accordance with Yolo County
Code section
9-6.02(G), and poses no threat of pollution or sanitation hazard;
   2.   The vessel is capable of self-propelled navigation in accordance with
Yolo County Code section
9-6.02(G), and poses no threat of pollution or sanitation hazard;
   3.   The owner permits on-site inspections of the vessel for compliance with
this Chapter, including that it is in a seaworthy condition in accordance with
Yolo County Code section
9-6.02(G), by law enforcement or other County personnel during reasonable
hours;
   4.   The vessel does not obstruct navigation; and
   5.   The vessel is moored in compliance with all applicable state and
federal laws.
(§ 3, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1513, eff.
October 24, 2019)
Sec. 9-6.12.   Services.
   No person shall furnish or supply electrical service, natural gas or fresh
water, or provide a sewer connection, to any vessel moored or anchored in
violation of this Chapter.
(§ 3, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016)
Sec. 9-6.13.   Equipment.
   A.   Any vessel moored or anchored shall be moored or anchored in such a
manner to prevent it from dragging anchor, becoming adrift or breaking away
from its mooring which may result in a threat of pollution or sanitation
hazard.
   B.   Mooring lines at docks and marinas shall be installed in a manner that
will maintain a moored vessel within its berth and prevent the vessel from
posing a safety hazard to the berth or to adjoining vessels.
(§ 3, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1513, eff.
October 24, 2019)
Sec. 9-6.14.   Administrative Civil Penalties.
   A.   Imposition. Pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4, and in
addition to any other remedies provided by County Code or state law, there is
imposed an administrative civil penalty of up to $5,000 dollars for each
separate violation of this Chapter. Notice of any administrative civil penalty
shall be served and proof of service shall be made in the same manner as
provided in subsection
9-6.04(F) of this Chapter.
   The Sheriff shall determine and notify the violator of the time within which
the violator must correct or remedy the violation. The violation notice shall
state that an administrative civil penalty will be imposed if the violation is
not remedied or corrected within the time stated. The notice shall state that
any administrative civil penalty may be appealed and administratively reviewed
by a hearing officer.
   B.   Administrative Review. Enforcement of the administrative civil penalty
imposed by the Sheriff shall be by written order issued by the hearing officer
following notice and an opportunity for hearing. Procedures concerning notice,
conduct of the hearing, and service are provided below. The order of the
hearing officer concerning the administrative civil penalty shall be in writing
resolving the essential issues raised and confirming, amending or rejecting the
administrative civil penalty imposed by the Sheriff. In reaching a decision
concerning any administrative civil penalty, the hearing officer shall be
guided by factors including, but not limited to: the danger to public health,
safety and welfare represented by the violation, recidivism, and any economic
benefit associated with non-compliance.
   C.   A hearing officer designated by the County Administrator shall conduct
those administrative hearings required by this section.
   1.   Hearings--Generally. At the time set for hearing, the hearing officer
shall hear the testimony of the enforcing department(s), the owner, and other
competent persons respecting the condition of the vessel, and other relevant
facts concerning the matter.
   2.   Record of Oral Evidence at Hearing. The proceedings at the hearing may
be reported by a tape recorder.
   3.   Continuances. The hearing officer may, upon request of the owner of the
vessel or upon request of the enforcing department, grant continuances from
time to time for good cause shown, or upon his/her own motion.
   4.   Oaths; Certification. In any proceedings under this Chapter, the
hearing examiner has the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to
certify to official acts.
   5.   Evidence Rules. California Government Code Section 11513, subsections
(a), (b) and (c), as presently written or later amended, shall apply to
hearings conducted under this Chapter.
   6.   Rights of Parties. Each party may represent themselves, or be
represented by anyone of their choice who is lawfully permitted to do so.
   7.   Official Notice. In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken,
either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact which
may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or which may appear in
any of the official records of the County or any of its departments.
   8.   Inspection of Vessels. The hearing officer may inspect the vessel
involved in the hearing prior to, during or after the hearing, provided that:
   a.   Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the
inspection is made;
   b.   The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the
inspection; and
   c.   The hearing officer shall state for the record during the hearing, or
file a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record,
upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed and the
conclusion drawn therefrom.
   d.   Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so
stated by the hearing examiner either for the record during the hearing or by
filing a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing
record.
   9.   Form and Contents of Decision; Finality of Decision. If it is shown by
a preponderance of the evidence that the condition of the vessel violates the
provisions of this Chapter:
   a.   The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall
contain findings of fact and a determination of the issues presented. The
decision shall also require the owner to commence abatement of the nuisance not
later than ten days after the issuance of the decision, and that the abatement
be completed within such time as specified by the hearing officer, or in the
alternative, within the time designated by the Sheriff. The decision shall
inform the owner that if the nuisance is not abated within the time specified,
the nuisance may be abated by the County in such manner as may be ordered by
the Sheriff and the expense thereof made a lien on the property involved.
   b.   The decision shall also inform the owner that the time for judicial
review is governed by the California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.
Copies of the decision shall be delivered to the parties personally or sent to
them by certified mail. The decision shall be final when signed by the hearing
officer.
   10.   Service of the Hearing Officer's Decision.  Upon issuance of the
decision, the Sheriff shall post a copy of the decision conspicuously on the
vessel involved, if possible, and shall serve a copy on the record owner by
first class mail and one copy shall be served on each of the following, if
known to the Sheriff or disclosed from official public records: the owner or
holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any other estate or legal
interest of record in the vessel.
   11.   Judicial Review. The manner of contesting the final order of the
hearing officer concerning any administrative civil penalty is governed by
Government Code Section 53069.4, or any successor provision thereto. Service of
the notice of appeal authorized by Government Code Section 53069.4 on the
County shall be served upon the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
   12.   Separate Offense for Each Day of Violation/Continuing Violation. Each
person violating this Chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of
this Chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by any such person. Any
violation which persists for more than one day is deemed a continuing violation
for the purpose of this Chapter.
   13.   Collection. In addition to all remedies contained in this Chapter, the
County may pursue all reasonable and legal means in collecting those sums
authorized and due.
(§ 3, Ord. 1476, eff. December 22, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1513, eff.
October 24, 2019)
Title 10
ENVIRONMENT
Chapters:
1.   Environmental Impact Assessments
2.   Elm Trees
3.   Cache Creek Area Plan In-Channel Maintenance Mining Ordinance
4.   Off-Channel Surface Mining
5.   Surface Mining Reclamation
6.   Agriculture
7.   Groundwater
8.   Agricultural Surface Mining and Reclamation Ordinance
9.   Stormwater Management and Discharge Control
10.   Habitat Mitigation Ordinance
11.   Gravel Mining Fee Ordinance
12.   Off-Highway Vehicle Use and Operation
13.   Yolo HCP/NCCP
14.   Industrial Hemp Cultivation, Manufacturing, Processing, and Storage
Chapter 1
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENTS*
*   Chapter 1 consisting of Article 1 entitled “General”, consisting of Section
10-1.101, Article 2 entitled “Purpose”, consisting of Section 10-1.201, Article
3 entitled “Policy”, consisting of Sections 10-1.301 through 10-1.304, Article
4 entitled “Definitions”, consisting of Sections 10-1.401 through 10-1.403,
Article 5 entitled “Prohibitions”, consisting of Sections 10-1.501 and 10-
1.502, Article 6 entitled “Application of Chapter Provisions: Exceptions”,
consisting of Sections 10-1.601 through 10-1.606, Article 7 entitled
“Procedure”, consisting of Sections 10-1 .701 through 10-1.704, Article 8
entitled “Initial Environmental Review”, consisting of Sections 10-1.801
through 10-1.808, Article 9 entitled “Negative Declarations”, consisting of
Sections 10-1.901 through 10-1.909, Article 10 entitled “Environmental Impact
Reports”, consisting of Sections 10-1.1001 through 10-1.1010, Article 11
entitled “Appeals”, consisting of Sections 10-1.1101 through 10-1.1108, and
Article 12 entitled “Validity”, consisting of Section 10-1.1201, as added by
Ordinance No. 679, effective April 5, 1973, as amended by Ordinance Nos. 729,
effective September 17, 1975, and 945, effective February 24, 1983, repealed by
Ordinance No. 1020, effective October 17, 1985.
Sections:
Article 1. Authority and Purpose
   
10-1.101   Authority.
   
10-1.102   Purpose.
Article 2. Adoption of Regulations
   
10-1.201   Adoption of the State CEQA Guidelines.
   
10-1.202   Appeals.
Article 3. Procedures
   
10-1.301   Delegation of authority to the Environmental Officer.
   
10-1.302   Application process.
   
10-1.303   Preparation of initial studies (Repealed).
   
10-1.304   Categorical exemptions. (Repealed).
   
10-1.305   Preparation of EIRs or negative declarations. (Repealed).
   
10-1.306   NDs and EIRs: Consultations. (Repealed).
   
10-1.307   Availability of draft environmental documents.
   
10-1.308   Public hearings. (Repealed).
   
10-1.309   Notice of determination. (Repealed).
   
10-1.310   Delegation of authority of the Community Development Agency.
(Repealed).
Article 4. Appeals (Repealed).
Article 5. Validity (Repealed).
Article 1.
Authority and Purpose
Sec. 10-1.101.   Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 21082 of the
Public Resources Code of the State and Section 15000 of Title 14 of the
California Administrative Code. (§ 2, Ord. 1020, eff. October 17, 1985)
Sec. 10-1.102.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to adopt the State CEQA Guidelines as the
regulations for the County regarding the objectives, criteria, and procedures
for the evaluation of projects and the preparation of environmental impact
reports or negative declarations pursuant to the California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA) and regulations promulgated thereunder, and to adopt
additional local procedures to implement the State CEQA Guidelines. (§ 2, Ord.
1020, eff. October 17, 1985)
Article 2.
Adoption of Regulations
Sec. 10-1.201.   Adoption of the State CEQA Guidelines.
   For the purpose of adopting objectives, criteria, and procedures for the
evaluation of projects and the preparation of environmental impact reports and
negative declarations as required by CEQA, the State CEQA Guidelines, together
with its appendices, adopted pursuant to Section 21093 of the Public Resources
Code of the State and set forth in Sections 15000 et seq. three (3) copies of
which are on file in the office of the County Clerk for public record and
inspection, hereby are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as
though set forth in this chapter in full; subject, however, to the amendments,
additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter, and said Guidelines shall
be known as the “County EIR Guidelines”.
   It is the intent and purpose of this section that the State EIR Guidelines,
as they are amended from time to time shall be the County EIR Guidelines
without further amendment to this chapter, and that said amendments shall be
effective for all purposes relevant to this chapter upon the date said
amendments become effective. (§ 2, Ord. 1020, eff. October 17, 1985)
Sec. 10-1.202.   Appeals.
   Decisions of the Environmental Officer under this chapter shall take effect,
and appeals thereof made and considered, in the manner provided in Article 33
of chapter 2 of this Title. (§ 18, Ord. 1178, eff. April 27, 1995)
Article 3.
Procedures
Sec. 10-1.301.   Delegation of authority to the Environmental Officer.
   The Director of the Community Development Agency is hereby appointed as the
Environmental Officer to perform such duties and exercise such authority as set
forth in this article.
   The Director is hereby authorized to delegate to such appropriate members of
the staff of the Community Development Agency the powers and duties of the
Environmental Officer as set forth in this article, including the following:
   (a)   The determination of whether a project is exempt;
   (b)   Consultations with responsible and trustee agencies in determining
whether a Negative Declaration or EIR should be prepared;
   (c)   The preparation of a Negative Declaration or EIR;
   (d)   The filing of required notices;
   (e)   Administering contracts with EIR consultants; and
   (f)   Issuing administrative regulations consistent with and to implement
this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 1020, eff. October 17, 1985)
Sec. 10-1.302.   Application process.
   The applicant shall submit the project application to the Community
Development Agency and pay all the fees necessary for environmental processing.
The Community Development Agency shall enter the application for a permit in a
logbook kept by the Environmental Officer for the purposes of assigning a
control number to the project. Pursuant to the State CEQA Guidelines, the
Environmental Officer shall determine whether the project qualifies for a
categorical exemption from the preparation of additional environmental
documents or is exempt from the CEQA. If a project application is received
which will be subject to approval by one or more responsible agencies, the
Environmental Officer shall consult with such agency or agencies prior to
determining whether a Negative Declaration or Environmental Impact Report is
required for the project. (§ 2, Ord. 1020, eff. October 17, 1985)
Sec. 10-1.303.   Preparation of initial studies.
   Repealed*. (§ 2, Ord. 1020, eff. October 17, 1985; * § 19, Ord. 1178 eff.
April 27, 1995)
Sec. 10-1.304.   Categorical exemptions.
   Repealed*. (§ 2, Ord. 1020, eff. October 17, 1985; * § 19, Ord. 1178 eff.
April 27, 1995)
Sec. 10-1.305.   Preparation of EIRs or negative declarations.
   Repealed*. (§ 2, Ord. 1020, eff. October 17, 1985; * § 19, Ord. 1178 eff.
April 27, 1995)
Sec. 10-1.306.   NDs and EIRs: Consultations.
   Repealed*. (§ 2, Ord. 1020, eff. October 17, 1985; * § 19, Ord. 1178 eff.
April 27, 1995)
Sec. 10-1.307.   Availability of draft environmental documents.
   Repealed*. (§ 2, Ord. 1020, eff. October 17, 1985; * § 19, Ord. 1178 eff.
April 27, 1995)
Sec. 10-1.308.   Public hearings.
   Repealed*. (§ 2, Ord. 1020, eff. October 17, 1985; * § 19, Ord. 1178 eff.
April 27, 1995)
Sec. 10-1.309.   Notice of determination.
   Repealed*. (§ 2, Ord. 1020, eff. October 17, 1985; * § 19, Ord. 1178 eff.
April 27, 1995)
Sec. 10-1.310.   Delegation of authority of the Community Development Agency.
   Repealed*. (§ 2, Ord. 1020, eff. October 17, 1985; * § 19, Ord. 1178 eff.
April 27, 1995)
Article 4.
Appeals
   Repealed*. (Sections 10-1.401 through 10-1.460, codified from Ordinance No.
1020; * Ord. 1178, eff. April 27, 1995)
Article 5.
Validity
   Repealed*. (Sections 10-1.501 through 10-1.502, codified form Ordinance No.
1020; * Ord. 1178, eff. April 27, 1995)
Chapter 2
ELM TREES
Sections:
   
10-2.01   Prohibitions.
   
10-2.02   Violations: Penalties
Sec. 10-2.01.   Prohibition.
   No person shall import into or export from the County any plants, or parts
thereof, of the genus Ulmus, including firewood, logs, cuttings, bark,
branches, or mature trees. (§ 1, Ord. 737, eff. October 13, 1975)
Sec. 10-2.02.   Violations: Penalties.
   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. (§ 1, Ord. 737, eff. October 13, 1975)
Chapter 3
CACHE CREEK AREA PLAN IN-CHANNEL ORDINANCE*
*Title 10, Chapter 3 of the Yolo County Code shall be entitled “Cache Creek
Area Plan In-Channel Maintenance Mining Ordinance,” and shall read in full as
follows: (§ 3, Ord. 1376, eff. Aug. 14, 2008):
Sections:
Article 1. Title, Authority, and Purpose
   
10-3.101   Title.
   
10-3.102   Authority.
   
10-3.103   Purpose.
Article 2. Definitions
   
10-3.201   Scope.
   
10-3.202   Act.
   
10-3.203   Commercial Mining.
   
10-3.204   Director.
   
10-3.205   Excavation.
   
10-3.206   In-Channel.
   
10-3.207   Material Removal.
   
10-3.208   Off-Channel.
   
10-3.209   Site Specific Plan.
   
10-3.210   Technical Advisory Committee.
Article 3. Scope and Exemptions
   
10-3.301   Scope of regulations.
   
10-3.302   Scope: Area defined.
   
10-3.303   Exemptions: Defined.
   
10-3.304   Exemptions.
Article 4. In-Channel Material Removal Standards
   
10-3.401   Access Roads.
   
10-3.402   Adherence to CCRMP/CCIP.
   
10-3.403   Agency Approvals.
   
10-3.404   Cultural Resources.
   
10-3.405   Design Guidelines.
   
10-3.406   Exceptions.
   
10-3.406.1   Habitat Conservation Plan Compliance.
   
10-3.407   Hazards and Hazardous Materials.
   
10-3.408   Hours of Operation.
   
10-3.409   Limitations on Removal of Material.
   
10-3.410   Location.
   
10-3.411.   Noise.
   
10-3.412.   Permit Life.
   
10-3.413.   Processing Prohibition.
   
10-3.414.   Re-grading.
   
10-3.414.1   Restoration.
   
10-3.415.   Re-vegetation.
   
10-3.416.   Seasonal Restrictions.
   
10-3.417.   Setbacks.
   
10-3.418.   Slopes.
   
10-3.419.   Surveys.
Article 5. In-Channel Approval Process
   
10-3.501   Applications: Contents.
   
10-3.502   Applications: Waiver of Information.
   
10-3.503   Applications: Filing.
   
10-3.504   Applications: Review.
   
10-3.505   Findings for Permit Approval.
   
10-3.506   Decision.
   
10-3.507   Appeals.
Article 6. Amendments and Minor Modifications to Approved Flood Hazard
Development Permits
   
10-3.601   Amendments and Minor Modifications: Purpose.
   
10-3.602   Amendments: Applications.
   
10-3.603   Amendments: Exceptions.
   
10-3.604   Minor Modifications.
   
10-3.605   Amendments and Modifications.
Article 7. Annual Reports
   
10-3.701   Cache Creek Monitoring Program.
   
10-3.702   Channel Improvement Projects.
Article 8. Fees
   
10-3.801   Fees: Applications.
Article 9. Confidentiality of Records
   
10-3.901   Confidentiality of Records.
Article 10. Inspections: Notices of Violations
   
10-3.1001   Inspections: Purpose.
   
10-3.1002   Inspections: Annual.
   
10-3.1003   Annual Inspections: Notification.
   
10-3.1004   Inspections: Designee.
   
10-3.1005   Violations: Notice.
   
10-3.1006   Violations: Order to Comply.
   
10-3.1007   Violations: Hearing.
   
10-3.1008   Violations: Revocation.
   
10-3.1009   Violations: Administrative Penalties.
   
10-3.1010   Violations: Public Nuisance.
Article 1.
Title, Authority, and Purpose
Sec. 10-3.101.   Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the "Cache Creek Area Plan In-Channel
Ordinance of Yolo County" or “In-Channel Ordinance”. It replaces the "Interim
In-Channel Surface Mining Regulations of Yolo County". (as amended by Ord.
1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.102.   Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the California
Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (SMARA) of 1975, Chapter 9 of Division 2 of
the Public Resources Code of the State, commencing with Section 2710; and
pursuant to the powers of the County to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare pursuant to Section 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the State.
(as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.103.    Purpose.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of the
Cache Creek Area Plan (CCAP) as related to allowed in-channel activities.
Limited material removal activities related to channel stabilization,
maintenance of flood flow capacity, erosion protection, protection of existing
structures and infrastructure, riparian restoration, and implementation of the
Channel Form Template may be performed pursuant to the Cache Creek Resources
Management Plan (CCRMP) and the Cache Creek Improvement Program (CCIP). This
material removal is necessary and required in order to allow landowners to
protect structures, infrastructure and land uses along the creek and
downstream, from damage from natural creek forces (scour, erosion, deposition,
washout, etc.). This chapter establishes the regulations applicable to all
material removal allowed to occur within Cache Creek, within the boundaries of
the CCAP.
   (b)   Stabilizing the channel banks and profiles pursuant to the CCRMP/CCIP
will result in reduced erosion, increased in-channel recharge, and additional
riparian habitat opportunities. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13,
2020)
Article 2.
Definitions
Sec. 10-3.201.   Scope.
   The definitions set forth in Article 2 of Chapters 4 and 5 of Title 10 of
the County Code shall apply throughout this chapter. (as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.202.   Act.
   "Act" shall mean the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975,
specifically referring to Chapter 9 of Division 2 of the Public Resources Code,
Sections 2710 et seq. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.203.   Commercial Mining.
   "Commercial mining" shall mean mining undertaken for the sole and/or primary
purpose of commercial gain. Pursuant to the CCAP, commercial in-channel mining
is precluded within Cache Creek. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13,
2020)
Sec. 10-3.204.   Director.
   As used within this Chapter, “Director” shall refer to the County
Administrator, or a designee chosen by the County Administrator (as amended by
§ 2, Ord. 1407, eff. April 28, 2011). (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.205.   Excavation.
   As used within this Chapter, "excavation" shall be synonymous with "material
removal" as defined below. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.206.   In-Channel.
   "In-Channel" shall mean that portion of Cache Creek (approximately______
acres in total) depicted in Figure_____ of the CCRMP as falling within the
creek channel boundary. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.207.   Maintenance Mining.
   “Material removal” also referred to as “maintenance mining” shall mean
excavation or fill undertaken for the sole and/or primary purpose of channel
stabilization, maintenance of flood flow capacity, erosion protection,
protection of existing structures and infrastructure, riparian restoration, and
implementation of the Channel Form Template as described in the CCIP and
consistent with the CCRMP. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.208.   Off-Channel.
   "Off-Channel" shall mean that portion of the lower Cache Creek basin
depicted in Figure_____ of the CCRMP as falling outside of the creek channel
boundary. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.209.   Site Specific Plan.
   "Site specific plan" shall mean an individual project plan for which a Flood
Hazard Development Permit (FHDP) is approved by the Director that is consistent
with the CCRMP (Public Res. Code Section 2715.5(d)). Site specific plans shall,
at a minimum, include the information required by Section 2715.5(d) of the Act
and such additional information as may be required pursuant to this chapter.
Pursuant to Section 103.506 an approved application for a FHDP shall constitute
a site specific plan. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.210.   Technical Advisory Committee.
   "Technical Advisory Committee" shall be as defined in the CCRMP/CCIP and
shall also be known as the "TAC". The TAC is established to provide scientific
and technical review for all projects conducted under the CCIP. Members of the
TAC may be contracted by the County Administrator. The TAC is comprised of
members with technical expertise in river systems, including hydraulic
engineering, fluvial geomorphology, biology, and riparian restoration (as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1407, eff. April 28, 2011). (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Article 3.
Scope and Exemptions
Sec. 10-3.301.   Scope of regulations.
   Unless otherwise provided in this article, no person or entity shall conduct
in-channel material removal operations unless a FHDP has been approved in
accordance with
Chapter 4 of Title 8 of the County Code (commencing with Section
8-4.404) and a Site Specific Plan and financial assurances as described in the
Act (Public Res. Code Section 2715.5) have been approved in accordance with
this chapter. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.302.   Scope: Area defined.
   This chapter shall apply only to material removal activities that occur
within the area located within the boundary of Cache Creek as defined in the
Cache Creek Area Plan of the Yolo County General Plan. The conduct of mining
outside of the channel of Cache Creek is regulated by Chapter 4 of this title
and shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (as amended by Ord.
1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.303.   Exemptions: Defined.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to those activities and
operations, which are exempted by Sections 2714 (e.g. farming, construction
projects, etc.) and 2776 (vested rights) of the Act. Any exemption granted from
the provisions of this chapter shall not, in and of itself, exempt a project or
activity from the application of other applicable regulations and requirements.
(as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.304.   Exemptions: Applications.
   Applications for exemptions shall be submitted to the Director for review
and determination as to completeness. If the application is determined
incomplete, the Director shall notify the applicant in writing within thirty
(30) days, specifically describing the information necessary to complete the
application. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Director shall
determine whether the operation is exempt or is subject to the provisions of
this chapter. Any person with standing may appeal the Director's decision to
the Planning Commission pursuant to Article 10 of Chapter 4 or Title 10. (as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Article 4.
In-Channel Material Removal Standards
Sec. 10-3.401.   Access Roads.
   (a)   All unpaved roads used during in-channel material removal operations
shall be adequately watered to keep soil moist at all times, in order to
control fugitive dust.
   (b)   Upon cessation of use, operational areas and haul roads that are not
required for future use of the site shall be ripped and prepared to prevent
compaction and allow for revegetation.
   (c)   In-channel haul roads shall be located along the toe of the
streambank, in order to provide additional bank stabilization and to minimize
disturbance of the low-flow channel. In areas where the low-flow channel is
immediately adjacent to the toe of the streambank, inchannel haul roads shall
be designed to protect the low flow channel. This design shall be submitted to
the TAC for review and comment. Each operation may have no more than two (2)
haul roads at one time that cross the low-flow channel. Construction of the
haul roads shall not result in excavation of the toe of the streambank, and
shall be designed to avoid existing or restored riparian habitat.
   (d)   No new haul roads shall be constructed through established native
riparian vegetation. Haul roads shall be realigned or redesigned to avoid
established habitat.
   (e)   Haul roads shall comply with all applicable requirements and
conditions of approval. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.402.   Adherence to CCRMP/CCIP.
The general standard for material removal or fill within the creek shall be to
ensure that the CCRMP and CCIP are strictly followed. This article sets forth
minimum acceptable in-channel material removal standards to implement this
general standard. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.403.   Agency approvals.
   All work within the channel shall comply with the requirements of all
agencies of jurisdiction, including but not limited to: Yolo County Building
Division (engineered plans for dams or sills), Yolo County CCRMP and CCIP (all
applicable standards), the State Department of Conservation (SMARA compliance),
the State Department of Fish and Wildlife (Section 1601 Streambed Alteration
Agreement), the State Regional Water Quality Control Board (Section 401 and
stormwater discharge), Caltrans (protection of bridges and highways), the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers (Section 404), the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services
(Endangered Species Act), and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (Flood
Hazard Development Permit). These requirements may take the form of
programmatic ("general") permits issued for the entire CCRMP/CCIP for a multi-
year period if proposed activities are deemed consistent with the provisions of
those permits by the Director. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13,
2020)
Sec. 10-3.404.   Cultural Resources.
   (a)   All resource records shall be checked for the presence of and the
potential for prehistoric and historic sites, paleontological resources, and
unique geologic features. Damaging effects to cultural resources shall be
avoided whenever possible. If avoidance is not feasible, the importance of the
site shall be evaluated by a qualified professional (e.g. archeologist,
paleontologist, or geologist, depending on the resource type) prior to the
commencement of operations. If a cultural or unique geological resource is
determined not to be important, both the resource and the effect on it shall be
reported to the County, and the resource need not be considered further. If
avoidance of an important cultural, paleontological, or unique geologic
resource is not feasible, a mitigation plan shall be prepared and implemented.
The mitigation plan shall explain the importance of the resource, describe the
proposed approach to mitigate destruction or damage to the site, and
demonstrate how the proposed mitigation would serve the public interest.
   (b)   If human skeletal remains are encountered during material removal, all
work within seventy-five (75) feet shall immediately stop, and the County
Coroner shall be notified within twenty-four (24) hours. If the remains are of
Native American origin, the appropriate Native American community identified by
the Native American Heritage Commission shall be contacted, and an agreement
for treating or disposing, with appropriate dignity, of the remains and
associated grave goods shall be developed.
   (c)   If any cultural resources, such as chipped or ground stone, historic
debris, building foundations, or paleontological materials are encountered
during material removal, then all work within seventy-five (75) feet shall
immediately stop and the Director shall be notified at once. Any cultural or
paleontological resources found on the site shall be recorded by a qualified
archaeologist or paleontologist using relevant professional protocols and a
report fully recording the find shall be submitted to the County. This report
shall include recommendations for appropriate treatment of the resource/
artifact. The County encourages the donation of resources, other than tribal
cultural resources, to the County for public display at the Cache Creek Nature
Preserve or other appropriate venue.
(as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.405.    Design Guidelines.
   All in-channel activities shall be consistent with and fully implement the
design guidelines for channel stabilization and maintenance contained in
Chapter 5.0 of the CCIP. Where feasible and appropriate, as recommended by the
TAC, the Channel Form Template shall be implemented as a part of the in-channel
work. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.406.   Exceptions.
   Where an applicant demonstrates to the lead agency that an exception to the
standards specified in this article is necessary, the TAC may recommend an
alternative standard for inclusion in the FHDP. Exceptions will be considered
by the Director only where necessary due to special circumstances associated
with the subject site, including size, shape, topography, location, or
surroundings. Although the TAC may recommend alternative standards, in all
cases the alternative standard must meet or exceed the policy objectives,
technical requirements, and/or environmental thresholds set forth in the OCMP,
as determined by the Director (see Article 5). (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.406.1.   Habitat Conservation Plan Compliance.
   All in-channel activities performed under the CCRMP and CCIP shall be
consistent with applicable components of the Yolo County Habitat Conservation
Plan/Natural Community Conservation Plan (HCP/NCCP). (as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.407.   Hazards and Hazardous Materials.
   (a)   All heavy equipment used for channel improvement projects shall be
kept in good working order to reduce emissions and preclude the leakage of
oils, fuels, and other substances that may adversely affect property, the
environment, or human health and safety. Fueling and maintenance activities
shall not occur within one-hundred (100) feet of the Channel Form Template
boundary or active channel, whichever is wider. All procedures for handling,
storage, and disposal of hazardous materials shall be described in a Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plan if required for the projects. Any long-term
project (e.g., extensive erosion control, gravel removal) shall have a chemical
spill prevention and emergency plan filed and approved by the appropriate local
agency. The plan must include training of the equipment operator and workers in
spill reporting and how to minimize environmental damage.
   (b)   Firms or individuals performing work within the channel shall
immediately notify the Director and/or the Yolo County Office of Emergency
Services of any events such as fires, explosions, spills, land or slope
failures, or other conditions at the site which could pose a risk to property,
the environment, or human health and safety outside the permitted area. Upon
request by any County agency, the firm or individual shall provide a written
report of any such event, within thirty (30) days, which shall include, but not
be limited to, a description of the facts of the event, the corrective measures
used, and the steps taken to prevent a recurrence of the incident. This
condition does not supersede nor replace any requirement of any other
government agency for reporting incidents.
   (c)   A Hazardous Materials Plan and the Spill Prevention Countermeasure
Contingency Plan, if required, shall be filed with the Yolo County
Environmental Health Division, prior to the commencement of work within the
channel.
   (d)   Wastewater from in-channel projects shall not be directly discharged
to Cache Creek. Measures such as berms, silt fences, sediment ponds, hay bales,
and/or revegetation shall be used to control erosion. Agricultural tailwater
shall be diverted to catchment basins prior to release to the creek.
   (e)   Sediment fines generated by processing of in-channel sand and gravel
shall not be used for agricultural soil enhancement or creek revegetation
projects. In-channel sediment fines shall only be used as backfill material in
off-channel habitat restoration if it can be demonstrated that sediment quality
is acceptable based on applicable regulations and standards.
   (f)   All internal combustion engine driven equipment and vehicles shall be
kept tuned according to the manufacturer’s specifications and properly
maintained to minimize the leakage of oils and fuels. No vehicles or equipment
shall be left idling for a period of longer than ten (10) minutes.
   (g)   For bank repair projects using fill, appropriate leaching tests on
fill materials shall be conducted to determine if it contains leachable
constituents at concentrations of potential concern. If potential fill material
is found to contain constituents at levels exceeding applicable thresholds,
that fill materials shall not be used. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.408.   Hours of Operation.
   All in-channel operations shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, unless emergency conditions require otherwise as
determined by the Director. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.409.   Limitations on Removal of Material.
   (a)   Where gravel bars are to be removed, there shall be minimal
disturbance of established, mature riparian vegetation and there shall be
preservation of geomorphic controls on channel gradient where they exist.
Complete removal of gravel bars may be recommended by the TAC and approved by
the Director only if hydraulic conditions related to the bar are recognized to
threaten structures and property.
   (b)   Aggregate material to be removed from the streambed or streambank
under approved in-channel projects shall be removed as soon as is practicable
after deposition, prior to the establishment of vegetation. No stockpiles shall
be left within the channel after material removal has been completed.
   (c)   The amount of aggregate removed from the channel shall be limited to
the average annual amount of sand and gravel (and associated fines) deposited
since the last prior year of inchannel material removal as estimated by the TAC
based on channel topography and bathymetry, not to exceed 690,800 tons annually
on average over a ten (10) year period, except where bank widening is necessary
as a part of implementing the Channel Form Template, or where potential erosion
and flooding problems exist. The amount and location of in-channel aggregate
material removal shall be carried out according to the ongoing recommendations
of the TAC and any related County approvals, with the voluntary cooperation of
the landowners.
   (d)   Aggregate material removed pursuant to this ordinance may be sold
(CCRMP, Section 6.1, para. 5). This material is excluded from the tonnage
allocation assigned to each off-channel operator pursuant to an approved FHDP
(CCRMP, Section 6.1, para. 7).
   (e)   The volume of aggregate material removed pursuant to this ordinance
shall be reported to the County on an annual and total-per-permit basis.
   (f)   Unless a subsequent environmental impact assessment is completed or a
determination is made that a subsequent environmental impact assessment is not
necessary, the combined volume of aggregate material removed from in-channel
and off-channel sources that is transported on the County roadway network in
any given year shall not exceed the annual allocation assigned to the
applicable off-channel operator (as specified in their approved mining permit).
(as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.410.   Location.
   Removal of in-channel aggregate materials shall only occur pursuant to this
chapter and pursuant to the requirements of the CCRMP/CCIP. Removal of in-
channel aggregate materials shall be restricted to locations within the Cache
Creek channel that fall within the boundaries of the CCAP. (as amended by Ord.
1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.411.   Noise.
   Noise levels shall not exceed an average noise level equivalent (Leq) of
eighty (80) decibels (dBA) measured at the outermost boundaries of the parcel
being excavated. However, noise levels may not exceed an average noise level
equivalent (Leq) of sixty (60) decibels (dBA) at any nearby residences or other
noise-sensitive land uses, unless emergency conditions require otherwise as
determined by the Director. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.412.   Permit Life.
   FHDPs shall be approved for the period of time identified by the Director as
necessary to complete the proposed in-channel activity, up to a maximum period
of two (2) years. A permit may be extended for an additional two (2) years,
subject to further review and approval by the Director. All FHDPs shall be
subject to annual adjustment by the Director to address the amount of materials
that can be extracted from the site based on data obtained through the annual
monitoring program. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.413.   Processing Prohibition.
   Processing of in-channel material shall occur only at approved off-channel
plant facilities. No new plant facilities shall be established for the purposes
of processing in-channel materials. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13,
2020)
Sec. 10-3.414.   Regrading.
   Streambed regrading after material removal, if required, shall leave behind
an undulating surface topography outside of the low-flow channel as similar to
naturally formed topography in the project area as possible, so that the
resulting surface depressions expose the shallow water table and maximize
potential for colonization by riparian trees. Features such as channels and
pools maximize the diversity of environmental conditions for the establishment
of riparian habitat, and are therefore encouraged. (as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec.10-3.414.1.   Restoration.
   (a)   Restoration plans shall be reviewed by the TAC prior to
implementation. Restoration projects shall include a minimum of three (3) years
of post-implementation monitoring to ensure establishment of native species.
Longer monitoring periods are encouraged as relevant to the species. Two (2)
years of monitoring following irrigation removal should be considered if
merited based on species and site conditions. Monitoring need not be restricted
to a contractor obligation and may be partially satisfied through observations
conducted during the annual creek walk. Pursuant to the CCRMP (Action 4.4-6)
projects that establish native woody vegetation shall be favored over emergent
wetlands in appropriate areas within the planning area.
   (b)   Design and develop habitat restoration projects so that they do not
adversely impact the agricultural productivity of nearby farmland.
   (c)   Restoration projects may be coordinated with agricultural drainage
structures that empty into Cache Creek or previously mined areas separated from
the creek, so that the sediment deposited can provide additional topsoil and so
that riparian species requiring a more steady supply of water can be
established.
   (d)   Vegetated buffers should be placed between restored habitat areas and
adjoining farmland in order to minimize the potential for riparian areas to
serve as reservoirs for predators and insect pests. Said buffers will also
reduce the effects of noise, dust, and spraying generated by agricultural
operations on wildlife and riparian vegetation.
   (e)   Species and water features included in habitat areas should be
designed to discourage the intrusion of wildlife, insect pests, and weeds that
would impair local crops.
   (f)   Trees that are suitable for wildlife perching near agricultural fields
dedicated to row crop production should be incorporated into habitat design in
order to provide foraging habitat for Swainson’s hawks and other birds of prey.
   (g)   All habitat restoration, creation, or enhancement plans proposed
within the CCRMP channel boundary shall be reviewed by the County Agricultural
Commissioner if requested by proponents of channel modification projects. The
Agricultural Commissioner shall identify and recommend appropriate vegetative
buffers between habitat areas and agricultural fields and effective management
of site water resources (including appropriate integration of agricultural
drainage features into habitat planning). Buffers that would result in partial
or secondary loss of agricultural land shall not be recommended by the
Agricultural Commissioner.
   (h)   Incorporate agriculturally related features, such as agricultural
forage areas and drainage systems, into the design of habitat planning. (as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.415.   Revegetation.
   (A)   Approved projects that result in the removal of material from channel
banks and/or removal of riparian vegetation shall be required to restore the
project area consistent with the following standards, and the CCIP:
      (1)   Native oaks, drought-tolerant shrubs, and drought-tolerant
understory species shall be planted on upper slopes, terraces, and other areas
where groundwater is deep and soil moisture from flows is minimal.
      (2)   Shallow terraces may be created along the banks of the low-flow
channel from I-505 to the Capay Bridge, with cottonwood and willow pole
cuttings planted on the benches. Optional methods include: a) digging short
trenches diagonally to the low-flow channel (angled downstream), with pre-
rooted willow and cottonwood cuttings planted on the upstream edge of the
trench; and b) creating in-channel riparian plots along this reach to trap bed
materials to aid in creating the shallow terraces. These measures would allow
for the development of a ribbon of vegetation to establish along the low-flow
channel in this area, thereby helping to connect the riparian corridor.
      (3)   Planting shall be conducted immediately after grading, or other
site preparation, before invasive vegetation has become established. If
undesirable vegetation does become established, it should be removed by
mechanical means and approved herbicides, under the supervision of a licensed
applicator.
      (4)   Dense native vegetation shall be emphasized along the streambank to
create a distribution of velocities within the channel, with the highest
velocities occurring within the low-flow channel. To ensure adequate water
supply for new plantings, secure irrigation systems should be installed for
revegetation projects within the planning area as needed.
      (5)   Habitat areas located next to grazing lands shall be fenced in
order to prevent vegetation disturbance. Signage shall be installed indicating
the area is undergoing habitat restoration.
      (6)   Fertilizer shall not generally be used because its application
favors non-native vegetation. Where appropriate, however, trees and shrubs may
be planted with a slow-release fertilizer.
      (7)   Native seeds, plants and cuttings used for reclamation and
restoration activities shall be ecotypes of Cache Creek Watershed genetic
origin including areas outside of Yolo County and of Yolo County genetic origin
when materials are used that originate from outside of the Cache Creek
Watershed. Cottonwood cuttings shall be collected and contract-grown at a
nursery with staff experienced in the propagation of native plants.
Alternatively, cottonwood and/or willow cuttings can be harvested from
vegetation in the project vicinity and planted within the same day. If storage
of cuttings is necessary it should occur within the creek or in a bucket of
cool water. Other woody riparian species shall be collected and contract-grown
from local seed by a qualified native plant nursery. Where revegetation
involves such a relatively small area that the requirements for locally-
collected and grown material would be infeasible, the seed and plant material
to be used in revegetation efforts may be obtained commercially as long as it
is of local origin from within Yolo County.
      (8)   Planting shall be initiated in the fall after the first soaking
rains. Container plants shall be planted in holes at least twice as deep and
wide as the plant container. The rootball should be thoroughly dampened before
planting and the planting holes deeply irrigated prior to planting. After
planting, the holes should be backfilled with native substrate material (with
no mulch added) and thoroughly tamped to remove air pockets. Willow cuttings
may be planted in clusters in planting holes prepared and backfilled in a
similar manner. Trees, shrubs, and willow cutting clusters shall be located in
randomly spaced, naturally clumped patterns. More regular planting patterns may
be considered for larger sites, in order to allow for mechanized equipment used
to maintain the site. Herbaceous seed mix (if used) should be planted via
broadcast seeding (including raking in), drill seeding (preferred method for
flatter areas), or hydroseeded (without hydromulch) over the planting area. If
hydroseeding is used, the area shall then be covered with blown rice straw
meeting State "weed-free" standards at one ton per acre. Soil stabilizer or
tackifier, such as Ecology Controls M-Binder, shall then be included at 150
pounds per acre. Hydromulching is not recommended because of a history of poor
results with native seedings. Herbaceous species may also be planted via plugs
as appropriate.
      (9)   Existing hydraulic conditions shall be assumed for all proposed
biotic reclamation activities. The County shall work with the Yolo County Flood
Control and Water Conservation District to explore opportunities for increasing
surface flows during spring and summer. The TAC would be responsible for
identifying and implementing new restoration opportunities resulting from the
increased water availability. All plantings should be carefully selected based
on the existing hydrology and water availability of the reclamation area.
      Irrigation of tree and shrub plantings may be necessary for the first two
(2) or three (3) summers in drier sites to allow the roots to develop
sufficiently to tap into the summer ground water level. Irrigation may be
necessary at least twice per month during dry periods for the first three (3)
years. Water requirements of young plantings should be evaluated as part of
routine monitoring, with adjustments to the frequency and duration of
irrigation made in response to indications of stress.
      (10)   The site shall be closely monitored for competing nonnative and
invasive vegetation, especially priority invasive species on the list
maintained by the Cache Creek Conservancy. Nonnative species shall be sprayed
or removed by hand as necessary to attain the success criteria, as defined in
each site-specific plan. For sites with substantial presence of nonnative
species, an additional year of treatment shall be conducted to deplete the seed
bank and prepare the site for planting.
      (11)   All planted sites shall be monitored for native plant
establishment and growth for a minimum of three (3) years. Longer monitoring
periods are encouraged as relevant to the species. Two (2) years of monitoring
following irrigation removal should be considered if merited based on species
and site conditions. Monitoring need not be restricted to a contractor
obligation and may be partially satisfied through observations conducted during
the annual creek walk. If understory species are planted, monitoring shall
include standard understory assessments (e.g., percent cover by species at peak
standing biomass). Monitoring data shall be made available to the County and
the Cache Creek Conservancy, and stored in a centralized database.
      (12)   The following guidelines shall be followed when developing wetland
habitat areas, with refinements and adjustments made based on current
professional practice where recommended by a qualified biologist, subject to
review by the TAC:
         (a)   Limit dense stands of aquatic vegetation in shallow areas to
lower mosquito harborage and enhance wave action. This will also serve as
substrate for mosquito predators.
         (b)   The banks of areas that retain water after June 1 (the beginning
of the optimal mosquito breeding season) shall be steep enough to prevent
isolated pooling as the water level recedes, to allow for wave action and to
provide access by mosquito predators. Shorelines shall be configured so as not
to isolate small channels or shallow ponding areas from the main body of water,
to provide continuous access by predators, especially mosquito fish.
         (c)   Seasonal marshes shall be designed to have at least four (4)
months of soil saturation or shallow inundation. Water depths shall not exceed
two (2) feet of water.
         (d)   Marsh species shall be planted every six (6) feet, using plugs
salvaged from marshes in the immediate vicinity or obtained from a nursery.
Transplanting shall take place within twelve (12) hours after salvage and the
root masses shall be kept continuously inundated from the time of
transplanting.
         (e)   Wetland areas shall cover a minimum of one (1) acre. Side slopes
shall be no steeper than 3:1 (horizontal:vertical). Small islands and complex
shorelines shall be provided to create a diverse environment. Wetland designs
shall include provisions for the wetlands to be partially drained periodically,
in order to allow for the reseeding of aquatic plants and to promote the decay
of built up organic debris.
         (f)   Pit bottoms shall be recontoured to create areas for waterfowl
nesting and depressions to provide a more permanent water feature. Islands
should generally be located on the upwind side of the water body to minimize
exposure to the prevailing winds. Island slopes above the water level should be
no steeper than 2:1 (horizontal: vertical). Emergent vegetation shall be placed
around the edges of islands to reduce wave-related erosion. Shrubs shall be
widely spaced. Trees and tall shrubs shall not be planted on the islands, since
predators perch in them to prey on waterfowl.
         (g)   Appropriate species and densities for marsh restoration may
include the following:
Species (scientific name) Species (common name) Density (plugs per acre)
Species (scientific name)   Species (common name) Density (plugs per acre)
Eleocharis radicans         Creeping spikerush    200
Juncus balticus             Baltic rush           100
Schoenoplectus acutus var.  Tule                  100
occidentalis
Schoenoplectus californicus Bulrush               100
Schoenoplectus pungens      Three-square          10
Carex rostrata              Beaked sedge          5
Equisetum hyemale           Scouring rush         5
Cephalanthus occidentalis   Buttonbush            5
 
      (13)   The following guidelines shall be followed when developing
riparian woodland habitat areas, with refinements and adjustments made based on
current professional practice where recommended by a qualified biologist,
subject to review by the TAC:
         (a)   Riparian woodland shall be established only where there are
coarse slopes containing soil types such as cobbly loam, gravelly loam, or
other loamy textures. Where slopes contain significant clay layers, open
woodlands (e.g., oak savannas) or grasslands shall be restored instead.
         (b)   Native trees and shrubs shall be planted in clusters to create
alternate patterns of open and enclosed spaces. Site-specific characteristics
may require alternative planting patterns.
         (c)   Native understory species should be planted whenever possible to
reduce soil erosion, resist nonnative species establishment, and to enhance
habitat for wildlife and pollinators.
         (d)   Appropriate species and densities for riparian woodland
restoration may include the following:
Species (scientific name) Species (common name) Density (number or pounds/acre)
Species (scientific name)    Species (common name)  Density (number or pounds/
                                                    acre)
Rosa californica             Wild rose              36
Quercus lobata               Valley oak             33
Populus fremontii            Fremont cottonwood     26
Salix gooddingii             Black willow           23
Salix laevigata              Red willow             23
Salix lasiolepis             Arroyo willow          23
Salix exigua                 Sandbar willow         23
Salix gooddingii             Gooding’s black willo23
Rubus ursinus                California blackberry  19
Acer negundo                 Box elder              18
Vitus californica            Wild grape             16
Cornus sericea               Dogwood                16
Fraxinus latifolia           Oregon ash             16
Platanus racemosa            Western sycamore       16
Sambucus nigra ssp. caerulea Blue elderberry        12
Ceanothus cuneatus           Buckbrush              12
Artemisia douglasiana        Mugwort                10
Baccharis salicifolia        Mule fat               6
Atriplex lentiformis         Quailbush              6
Elymus glaucus               Blue wildrye           16 lbs.
Hordeum brachyantherum       Meadow barley          16 lbs.
Elymus triticoides           Creeping wildrye       16 lbs.
 
   Additional understory species, especially native forbs that provide
pollinator resources (e.g., milkweeds, native clovers, lupines, California
poppy) should also be considered.
      (14)   The following guidelines shall be followed when developing oak
woodland habitat areas, with refinements and adjustments made based on current
professional practice where recommended by a qualified biologist, subject to
review by the TAC:
         (a)   Oaks should generally be widely spaced (e.g. 50 ft. spacing),
and shrubs should generally be planted in mixed-species clusters (e.g. 25 ft.
spacing). Native grasses and forbs should be densely planted inbetween woody
vegetation.
         (b)   Appropriate species and densities for oak woodland/savanna
restoration may include the following:
Species (scientific name) Species (common name) Density (number or pounds/acre)
Species (scientific name)    Species (common name) Density (number or pounds/
                                                   acre)
Quercus lobata               Valley oak            20
Rosa californica             Wild rose             15
Sambucus nigra ssp. caerulea Blue elderberry       10
Baccharis pilularis          Coyote brush          10
Heteromeles arbutifolia      Toyon                 10
Cercis occidentalis          Redbud                10
Frangula californica         Coffeeberry           10
Rubus ursinus                California blackberry 8
Quercus wislizeni            Interior live oak     6
Aesculus californica         California buckeye    5
Elymus triticoides           Creeping wildrye      16 lbs.
Bromus carinatus             California brome      10 lbs.
Hordeum brachyantherum ssp.  California barley     5 lbs.
californicum
Poa secunda                  Pine bluegrass        5 lbs.
Stipa pulchra                Purple needlegrass    5 lbs.
Elymus trachycaulus          Slender wheatgrass    5 lbs.
 
   Additional understory species, especially native forbs that provide
pollinator resources (e.g., milkweeds, native clovers, lupines, California
poppy) should also be considered.
      (15)   The following guidelines shall be followed when creating habitat
areas within previously mined areas outside of the active channel, with
refinements and adjustments made based on current professional practice where
recommended by a qualified biologist, subject to review by the TAC:
         (a)   Basins that have floors close to the groundwater level should be
restored to seasonal marsh and riparian wetlands. Those that are permeable,
dominated by sand and gravel, should promote woodland habitat.
         (b)   Pit floors shall have sufficient topsoil and overburden to
support the proposed habitat. Overburden and soil may be obtained from the
diversion of agricultural tailwater, aggregate processing wash fines, of
deposition by the creek. Areas to be planted shall be appropriately prepared
prior to planting. If necessary, soils may be tested after preparation has
occurred in order to determine the need for soil amendments.
         (c)   Pits should then be planted and irrigated until the plants have
established. Agricultural tailwater is encouraged as an irrigation source. It
would provide a valuable source of water for revegetation projects, and would
also provide bio-filtering for the sediment and residue pesticides contained
within the tailwater.
         (d)   Pits should be monitored closely for invasive plants species,
and invasive species should be removed if found.
         (e)   Areas that will not be planted may be graded to create steep,
barren slopes to provide habitat for the bank swallow.
         (f)   Except in important recharge areas, levees may be removed,
breached at the downstream end, or a culvert installed at the downstream end to
allow for dynamic interaction with the variable water level in the creek.
Natural flooding will provide additional water, increase the diversity of tree
species through colonization, and allow for the accumulation of organic
nutrients and sediment.
         (g)   Habitat plans shall take into account the range of expected
water level fluctuations and shall adjust the siting and design of the pit
accordingly.
         (h)   In areas where fluctuating groundwater levels may affect
revegetation plots at wet pit sites, consult with the TAC hydrogeologist and
biologist to develop a viable, site-specific planting area.
      (16)   Topsoil and vegetation removed from the streambed shall be
salvaged for use in restoration planting within the channel.
      (17)   Where the low-flow channel is creating excessive bank erosion
problems and its relocation becomes necessary, grading within the low-flow
channel shall provide topographic conditions that will ensure the safe passage
of fish and prevent them from becoming trapped in isolated pockets of water.
      (18)   Low weirs may be installed, outside of the low-flow channel, to
provide shallow pools for encouraging the establishment of riparian vegetation.
When establishing shallow pools out of the low-flow channel, but within the
floodplain of Cache Creek, the County shall coordinate with the TAC and the
California Department of Fish and Wildlife to minimize the potential for native
fish species mortality due to potential impediments to fish migrations.
      (19)   Site-scaled treatment of priority species shall begin within the
first year after any ground disturbance using best available methods and
optimal timing as appropriate for the species present (e.g., herbicide
spraying, cut/stump, mechanical removal). All chemical spraying must be
performed by or under the supervision of a Qualified Applicator Licensee and
reflect input from a Pest Control Advisor. All cut plants shall either be
disposed of or burned to reduce debris and prevent resprouts. All treatments
shall be implemented in accordance with the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, the Yolo
HCP/NCCP, as other regulations as appropriate. Monitoring of treated areas
shall be implemented in order to determine if or when retreatment is necessary
to ensure complete removal of the target species.
      (20)   Where riparian restoration is proposed in streambed areas located
outside of the lowflow channel, cottonwood and willow cuttings should be placed
within existing swales and other naturally-occurring low-elevation areas in
order to provide them with sufficient soil moisture to survive the summer
months.
      (21)   The TAC shall evaluate the vegetative cover within the CCRMP on an
annual basis. At a minimum of once every five (5) years, the existing hydraulic
model of the Cache Creek channel shall be updated based on current conditions,
including topography and estimation of channel roughness based on vegetation
conditions. Based on these updates, the TAC shall determine whether changes in
topography and vegetation are decreasing channel flood capacity and recommend
actions for consideration by landowners and agencies that could alleviate such
a loss of capacity if deemed appropriate.
   (B)   Vegetated buffers comprised of native species should be placed between
restored habitat areas and adjoining farmland, in order to minimize the
potential for riparian areas to serve as reservoirs for agricultural pests.
Said buffers will also reduce the effects of noise, dust, and spraying
generated by agricultural operations on wildlife and riparian vegetation.
   (C)   Native species and water features included in habitat areas should be
designed to discourage the proliferation of agricultural pests and weeds that
would impair local crops.
   (D)   Native species shall be selected to encourage the biological control
of agricultural and native habitat pests and weeds.
   (E)   Native trees that are suitable for wildlife perching near agricultural
fields dedicated to row crop production should be incorporated into habitat
design, in order to provide foraging habitat for Swainson's hawks and other
birds of prey.
   (F)   As an alternative to on-site revegetation where such cannot be
feasibly and successfully implemented, habitat restoration or creation at a
suitable off-site location and/or non-native removal and other habitat
enhancement at a suitable off-site location will be required. (as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.416.   Seasonal Restrictions.
   Pursuant to the CCIP, the deadline for submittal of applications for an FHDP
in the Cache Creek channel is May 31st. The deadline for completion of approved
in-channel work is November 1st, unless an extended period for completion is
recommended by the TAC, consistent with applicable general permit conditions
imposed by other agencies of jurisdiction (see Section
10-3.403), and approved by the Director. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.417.   Setbacks.
   (a)   No material removal shall take place within one-hundred and fifty
(150) feet of the centerline of the low-flow channel, where the creek is
contained within a single channel, except at the upstream and downstream ends
of the removal site where it connects to the existing channel. Where the creek
is braided or contains multiple active channels, no material removal shall take
place within one-hundred and twenty-five (125) feet of each channel, except at
the upstream and downstream ends of the removal site where it connects to
existing channels.
   (b)   No material removal shall take place within twenty-five (25) feet of
any mature trees to be retained within the channel, unless approved by TAC
Biologist.
   (c)   For the purposes of this Section and CCRMP Performance Standard 6.5-8,
channel stabilization and/or restoration activities that are otherwise
consistent with the CCRMP and CCIP, but would encroach within these setbacks,
are allowed subject to the review of the TAC and approval by the Director. (as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.418.   Slopes.
   (a)   Final slopes for in-channel material removal shall conform to the
channel slope and sinuosity guidelines shown in Figure ____ of the CCRMP.
Material removal shall be sloped in a downstream direction, towards the low-
flow channel. When recommended by the TAC, alternate grading plans may be
approved by the Director.
   (b)   In-channel material removal shall generally conform to the conceptual
inchannel cross-section shown in Figure  ___  of the CCRMP. When recommended by
the TAC, alternate grading plans may be approved by the Director. (as amended
by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.419.   Surveys.
   The applicant shall ensure that completed projects are surveyed to provide a
record of as-built conditions. This survey shall be completed in a form
acceptable to the TAC, and shall be submitted to the TAC within thirty (30)
days of completion of the project as determined by the Director. (as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Article 5.
In-Channel Approval Process
Sec. 10-3.501.   Applications: Contents.
   Except as provided for in Section
10-3.502 of this article, all project application documentation shall be
submitted to the Director at one time. Three (3) complete copies of the
application shall be provided to the County. Applications for proposed in-
channel activities shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
   (a)   Completed Flood Hazard Development Permit (FHDP) application forms;
   (b)   A narrative description of the proposed activity;
   (c)   Site-specific technical reports requested by the TAC (if not already
on file) such as a biological resources analysis and revegetation program; a
hydrology analysis; a geotechnical analysis; an engineered material removal
plan.
   (d)   A biological database search (e.g., California Natural Diversity Data
Base) shall be completed prior to implementation of projects. The database
search shall compile existing information on occurrences of special-status
species and areas supporting sensitive natural communities that should be
considered for preservation. In addition, the database search shall be
supplemented by reconnaissance-level field surveys to confirm the presence or
absence of populations of special-status species, location of elderberry
shrubs, active bird nests and colonies, and extent of sensitive natural
communities along the creek segment. Essential habitat for special-status
species and sensitive natural communities shall be protected and enhanced as
part of restoration efforts or replaced as part of mitigation plans prepared by
a qualified biologist and reviewed by the TAC. Compliance with the Yolo HCP/
NCCP will ensure mitigation for activities and species covered under that Plan.
   (e)   A cultural resources survey of the proposed mining area, in order to
evaluate the potential for historic and/or prehistoric artifacts. A survey may
not be required if a preliminary investigation from the Northwest Information
Center indicates that the likelihood of archaeological resources is low for the
proposed site.
   (f)   A site plan showing property lines, assessor's parcel numbers, on-site
and adjoining land uses, topography, access, and vegetation.
   (g)   A description of the potential effects of the proposed project on
hydraulic conditions upstream and downstream of the proposed project site.
   (h)   A chemical spill prevention and emergency plan (or its equivalent)
files and approved by the appropriate lead agency for all long-term projects
that involve the use of heavy equipment.
   (i)   Channel stabilization projects, as opposed to annual channel
maintenance activities, may be required to submit refined hydraulic and
sediment transport models for specific creek reaches to develop design
parameters. The County will make available flow and sediment discharge data,
current versions of hydraulic and sediment transport models, and information on
channel stability trends in the vicinity of the proposed project. This
information shall be used to prepare the application.
   (j)   An estimate of the financial assurances necessary to implement the
proposed reclamation and/or restoration components of the permit, prepared in
accordance with Chapter 5, Article 7 of this title and including the following
information:
      (1)   An estimate of the equipment usage and manhours necessary to
complete reclamation. Estimates for equipment usage shall be substantiated
(e.g., the Caterpillar Performance Handbook or similar reference document) and
labor requirements explained;
      (2)   An estimate of indirect costs, such as supervision, contingency,
mobilization, profit, and overhead;
      (3)   The acreages of each type of area proposed in the site specific
plan (e.g., slopes, roads, habitat, etc.), referenced to a site plan; and,
      (4)   An estimate of the amounts of soil, subsoil, wash sediments, and
overburden to be used in reclamation or restoration.
   (k)   In addition to the foregoing, the Director may require such other and
further information relevant to the project as needed to determine whether the
proposal may affect the public health and safety, to evaluate the potential
environmental effects of the proposal, or for such other good cause as
determined by the Director in his or her sole discretion. (as amended by Ord.
1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.502.   Applications: Waiver of Information.
   The Director may waive any of the items of information required in Section
10-3.501 of this Article, if the following conditions apply:
   (a)   The gathering of such information is precluded by physical conditions
existing on the site on the date of the application; and
   (b)   The applicant has provided a statement describing the reasons for the
delay, including the date by which the information required in the application
will be submitted. If granted, the Director shall notify the applicant in
writing, specifically describing the information which is being waived and
specifying the date by which the applicant shall provide the necessary
information. If all other information required pursuant to this chapter has
been submitted and the appropriate fees have been paid, then the Director shall
receive the application for filing; or
   (c)   The County or TAC is acting as the applicant; or
   (d)   The information (or an acceptable equivalent) is already on file. (as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.503.   Applications: Filing.
   Applications shall be submitted to the Director no later than May 31st. TAC
review and comment, review by the Director, and final action of the FHDP shall
occur no later than June 30th. However, the application shall not be processed
until the Director has determined it to be complete and the appropriate fees
have been paid, as required under Article 8 of this chapter. (as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.504.   Applications: Review.
   The application shall be reviewed by the TAC and Director for consistency
with the CCRMP, CCIP, and all applicable terms of the permits issued by other
agencies of jurisdiction (see Section 10-3.403).
   Once the application has been accepted, the Director shall submit the
application package to the TAC for review and recommendation as soon as
possible. Pursuant to the CCIP the role of the TAC is to provide scientific and
technical review and recommendations. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.505.   Findings for Permit Approval.
   The Director may approve a FHDP pursuant to this chapter (and Section
8-4.404 of the County Code ) only if all of the following findings are made:
   (a)   The proposed in-channel activity is consistent with any County-
administered general permits from other agencies of jurisdiction (see Section
10-3.403); or alternatively, that all other state and federal permits have been
obtained.
   (b)   Any sand and gravel removed from the channel is a result of the
proposed in-channel activity is necessary for one or more of the following
reasons:
      (i)   to maintain flood flow capacity
      (ii)   to protect existing structures, infrastructure, and/or farmland
      (iii)   to minimize bank erosion
      (iv)   to implement the Channel Form Template
   (c)   The proposed in-channel activity will protect sensitive biological
resources.
   (d)   The proposed in-channel activity is consistent with the requirements
of both the CCRMP and the CCIP, and with the requirements of Section
8-4.404 of County Code.
   (e)   Existing flooding problems are not exacerbated by the proposed in-
channel activity. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.506.   Decision.
   After considering the application materials and the recommendations of the
TAC, Director shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application by
a written decision setting forth the findings supporting the action. Approval
may be granted subject to any relevant condition which the Director may deem
necessary to effectuate the purposes of the Act and this chapter. Such
conditions may address any or all of the findings required by Section
10-3.505 of this article. If the application is conditionally approved, the
conditions shall be specified in writing. Conditions of the permit will require
that completed projects be surveyed to provide a record of as-built conditions.
   The approved application shall satisfy the requirements for a “site specific
plan” under Public Resources Code Section 2715.5(d). (as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.507.   Appeals.
   The decision of the Director shall become final within fifteen (15) days,
unless appealed. The decision of the Director may be appealed pursuant to
Section 8-4.405 of the County Code,
Article 6.
Amendments and Minor Modifications to Approved Flood Hazard Development Permits
Sec. 10-3.601.   Amendments and Minor Modifications: Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide procedures for changing the
conditions of approval or project description (as described in the application
and accompanying analyses) to account for unanticipated changes in the proposed
activity, site characteristics, regulations, or other aspects of the approved
FHDP. Such changes may constitute either an amendment or minor modification of
a permit, as described further below. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.602.   Amendments: Applications.
   Applications for amendments to previously approved FHDPs shall be submitted
to the Director, on forms provided by the County, and shall be accompanied by
the appropriate fees, as determined in Article 8 of this chapter. Such
applications shall be processed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article
5 of this chapter. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.603.   Amendments: Exceptions.
   Proposed exceptions to the in-channel standards for material removal
constitute an amendment, and may not be included as part of any application for
a minor modification. Any changes in the conditions of approval or the amount
of surface area and/or depth to be disturbed shall also be treated as a
substantial deviation from the approved plan, and shall be processed as an
amendment to the FHDP. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.604.   Minor Modifications.
   The Director may approve minor modifications of FHDPs pursuant to this
chapter. A minor modification may only be approved if the Findings for Permit
Approval in Section
10-3.504 can be made. If these criteria are not satisfied, an amendment must be
pursued instead. Such modifications shall be noted on the approved plans and
shall be initialed by the Director. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13,
2020)
Sec. 10-3.605.   Amendments and Modifications.
   Amendments shall be acted upon by the County pursuant to the procedures
identified in Article 5 of this chapter, as supplemented by this article. (as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Article 7.
Annual Reports
Sec. 10-3.701.   Cache Creek Monitoring Program.
   The TAC shall implement a creek monitoring program pursuant to Chapter 6.0
of the CCIP, consisting of periodic collection of stream discharge and sediment
transport data and annual analysis of changes in channel morphology and
riparian vegetation. All data and analysis shall be summarized in an annual
report submitted to the Board of Supervisors. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.702.   Channel Improvement Projects.
   The TAC will annually identify priority channel improvement projects on the
basis of the results of the Cache Creek Monitoring Program. The annual report
will describe the need for and purpose of identified priority projects. The
report will describe the specific location of the projects and the general
aspects of the improvements. Pursuant to the CCIP, the Director will coordinate
with property owners to implement the projects. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Article 8.
Fees
Sec. 10-3.801.   Fees: Applications.
   Each application for a FHDP or any amendments and modifications thereto
shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as determined in the Master Fee
Resolution adopted by the Board of Supervisors. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Article 9.
Confidentiality of Records
Sec. 10-3.901.   Confidentiality of Records.
   Any proprietary information submitted in a permit application, a report, or
other document required by this chapter, which is considered by the applicant
to be confidential shall be submitted under separate cover and shall be so
marked by the applicant. Proprietary information shall include, but may not be
limited to, the following: annual production figures, reserves, or rates of
depletion of the aggregate resource being mined, pursuant to Section 2778(a) of
the Act; well log information; and the location and extent of sensitive
archaeological sites.
   The proposed confidential information shall be accompanied by a statement
citing the legal authority supporting the applicant's claim of confidentiality.
The request for confidentiality shall be reviewed by the Director, in
consultation with the Office of the County Counsel if necessary, and shall
either be approved or denied. The information at issue shall be maintained in a
confidential manner by the County until the Director reaches a decision.
   The decision to approve or deny the claim of confidentiality by the Director
shall be made in writing. If the claim of confidentiality is denied, the
applicant may request the return of the information at issue. The Director’s
action on a claim of confidentiality is final, and may not be appealed to the
Planning Commission or the Board of Supervisors. In any subsequent judicial
action or proceeding where the proprietary, confidential nature of the
information is contested, the applicant shall reimburse the County for any
legal fees and other costs reasonably incurred in defending against the
disclosure of such information, regardless of whether the County prevails.
   If the request is approved, then the confidential information shall be
maintained under separate cover and shall be marked "confidential," "trade
secret," or otherwise stamped to indicate its confidential status. The contents
of the confidential file shall be made available only to the Director and those
persons authorized in writing by the applicant and by the property owner. If
the request is denied, the applicant may withdraw the information and include
it with the application or report as a public document. Failure to submit any
necessary information, or the applicant's decision to withdraw such information
if a claim of confidentiality is denied, may result in an incomplete
application or report. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Article 10.
Inspections: Notices of Violations
Sec. 10-3.1001.   Inspections: Purpose.
   The Director shall make such necessary inspections and investigations of all
in-channel operations within the unincorporated portion of the County in order
to accomplish any of the following purposes:
   (a)   To determine compliance with this chapter and the Act;
   (b)   To determine compliance with the conditions of any permit approved
pursuant to this chapter;
   (c)   To investigate the environmental effects which the operations may be
causing to the surrounding area; and
   (d)   To verify the information submitted in any application or any annual
report submitted pursuant to this chapter. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.1002.   Inspections: Annual.
   During the life of the permit and any required monitoring, the Director
shall conduct an inspection or inspections not less than once in any calendar
year (consistent with the requirements of Pub. Resources Code Section 2774) of
each in-channel operation to determine whether the applicant is in compliance
with the Act, the Regulations, this chapter, and any permits or other
approvals, and/or whether all authorized work has been properly completed. (as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.1003.   Annual Inspections: Notification.
   All inspections shall be documented using forms adopted by the State
Department of Conservation. The Director shall notify the Department of the
inspection within ninety (90) days after it has been completed. Said notice
shall include the following:
   (a)   A statement regarding whether the operation is in compliance with the
Act and this chapter. Any violations of either the Act or this chapter shall be
specifically described;
   (b)   The completed inspection forms;
   (c)   A description of any pending reviews or appeals of permits, financial
assurances, amendments or modifications thereto;
   (d)   Aspects of the operation, if any, that were found to be inconsistent
with the Act but were corrected before the submission of the inspection form to
the Department;
   (e)   Aspects of the operation, if any, that were found to be inconsistent
with the Act but were not corrected before the submission of the inspection
form to the Department;
   (f)   A statement describing the County’s intended response to any aspects
of the operation found to be inconsistent with the Act but were not corrected
before the submission of the inspection form to the Department; and
   (g)   Any supporting documentation.
   Copies of the notice shall also be provided to the applicant. (as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.1004.   Inspections; Designee.
   Inspections shall be conducted by a state-licensed geologist, state-licensed
civil engineer, state-licensed landscape architect, state-licensed forester, or
a qualified County employee who is familiar with land reclamation issues (as
described in the Act and related regulations) and experienced in activities
governed by the Act, and who has not been employed by the applicant in any
capacity during the previous twelve (12) months. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.1005.   Violations: Notice.
   Whenever the Director has reasonable cause to believe that an in-channel
operation is in violation of the Act or the Regulations, this chapter, any
terms or conditions of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or development
agreement (“violation”), the following procedure shall be followed:
   (a)   In the event of a violation of the Act or Regulations, or a violation
that in the sole discretion of the Director poses an imminent and substantial
endangerment to the public health, safety, or the environment, the following
procedures shall be followed:
      i.   The Director shall provide a written notice to the operator at the
time of inspection or as soon thereafter as the violation is made known. The
operator shall be provided thirty (30) days to correct. If correction is not or
cannot be achieved within thirty (30) days, the operator and the County may
enter into a stipulated order to comply, with notice sent to the Department. A
stipulated order to comply shall include a schedule and time for compliance
that the County determines is reasonable after taking into account the actions
and legal processes required to correct the violation.
      ii.   If the operator does not comply with a notice issued pursuant to
(a)(i), above, within thirty (30) days of being served the notice, the County
may issue an Order to Comply, pursuant to Section
10-3.1006 of this Chapter.
   (b)   If the Director determines that a violation other than a violation of
the Act, does not pose an imminent and substantial endangerment to public
health, safety, or the environment, the following procedure shall be followed:
      i.   The Director shall provide written notice to the operator
documenting the potential violation (“condition of concern”). The Director may
request additional information from the operator to assess the site conditions
and determine if a violation exists. The operator shall be provided thirty (30)
days to respond to this initial notice. If the requested information is not
received within thirty (30) days, the Director shall proceed with an Order to
Comply as set forth in Section
10-3.1006. An extension of time may be requested by the applicant in cases
where compilation of the information may take longer, but such extension shall
not exceed sixty (60) days.
      ii.   If the operator resolves the condition of concern within the
timeframe set in (b)(i) above, the Director shall verify by conducting a site
inspection or review of information provided by the operator, whichever is
appropriate. The Director shall notify the operator in writing that the
condition of concern has been satisfactorily resolved.
      iii.   If the Director determines the condition of concern is still
active after the timeframe described in 3(b)(i), the Director shall submit a
notice to the operator requiring submittal of a Correction Plan. The Correction
Plan to be provided by the operator shall at a minimum describe in detail the
sequence, methods, and timeline necessary for each step to correct the
conditions of concern identified by the Director. The Correction Plan must be
received within thirty (30) days from the date of notification. The Director
shall review and accept or request changes to the Correction Plan within thirty
(30) days of receipt. If changes or clarification is requested, the operator
shall then be provided another thirty (30) days to finalize and submit the
final Correction Plan and commence implementation. Implementation must begin
immediately (unless mutually agreed upon and documented in the Correction Plan)
and must be fully completed no later than one year from the date of submission
of the final Correction Plan.
      Once the Correction Plan is finalized, the Director shall forward the
Correction Plan to the Planning Commission as an informational/ correspondence
item with the next Planning Commission agenda packet. No formal action shall be
taken by the Planning Commission on the Correction Plan.
      iv.   In the event that the procedure set forth above does not result in
correction of a violation, an order to comply shall be served to the operator
pursuant to Section
10-3.1006. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.1006.   Violations: Order to comply.
   If the violation continues after the timeframes specified in Section
10-3.1005, the Director shall issue an order to comply requiring that the
violation be corrected or abated and that the operator come into compliance
with the applicable law, regulation, or requirement. The order to comply shall
be delivered by personal service or certified mail, with a copy sent to the
Department. An order to comply issued pursuant to this Section shall take
effect 30 days following the service of the order to comply unless within those
thirty (30) days the operator appeals the order and requests a hearing before
the Planning Commission. The order shall specifically describe both the
violation(s) and the remedial steps required for compliance. The order shall
specify a time by which compliance must be completed, as determined by the
Director. A reasonable amount of time shall be allowed to bring the operation
into compliance, taking into account the seriousness of the violation, the
potential harm to public health, safety, and the environment, and any good
faith efforts to comply with the applicable requirements.
Sec. 10-3.1007.   Violations: Hearing.
   Upon the filing of an appeal pursuant to Section
10-3.1006, the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing to consider
the violation. Upon the close of the hearing, the Commission shall take one of
the following actions:
   (a)   Affirm the order to comply of the Director;
   (b)   Remove any of the violations or remedy steps required for compliance
and affirm the order as modified; or
   (c)   Vacate the order to comply.
   If the order of the Director is affirmed, the Planning Commission’s decision
shall become final, unless an appeal is filed with the Board within fifteen
(15) days after the decision, pursuant to Article 10 of this chapter. (as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.1008.   Violations: Revocation.
   If an applicant fails to abide by the requirements of an order to comply
following the final decision of the Planning Commission pursuant to Section
10-3.1007, above, then the FHDP shall be considered revoked and the Director
shall initiate procedures to revoke the applicant’s permit(s) and forfeit the
financial assurances in accordance with Article 11 of this chapter. (as amended
by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.1009.   Violations: Administrative penalties.
   If the applicant fails to comply with an order to comply, issued pursuant to
this article, the Director may issue an order imposing administrative penalties
of up to, but not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000) per day for
noncompliance with this article in addition to noncompliance with any other
article or chapter, retroactive to the original date of noncompliance. When
determining the amount of the penalty, the Director shall consider, but may not
be limited to, the following factors:
   (a)   The nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation(s);
   (b)   Any prior history of violations; and,
   (c)   The degree of culpability by the applicant.
   The order establishing administrative penalties shall be served by certified
mail to the applicant. Any such order shall become effective upon issuance and
the penalties imposed therein shall be paid to the Director within fifteen (15)
days. If the order imposing administrative penalties is appealed to the
Planning Commission, the applicant shall deposit any amounts due pursuant to
Section
10-11.10 with the County Treasury in an account earning interest at the County
pooled rate. Any appeal to the Planning Commission must be filed within fifteen
(15) days after the order if first mailed. The Planning Commission shall hear
the appeal de novo.
   Any decision to order administrative penalties shall become effective within
thirty (30) days of the exhaustion of the administrative remedies provided in
this chapter, unless the applicant files a petition for writ of mandate in the
superior court for review of the order. If no writ petition is filed, then the
order setting administrative penalties shall not be subject to review by any
court or agency. The order establishing administrative penalties shall be
served by certified mail to the applicant.
   Penalties collected by the Director shall only be used to cover the
reasonable costs incurred by the County in administering either the Act or
Chapters 3, 4, and 5 of Title 10 of this Code. (as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-3.1010.   Violations: Public nuisance.
   Any in-channel activity in violation of this title, or in violation of any
permit or order to comply issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be considered
a public nuisance. If the applicant fails to comply with an order to comply,
issued pursuant to this article, the Director may refer the violation to County
Counsel for abatement or the District Attorney for criminal remedies.
(§ 1, Ord. 820, eff. February 22, 1979, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1376, eff.
August 14, 2008; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Chapter 4
OFF-CHANNEL SURFACE MINING
Sections:
Article 1. Title, Authority and Purpose
   
10-4.101   Title.
   
10-4.102   Authority.
   
10-4.103   Purposes.
Article 2. Definitions
   
10-4.201   Scope.
   
10-4.202   Abandon: Abandonment.
   
10-4.203   Act.
   
10-4.204   Agency.
   
10-4.205   Board.
   
10-4.206   CEQA.
   
10-4.207   Commission.
   
10-4.208   County.
   
10-4.209   Department.
   
10-4.210   Director.
   
10-4.211   Financial assurances.
   
10-4.212   Haul road.
   
10-4.213   Idle.
   
10-4.214   Interim management plan.
   
10-4.215   Mined lands.
   
10-4.216   Mining waste.
   
10-4.217   Minor modification.
   
10-4.218   Operator.
   
10-4.219   Overburden.
   
10-4.220   Prime agricultural land.
   
10-4.221   Reclamation.
   
10-4.222   Reclamation plan.
   
10-4.223   Regulations.
   
10-4.224   Responsible agency.
   
10-4.225   Slope.
   
10-4.226   State CEQA guidelines.
   
10-4.227   Surface mining operations.
   
10-4.228   Trustee agency.
Article 3. Scope and Exemptions
   
10-4.301   Incorporation by reference.
   
10-4.302   Scope of regulations.
   
10-4.303   Scope: Area defined.
   
10-4.304   Exemptions: Defined.
   
10-4.305    Exemptions: Applications.
Article 4. Off-Channel Mining Standards
   
10-4.401   Scope.
   
10-4.402   Access roads.
   
10-4.403   Accident reporting.
   
10-4.404   Aesthetics.
   
10-4.405   Annual production limits.
   
10-4.406   Benches.
   
10-4.407   Conveyor systems.
   
10-4.408   County road improvements.
   
10-4.409   County road maintenance.
   
10-4.410   Cultural resources.
   
10-4.411   Dam requirements.
   
10-4.411.1   Depth of mining.
   
10-4.412   Dewatering.
   
10-4.413   Drainage.
   
10-4.414   Dust control.
   
10-4.414.1   Energy.
   
10-4.415   Equipment maintenance.
   
10-4.416   Flood protection.
   
10-4.417   Groundwater monitoring programs.
   
10-4.418   Habitat conservation plan compliance.
   
10-4.419   Haul roads.
   
10-4.419.1   Hazardous materials storage.
   
10-4.420   Lighting.
   
10-4.420.1   Mercury bioaccumulation in wildlife.
   
10-4.421   Noise: General standard.
   
10-4.422   Noise: Sonic safety devices.
   
10-4.423   Noise: Traffic.
   
10-4.424   Other agency approvals.
   
10-4.425   Parking.
   
10-4.426   Permit life.
   
10-4.427   Protection of nearby drinking water wells.
   
10-4.428   Sanitary facilities.
   
10-4.429   Setbacks.
   
10-4.430   Site maintenance.
   
10-4.431   Slopes.
   
10-4.432   Soil removal.
   
10-4.433   Soil stockpiles.
   
10-4.434   Technical report recommendations.
   
10-4.435   Transfer of allocation.
   
10-4.436   Vegetation protection.
   
10-4.437   Wastewater discharge.
   
10-4.438   Watercraft.
   
10-4.439   Wetlands.
   
10-4.440   Wildlife habitat.
   
10-4.441   Exceptions.
Article 5. Surface Mining Permit Approval Process
   
10-4.501   Zoning requirements.
   
10-4.502   Applications: Contents.
   
10-4.503   Applications: Waiver of information.
   
10-4.504   Applications: Filing.
   
10-4.505   Applications: Review.
   
10-4.506   Applications: Public hearing.
   
10-4.507   Public hearing: Notice.
   
10-4.508   Public hearing: Review.
   
10-4.509   Public hearing: Findings for approval.
   
10-4.510   Public hearing: Decision.
Article 6. Amendments and Modifications to Approved Surface Mining Permits
   
10-4.601   Amendments and modifications: Purpose.
   
10-4.602   Amendments: Applications.
   
10-4.603   Amendments: Exceptions.
   
10-4.604   Minor modifications.
   
10-4.605   Interim permit review.
Article 7. Annual Reports
   
10-4.701   Annual reports: Contents.
   
10-4.702   Annual reports: Filing.
   
10-4.703   Annual reports: Hearing.
Article 8. Fees.
   
10-4.801   Fees: Applications.
   
10-4.802   Fees: Inspections and administrative.
   
10-4.803   Fees: Maintenance and remediation fund.
   
10-4.804   Fees: Delinquent payment.
Article 9. Confidentiality of Records
   
10-4.901   Confidentiality of records.
Article 10. Appeals
   
10-4.1001   Appeals: Planning Commission.
   
10-4.1002   Planning Commission appeals: Hearings.
   
10-4.1003   Appeals: Board of Supervisors.
   
10-4.1004   Board of Supervisors: Hearing.
   
10-4.1005   Appeals: Scope.
   
10-4.1006   Appeals: Withdrawal.
   
10-4.1007   Appeals: State Mining and Geology Board.
Article 11. Inspections: Notices of Violations
   
10-4.1101   Inspections: Purpose.
   
10-4.1102   Inspections: Annual.
   
10-4.1103   Annual inspections: Notification.
   
10-4.1104   Inspections: Designee.
   
10-4.1105   Violations: Notice.
   
10-4.1106   Violations: Order to comply.
   
10-4.1107   Violations: Hearing.
   
10-4.1108   Violations: Revocation.
   
10-4.1109   Violations: Administrative penalties.
   
10-4.1110   Violations: Public nuisance.
Article 1.
Title, Authority and Purpose
Sec. 10-4.101.   Title.
   This chapter shall be known as "The Off-Channel Surface Mining Ordinance of
Yolo County” or “Mining Ordinance”. (§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.102.   Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the California
Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, Chapter 9 of Division 2 of the
Public Resources Code of the State, commencing with Section 2710, and pursuant
to the powers of the County to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
pursuant to Section 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the State. (§ 1,
Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13,
2020)
Sec. 10-4.103.   Purposes.
   The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
   (a)   The extraction of sand and gravel is essential to the continued
economic well-being of the State and to the needs of society. Although the
County encourages the production of sand and gravel, consideration must also be
balanced by other societal values, including but not limited to recreation,
water resources, wildlife, agriculture, and aesthetics;
   (b)   The potential environmental impacts, operational methods, and
reclaimed end uses of in-channel surface excavation are significantly different
from those associated with off-channel surface mining. Thus, it is appropriate
to provide separate performance standards and findings for both in-channel and
off-channel activities, so that regulations contained within this title are
sensitive to the specific issues involved in each of the two (2) types of
operations;
   (c)   Due to concerns about the impacts of excavation within the channel to
structures, property, and riparian habitat, in-stream surface excavation will
be minimized and will only be permitted for maintenance of flood flow capacity;
protection of existing structures, infrastructure, and/or farmland; erosion
control; implementation of the Channel Form Template; enhancement of creek
stability; establishment of riparian vegetation; recreation and open space uses
consistent with the Parkway Plan; and similar channel maintenance activities.
Therefore, in order to provide the aggregate necessary for the County's needs,
off-channel mining will be encouraged;
   (d)   Off-channel surface mining must be carefully monitored, in order to
eliminate residual hazards to the public health and safety, and to maximize the
benefits to the County from surface mining operations; and
   (e)   Off-channel surface mining takes place in diverse areas, where the
geologic, climatic, biological, and social conditions are significantly
different. Surface mining permits must be specifically adapted to the
requirements of the particular land being mined. Therefore, this chapter
imposes general performance standards, by which off-channel surface mining
operations shall be measured in order to ensure that resources and
infrastructure are managed in a consistent manner to maximize their overall
benefit.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Article 2.
Definitions
Sec. 10-4.201.   Scope.
   The definitions set forth in Article 2 of Chapter 5 of this title shall
apply throughout this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.202.   Abandon: Abandonment.
   “Abandon” or “abandonment” shall mean to cease surface mining or reclamation
with the intention of not resuming or reclamation. Operations that have an
approved interim management plan shall not be considered abandoned, unless the
operator is financially incapable of performing reclamation or has failed to
observe an order to comply. However, any surface mining operation that is idle
for twelve (12) consecutive months or longer shall be considered abandoned.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.203.   Act.
   “Act” shall mean the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975,
specifically referring to Chapter 9 of Division 2 of the State Public Resources
Code, Sections 2710 et seq.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.204.   Agency.
   “Agency” shall mean the County Administrator.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1407, eff.
April 28, 2011; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.205.   Board.
   “Board” shall mean the Board of Supervisors of the County.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.206.   CEQA.
   “CEQA” shall mean the California Environmental Quality Act set forth in
Sections 21000 et seq. of Division 13 of the Public Resources Code of
California.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.207.   Commission.
   “Commission” shall mean the Planning Commission of the County, or its
successor in function.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.208.   County.
   “County” shall mean the County of Yolo.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.209.   Department.
   “Department” shall mean the State Department of Conservation, or its
successor in function with regards to surface mining and reclamation
regulation.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.210.   Director.
   “Director” shall mean the County Administrator, or a designee chosen by the
Administrator.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1407, eff.
April 28, 2011; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.211.   Financial assurances.
   “Financial assurances” shall mean monetary funds, securities, or other
instruments provided by the operator to ensure that surface mining operations
are reclaimed according to the approved reclamation plan, should the operator
abandon the mine site.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.212.   Haul road.
   "Haul road" or “route” shall mean: 1) a road along which material is
transported from the area of excavation to the processing plant or stock pile
area of the surface mining operation; and/or 2) the designated route aggregate
trucks are authorized to take pursuant to Section
10-4.419.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020).
Sec. 10-4.213.   Idle.
   "Idle" shall mean that an operator of a surface mining operation has
curtailed production at the surface mining operation, with the intent to resume
the surface mining operation at a future date, for a period of one year or more
by more than ninety (90) percent of its maximum annual mineral production
within any of the last five (5) years during which an interim management plan
has not been approved.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.214.   Interim management plan.
   "Interim management plan" shall mean an amendment to the approved
reclamation plan to provide measures for maintaining an idle mine site until
operations are resumed.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.215.   Mined lands.
   "Mined lands" shall mean the surface, subsurface, and groundwater of an area
in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted,
including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land
excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities,
equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from,
or are used in, surface mining operations are located.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.216.   Mining waste.
   "Mining waste" shall mean the residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid,
vegetation, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property directly
resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.217.   Minor modification.
   "Minor modification" shall mean a change in the approved mining plan that
does not substantially alter the intent or the conditions of the mining plan.
(§ 1 Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.218.   Operator.
   "Operator" shall mean any person who is engaged in surface mining
operations, or who contracts with others to conduct operations on their behalf,
except a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with
wages as their sole compensation.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.219.   Overburden.
   "Overburden" shall mean soil, rock, or other materials that lie above a
natural mineral deposit or between mineral deposits, before or after their
removal by surface mining operations.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.220.   Prime agricultural land.
   "Prime agricultural land" shall mean all land which meets the definition of
prime agricultural land set forth in Section 51201 of the Government Code of
the State as administered by the County in the administration of its
agricultural preserve program.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.221.   Reclamation.
   "Reclamation" shall mean the combined process of land treatment that
minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife
habitat, flooding, erosion, threats to public health or safety, and other
adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface
effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a
usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses. The
process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require
backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization,
or other measures.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.222.   Reclamation plan.
   "Reclamation plan" shall mean the operator's completed and approved plan for
reclaiming lands affected by any surface mining operations conducted after
January 1, 1976, as required by Section 2772 of the Public Resources Code of
the State.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.223.   Regulations.
   "Regulations" shall mean the State Mining and Geology Board Reclamation
Regulations, specifically referring to Subchapter 1 of Chapter 8 of Division 2
of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.224.   Responsible agency.
   "Responsible agency" shall mean all public agencies other than the County
which have discretionary approval power over the project.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.225.   Slope.
   "Slope" shall mean the angle of the ground surface, expressed as a ratio of
the horizontal distance to the vertical distance.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.226.   State CEQA guidelines.
   "State CEQA guidelines" shall mean those regulations set forth in Sections
15000 et seq. of Chapter 3 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.227.   Surface mining operations.
   “Surface mining operations” shall mean all, or any part of, the process
involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and
mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals
naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or
surface work incidental to an underground mine. Surface mining operations shall
include, but are not limited to: in-place distillation or retorting or
leaching; the production and disposal of mining waste; and prospecting and
exploratory activities.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.228.   Trustee agency.
   "Trustee agency" shall mean a state agency having jurisdiction by law over
natural resources affected by a project which are held in trust for the people
of the State.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Article 3.
Scope and Exemptions
Sec. 10-4.301.   Incorporation by reference.
   The provisions of the Act and the Regulations, as those provisions and
regulations may be amended from time to time, are made a part of this chapter
by reference with the same force and effect as if the provisions therein were
specifically and fully set out herein, excepting that when the provisions of
this chapter are more restrictive than corresponding state provisions, this
chapter shall prevail.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.302.   Scope of regulations.
   Unless otherwise provided in this article, no person shall conduct off-
channel surface mining operations unless a surface mining permit has been
approved in accordance with this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be
interpreted as requiring the filing of a surface mining permit application for
lands where surface mining operations were completed prior to January 1, 1976.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.303.   Scope: Area defined.
   This chapter shall apply only to the area located within the boundary of the
Off-Channel Mining Plan of the Yolo County General plan. The conduct of
excavation within the channel of Cache Creek is regulated by Chapter 3 of this
title and shall not be the subject to the provisions of this chapter
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.304   Exemptions: Defined.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to those activities and
operations which are exempted by sections 2714 and 2776 of the Act. Any
exemption granted from the provisions of this chapter shall not, in and of
itself, exempt a project or activity from the application of other applicable
regulations and requirements.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.305.   Exemptions: Applications.
   Applications for exemptions shall be submitted to the Director for review
and determination as to completeness. If the application is determined
incomplete, the Director shall notify the operator in writing within thirty
(30) days, specifically describing the information necessary to complete the
application. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Director shall
determine whether the operation is exempt or is subject to the provisions of
this chapter. Any person with standing may appeal the Director’s decision to
the Commission, pursuant to Article 11 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Article 4.
Off-Channel Mining Standards
Sec. 10-4.401.   Scope.
   The general standard for the operation of surface mines is to ensure that
the public health and safety and environment are protected. This article sets
forth minimum acceptable off-channel mining standards to implement this general
standard. These minimum acceptable standards shall be considered and discussed
in every surface mining permit approved pursuant to this chapter. In addition,
the minimum practices and standards set forth in the Act shall also be
considered and discussed in every surface mining permit approved pursuant to
this chapter. These standards shall be followed in addition to any other
conditions of approval or regulations imposed on the surface mining permit.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.402.   Access roads.
   The first one hundred (100) feet of access road intersecting a County-
maintained road shall be surfaced in a manner approved by the Public Works
Department, with an approach constructed to County standards. Traffic control
and warning signs shall be installed as required by the Public Works
Department.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.403.   Accident reporting.
   The operator shall immediately notify the Director of any events such as
fires, explosions, spills, land or slope failures, or other conditions at the
site which could pose a hazard to life or property. Action shall be immediately
undertaken to alleviate the hazard. The operator shall provide a written report
of any such event, within thirty (30) days, which shall include, but not be
limited to, a description of the facts of the event, the corrective measures
used, and the steps taken to prevent a recurrence of the incident. Failure to
provide this report shall initiate violation proceedings pursuant to Article
11. This condition does not supersede nor replace any requirement of any other
governmental entity for reporting incidents.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.404.   Aesthetics.
   The visibility of mining operations, facilities, and landform alterations
from public areas, viewpoints, and nearby residences shall be minimized, based
on an assessment of site-specific visual characteristics and viewing
conditions. The use of berms, vegetative screens, seeding, special plant
materials and contouring the sides and top surfaces of modified landforms, or
other measures, shall be incorporated into the individual mine and reclamation
plans as appropriate.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.405.   Annual production limits.
   Each surface mine shall operate within the limits of the annual production
level established in the use permit. Annual aggregate production may not exceed
the established annual level, except to meet temporary market demand.
Individual producers may exceed their maximum annual allocation by up to twenty
(20%) percent in any one calendar year, so long as their running ten (10) year
average does not exceed the maximum level. Aggregate sold in excess of the
established annual level shall be subject to a ten (10¢) cents/ton surcharge.
Monies generated by the surcharge shall be divided evenly between the CCIP fund
and the Maintenance and Remediation Fund. The maximum cumulative amount of
aggregate sold annually shall not exceed 5.97 million tons, plus the twenty
(20%) percent market demand exception allowed by permits issued under the OCMP.
Waste concrete and asphalt that is processed as recycled materials for use in
construction shall not be counted as part of an operation's maximum annual
production.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.406.   Benches.
   During mining operations, a series of benches may be excavated in a slope
provided that the excavations are made in compliance with the requirements of
the State Mine Safety Orders (California Code of Regulations, Title 8,
Subchapter 17). The vertical height and slope of the benches constructed for
permanent reclaimed slopes shall not exceed maximum standards for the specific
soil types presented in the California Code of Regulations, Title 8, Article 6.
In general, vertical cutslopes between benches shall not exceed four (4') feet
in height in topsoil and overburden sediments. Benching shall be allowed in
cohesive soil (clay, sandy or silty clay, clayey silt) only. Slopes above the
elevation of groundwater (determined at the time of the excavation by the level
of exposed water in the excavation) that exceed the maximum vertical height
shall be excavated and maintained at slopes not steeper than 2:1 (horizontal:
vertical). Slopes located five (5') feet or less below the average summer low
ground-water level shall not be steeper than 2:1 (horizontal:vertical). Slopes
located more than five (5') feet below the average summer low groundwater level
shall not be steeper than 1: 1 (horizontal to vertical).
   Vertical cutslopes in excess of four (4') feet in height may be approved for
the development of special habitat (e.g., bank swallows) if a site-specific
slope stability analysis, performed by a licensed engineer, indicates that the
slope does not exceed critical height for the on-site soil conditions. Projects
proposing such slopes shall submit a long-term maintenance plan to ensure that
the function of the slopes as habitat is met.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.407.   Conveyor systems.
   Wherever practical and economically feasible, portable or movable conveyor
systems shall be used to transport raw materials and overburden.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.408.   County road improvements.
   It is the intent of this program that each operator shall pay for any road
improvements determined to be necessary to support their operation consistent
with County and CCAP standards, and for ongoing operations and maintenance.
Each operator shall pay its fair share toward improvements required to maintain
a structural capacity (traffic index) sufficient for the project traffic and to
maintain operations on County roads and on State Highways within the OCMP
planning area consistent with applicable General Plan policies related to LOS
and applicable State policy related to VMT. Fair share mitigation shall also be
required to improve existing operational as well as structural deficiencies of
the transportation system. Specific locations shall be identified through the
project-specific environmental review process for each operator's long-term
mining permit application. Each operator shall participate in a funding program
operated by the County which is designed to ensure that all improvements are
made in a timely manner and that a reimbursement mechanism is in place to
ensure repayment of any costs contributed in excess of fair share amounts. The
program shall be initiated upon the approval of the long-term mining permits
and shall be updated biennially by the County to ensure any new or modified
impacts or funding sources are being addressed.
   Each operator shall have the option to complete the work at their expense
without triggering the competitive bid process, as long as they comply with the
applicable legal requirements of the County. If the operator declines the
option, the County shall utilize the competitive bid process.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.409.   County road maintenance.
   The operator shall agree to assume joint pavement maintenance responsibility
with the County (or shared with another producer using the same roadway) for
all County roads along a designated haul route from the access point of the
surface mining operation to an appropriate State Highway. The County will
provide maintenance of the county-maintained roadside drainage ditches, traffic
signs, and striping. By May 15 of each year, the operator shall submit to the
County an annual evaluation report documenting the structural integrity of the
pavement structural section and the PCI of the roads maintained by the
operator. The annual report shall be signed and sealed by a civil engineer
licensed in the State of California. The report shall contain a proposed action
plan for pavement maintenance and pavement improvements to maintain safe and
efficient traffic operation on the roads, and a PCI of 70 or more, unless
otherwise agreed by the County, as defined by American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM) Method D6433 (Standard Practice for Roads and Parking Lots
Pavement Condition Index Survey), for each upcoming year. Within 30 days, the
County will review the report and recommend revisions if necessary. Following
acceptance of the report by the County, the operator shall secure a County
encroachment permit specific to the action plan (at no cost to the operator)
and complete the proposed pavement maintenance and improvement activities prior
to the submittal of the annual report. Striping may be provided by the County
if County striping equipment and material are available. Otherwise striping
will be provided by the operator. Once the work is completed, the operator will
resubmit the annual evaluation report by November 1st each year, and include
the scope and dates that work was completed.
   If minor emergency asphalt repairs (work requiring a single County Public
Works maintenance pick-up truck with asphalt patching material) are identified
within the maintenance areas of the hauling routes after the applicant’s yearly
maintenance has been completed, county crews will perform the minor asphalt
repair maintenance once in a sixty (60) consecutive day period. The types of
asphalt pavement failures requiring repairs include, but are not limited to,
cracking, pot holes, depressions, rutting, shoving, upheaval, and raveling and
any other pavement damage or failures requiring immediate repair by the County.
   If major emergency roadway repairs associated with the permitted activities
(work requiring more than a single County Public Works maintenance pick-up
truck with asphalt patching material, or minor asphalt repairs occurring in
less than the sixty (60) consecutive day period) are identified after the
applicant’s yearly maintenance has been completed, the applicant shall obtain a
County encroachment permit (at no cost to applicant) and complete the major
roadway repairs. If major roadway repairs that are the applicant’s fair share
obligation are not completed by the applicant in a timely manner as determined
by the County, and the County must make repairs when the public’s safety is
considered at risk by the County Engineer, then the applicant will be billed
for the County’s major roadway repair work on a time and materials basis. An
applicant may coordinate with the County to have the County complete required
improvements, and in such case must fully fund the County’s costs to do so. The
operator does not assume the liability for the roadway, except for cases where
the operator has not fulfilled its maintenance obligations.
   If a subsequent mining operation utilizes a road previously required to be
improved pursuant to this subsection, then the subsequent operator shall be
responsible for compliance with the agreements and requirements of the previous
operator.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.410.   Cultural resources.
   (a)   All resource records shall be checked for the presence of and the
potential for prehistoric and historic sites, paleontological resources, and
unique geologic features. Damaging effects on cultural resources shall be
avoided whenever possible. If avoidance is not feasible, the importance of the
site shall be evaluated by a qualified professional (either an archaeologist or
geologist, depending on the resource type) prior to the commencement of mining
operations. If a cultural resource or unique geologic resources are determined
not to be important, both the resource and the effect on it shall be reported
to the County, and the resource need not be considered further. If avoidance of
an important cultural, paleontological, or unique geologic resource is not
feasible, a mitigation plan shall be prepared and implemented. The mitigation
plan shall explain the importance of the resource, describe the proposed
approach to mitigate destruction or damage to the site, and demonstrate how the
proposed mitigation would serve the public interest.
   (b)   If human skeletal remains are encountered during excavation, all work
within seventy-five (75') feet shall immediately stop, and the County Coroner
shall be notified within twenty-four (24) hours. If the remains are of Native
American origin, the appropriate Native American community identified by the
Native American Heritage Commission shall be contacted, and an agreement for
treating or disposing of, with appropriate dignity, the remains and associated
grave goods shall be developed.
   If any cultural resources, such as chipped or ground stone, historic debris,
building foundations, or paleontological materials are encountered during
excavation, then all work within seventy-five (75') feet shall immediately stop
and the Director shall be notified at once. The find must be recorded by a
qualified archaeologist or paleontologist using relevant professional protocols
and a report fully recording the find submitted to the County. This report
shall include recommendations for appropriate removal and preservation of the
artifact. The County encourages the donation of the find to the County for
public display at the Cache Creek Nature Preserve or other appropriate venue.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.411.   Dam requirements.
   An application for construction shall be filed with the California Division
of Safety for Dams and approved prior to the start of construction for any new
dam that falls under the State jurisdiction for safety.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec.10-4.411.1.   Depth of Mining.
   This ordinance regulates the size of the footprint of the mining operation,
and establishes no regulatory depth limit for off-channel mining. Unless an
environmental analysis concludes that unacceptable environmental impacts will
result, mining operations shall be encouraged to excavate the full depth of
available resources at any particular mining site. In conjunction with a
minimized mining footprint, this will ensure efficiency in resource extraction,
help minimize impacts to agriculture by containing the area of surface
disturbance of any individual mining operation, and minimize impacts of water
loss associated with evaporation from reclaimed lakes.
(Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.412.   Dewatering.
   "Dewatering" shall mean lowering the water level in a wet pit by pumping
water from the pit, regardless of the purpose of the pumping. Water generated
from dewatering activities must be beneficially used and discharged on-site.
Pumps systems used to dewater the wet pits shall be powered by electricity
(i.e., through connection to power lines) or solar power. This ordinance does
not permit water generated from dewatering activities to be used or discharged
off-site. No off-channel excavation shall use dewatering as a part of surface
mining operations, unless site-specific technical analysis performed by a
qualified Professional Engineer or Professional Geologist with experience in
hydrogeology demonstrates that the proposed dewatering will not adversely
affect off-site wells with respect to groundwater level and quality. The
Professional Engineer or Professional Geologist shall demonstrate, using
appropriate hydrogeologic analysis (i.e., using data-supported empirical,
analytical, and/or numerical investigative tools), that the proposed dewatering
activity will not adversely impact active off-site wells or other water
resources (e.g., creeks and wetlands) within one thousand (1000) feet of the
proposed dewatering pit boundary. Average historic low groundwater levels in
the subject well shall be used for the analysis. Site-specific aquifer testing
shall be conducted, if needed, to determine aquifer properties for the
analysis. Consistent with the OCMP EIR, an effect shall be considered adverse
if the reduction in simulated groundwater levels exceeds two (2') feet at any
well located within one thousand (1000) feet of the pit boundary or results in
well failure.
   The hydrogeologic analysis shall be submitted to the County for review and
approval prior to implementation of any dewatering activities. If an adverse
impact is identified by the analysis (either impacts to existing wells or other
water resources, including creeks and wetlands), dewatering activities will be
modified to eliminate any adverse impacts, and/or the applicant shall otherwise
mitigate adverse impacts to the satisfaction of the County.
   Approval to dewater requires Planning Commission approval pursuant to
sections
10-4.506 and
10-4.602.
   Prior to and for the duration of dewatering activities, the applicant shall:
1) monitor water levels in the wet pit(s) and nearby monitoring wells on a
quarterly basis; and 2) quantify the amount of water pumped from and returned
to the wet pit(s). This monitoring data shall be reviewed by the applicant's
Professional Engineer or Professional Geologist to determine whether any
adverse impacts are occurring. Documentation of the monitoring and data
evaluation shall be submitted to the County annually. If adverse impacts are
found to be occurring, dewatering activities will be modified to eliminate
adverse impacts, or the applicant shall otherwise mitigate impacts to the
satisfaction of the County. Any measures designed to mitigate adverse impacts
identified after implementation of dewatering activities shall be approved by
the Planning Commission at a regularly scheduled meeting, with written notice
of the adverse impact and proposed mitigation measures given by mail to all
property owners within 1,000 feet of the pit boundary in addition to any notice
otherwise required by law.
   For purposes of this section, mitigation measures of adverse impacts may
include, but are not limited to, well modification, well relocation,
compensation of well owners for increased pumping cost, or providing an
alternative water supply. Such mitigation measures shall be paid for by the
mining operator, with sufficient financial security to ensure completion of the
measures.
   Pumping of water from the wet pit in lieu of pumping of groundwater from a
well shall not require predictive impact analysis in addition to analysis
provided in the approved, site-specific CEQA document, unless the total annual
water demand, as set forth in the CEQA document, is exceeded. This does not
remove the requirement for monitoring and reporting activities described above.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1487, eff.
April 6, 2017; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.413.   Drainage.
Surface water may be allowed to enter mined areas, through either perimeter
berms or ditches and grading, when designed and engineered pursuant to an
approved reclamation plan and where effective best management practices (BMPs)
to trap sediment and prohibit contamination are included. Appropriate erosion
control measures shall be incorporated into all surface water drainage systems.
Stormwater drainage systems shall be designed to connect with natural drainages
so as to prevent flooding on surrounding properties and County rights-of-way.
Storm water runoff from mining areas shall be conveyed to lowered areas
(detention basins) to provide detention of runoff generated during a twenty
(20) year, one-hour storm event. All drainage conveyance channels or pipes
(including spillways for detention areas) shall be designed to ensure positive
drainage and minimize erosion. The drainage conveyance system and storm water
detention areas shall be designed and maintained in accordance with Best
Management Practices for the reduction of pollutants associated with runoff
from mined areas. The design and maintenance procedures shall be documented in
the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan required for mining operations. The
drainage system shall be inspected annually by a Registered Civil Engineer,
Registered Geologist, or Certified Erosion and Sediment Control Specialist to
ensure that the drainage system is functioning effectively and that adverse
erosion and sedimentation are not occurring. The annual inspection shall be
documented in the Annual Mining and Reclamation Report. If the system is found
to be functioning ineffectively, the operator shall promptly implement the
recommendations of the engineer.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.414.   Dust control.
   Unless superseded by newer more effective standards, the following measures
shall be implemented in order to control fugitive dust:
   (a)   All stockpiled soils shall be enclosed, covered, or have sufficient
moisture to control fugitive dust at all times. Inactive soil stockpiles should
be vegetated or adequately watered to create an erosion-resistant outer crust.
   (b)   During operating hours, all disturbed soil and unpaved roads shall be
adequately watered to keep soil moist.
   (c)   All disturbed but inactive portions of the site shall either be seeded
or watered until vegetation is grown or shall be stabilized using methods such
as chemical soil binders, jute netting, or other Yolo-Solano Air Quality
Management District approved methods.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.414.1.   Energy.
   Wherever practical and feasible, aggregate facilities shall use clean
electric energy from the grid or install alternative on-site electricity
generation systems to replace diesel equipment and reduce criteria pollutant
emissions.
(Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.415.   Equipment maintenance.
   All internal combustion engine driven equipment and vehicles shall be kept
tuned according to the manufacturer's specifications and properly maintained to
minimize the leakage of oils and fuel. No vehicles or equipment shall be left
idling for a period of longer than is required by law, recommended by the Air
District, or ten (10) minutes, whichever is shorter.
   Fueling and maintenance activities of heavy equipment (except draglines and
floating suction dredges) are prohibited within one hundred (100) feet of open
bodies of water during mining and reclamation. All Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plans shall include provisions for releases of fuels during fueling
activities for draglines and floating suction dredges.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.416.   Flood protection.
   All off-channel surface mining operations shall be provided with a minimum
one-hundred (100) year flood protection. Off-channel excavations shall be
designed to minimize the potential for levee breaching and/or pit capture. In
addition, excavations shall be designed to prevent overtopping of channel banks
or levees along Cache Creek and all tributaries and drainage channels
(including, but not limited to, Willow Slough and Lamb Valley Slough).
   The flood protection upgrades shall be designed and constructed to provide
the necessary one hundred (100) year protection without creating a net increase
of in upstream or downstream flooding elevations. Upstream flooding could be
increased if additional levee construction serves to confine flows to a narrow
width, thereby increasing the water surface elevation. Downstream flooding
could be increased if floodplain storage areas were removed from the drainage
system by constructing levees in areas where they did not exist before (or
raising levees that are overtopped in floods up to the one hundred (100) year
event). Where feasible, alternative or non-structural flood management designs
(potentially using detention basins, infiltration galleries, and/or floodplain
storage in noncritical areas) shall be incorporated. New development (such as
buildings, levees, or dikes) located within the floodplain shall conform to all
applicable requirements of the Yolo County Flood Protection Ordinance and the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.417.   Groundwater monitoring programs.
   All surface mining operations that propose off-channel excavations extending
below the groundwater level shall develop and maintain a groundwater monitoring
program consisting of two (2) components: water level measurements and water
quality testing. A groundwater level monitoring program shall be initiated at
least six (6) months prior to the removal of overburden. At a minimum, the
groundwater level monitoring program shall consist of three (3) monitoring
wells, with at least one well upgradient of the wet pit and one well
downgradient of the wet pit. Monitoring programs for proposed mining areas
exceeding one hundred (100) acres (total proposed mining area over the life of
the project) shall include one additional well for each one hundred (100) acres
of wet pit mining. Therefore, wet pit mining areas of one to ninety-nine (99)
acres would require three (3) wells, one hundred (100) to one hundred ninety-
nine (199) acres would require four (4) wells, two hundred (200) to two hundred
ninety-nine (299) acres would require five (5) wells, and so on. These wells
shall be distributed through the vicinity of the wet pit mining area and used
for groundwater level measurements. Groundwater levels shall be collected from
the monitoring wells on a quarterly basis for six (6) months prior to mining
and for the duration of the mining period. All wellheads shall be surveyed with
horizontal and vertical control to allow calculation of groundwater elevations
and development of groundwater contour maps. Groundwater levels shall be
measured with an accuracy of plus or minus 0.01 foot, at minimum.
   Water quality in the vicinity of each active wet pit mining location shall
be evaluated by analyzing samples from selected monitoring wells (one
upgradient and one downgradient) and wet pit surface water sampling locations.
Since mining may be conducted in phases over a relatively long period of time,
pit boundaries may change with time. Selection, and installation if necessary,
of downgradient monitoring wells, which would be critical to adequately
characterize the groundwater quality in the vicinity of the wet pits, shall be
submitted by the operator for review and approval by the County. The selected
monitoring wells shall be installed and sampled at least six (6) months prior
to the removal of overburden. The downgradient wells shall be located as near
to the active wet pit mining areas as is practical. The upgradient wells shall
be located an adequate distance from the proposed mining area to ensure that
the effect of the wet pit on water quality in the well would be negligible. The
water samples from the wet pit shall be collected in a manner so as to ensure
that they are representative of water quality within the wet pit. The minimum
sampling schedule and required analyses are described below.
   (a)   Groundwater level and pit water surface level measurements shall be
performed quarterly in all wells for the duration of mining and reclamation.
   (b)   For monitoring the groundwater quality of proposed wet pit mining,
sample collection and analysis of physical, chemical, and biological
constituents shall be conducted according to the following specifications:
   (1)   Prior to the removal of overburden. One upgradient and one
downgradient well shall be sampled at least six (6) months prior to the removal
of overburden and again at the start of excavation. The samples shall, at
minimum, be analyzed for general minerals; inorganics; nitrates; total
petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH) as diesel and motor oil, benzene, toluene,
ethylbenzene, and xylenes (BTEX); pesticides (EPA 8140 and 8150); and coliform
(with E. coli confirmation).
   (2)   During wet pit mining and active reclamation. The wet pit shall be
sampled semiannually for the duration of mining and active reclamation. The
samples shall, at minimum, be analyzed for general minerals; inorganics;
nitrates; TPH as diesel and motor oil, BTEX; pesticides (EPA 8140 and 8150);
and coliform (with E. coli confirmation).
   One upgradient and one downgradient well shall be analyzed, at minimum, for
general minerals; inorganics; nitrates; TPH as diesel and motor oil, BTEX;
pesticides (EPA 8140 and 8150); and coliform (with E. coil confirmation). The
wells shall be sampled according to the following schedule: semiannually for
the first two (2) years, and annually every year thereafter.
   (3)   After active reclamation. One year after all heavy equipment work has
been completed in the vicinity of the pit, the TPH and BTEX analyses may be
discontinued. The wet pit and one upgradient and one downgradient well shall be
sampled and analyzed for pH; temperature; nutrients (phosphorous and nitrogen);
total dissolved solids; total coliform (with E. coli confirmation); and
biological oxygen demand. This monitoring shall be conducted every two (2)
years for a ten (10)-year period after completion of reclamation.
   A report to the Agency and Department of Environmental Health shall be
submitted within thirty (30) days of the required groundwater testing.
   Additional tests and analysis shall be required only if a new condition is
recognized that may threaten water quality or if the results of previous tests
fall outside allowable ranges. If at any time during the monitoring period,
testing results indicate that sampling parameters exceed Maximum Contaminant
Levels (MCLs), as reported in the California Code of Regulations, or
established background levels, a qualified professional shall evaluate
potential sources of the contaminants. The evaluation shall determine the
source and process of migration (surface or subsurface) of the contaminants. A
report shall be submitted to the regulatory agencies (the Agency, Yolo County
Department of Environmental Health, the Central Valley Regional Water Quality
Control Board, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency) which identified,
the source of the detected contaminants and specifies remedial actions to be
implemented by the operator for corrective action. If it is determined that the
source of water quality degradation is off-site, and the County and the RWQCB
are in agreement with this conclusion, the operator shall not be responsible
for corrective action.
   If corrective action is ineffective or infeasible, the responsible party
must provide reparation to affected well owners, either by treatment of water
at the wellhead or by procurement of an alternate water supply.
   If, at the completion of the mining and reclamation period, water quality
has not been impacted, all monitoring wells shall be destroyed in accordance
with the California Department of Water Resources Well Standards. If the
County, landowner, or other agency wishes to maintain the wells for future
water resources evaluation, selected wells may be preserved for this use.
Monitoring wells may remain useful for post-mining land uses.
   The County may retain appropriate staff or a contract consultant to provide
third party critical review of all hydrologic reports related to monitoring.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.418.   Habitat conservation plan compliance.
   All surface mining operations shall complement the preservation and
enhancement measures in the Yolo County Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP). Mining
operators with lands designated as having a moderate to high potential for use
as mitigation areas in the HCP shall be encouraged to participate in the
Developer HCP Participation Options, including use of lands as mitigation
sites.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996)
Sec. 10-4.419.   Haul roads.
   Trucks accessing a mining site to pick up a load, or leaving a mining site
to deliver a load, are restricted to the approved/designated haul routes
identified in the operator’s permit which applies to the route taken from the
mining site access/ driveway to a state/federal highway. If a truck
subsequently exits the state/federal highway while within Yolo County, this too
may only occur on an approved/designate haul route. This applies to all truck
trips serving the mining site, unless making a local delivery. Those portions
of designated truck haul routes that include County-maintained roads shall be
posted as such, in accordance with the Public Works Department, to facilitate
law enforcement and public safety. Private truck haul routes or conveyors shall
be used to transport material within the mining site, in order to reduce
impacts to public roads.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.419.1.   Hazardous materials storage.
   Prior to handling threshold quantities of hazardous materials (fifty-five
(55) gallons, five hundred (500) pounds, or two hundred (200) cubic feet of
compressed gas) or generating any amount of hazardous waste on site, a
Hazardous Materials Business Plan must be completed and submitted to Yolo
County Environmental Health by the operator through the California
Environmental Reporting System (CERS). In addition, prior to above ground
storage tanks (AST) or containers with cumulative storage capacity greater than
one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) gallons of petroleum products being
present at the facility, a Spill Prevention Countermeasure Contingency (SPCC)
Plan must be prepared, implemented, and retained on site.
(Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.420.   Lighting.
   All lighting shall be arranged and controlled so as not to illuminate public
rights-of-way or adjacent properties.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.420.1.   Mercury Bioaccumulation in Wildlife.
   Each mining area to be reclaimed to a permanent lake as part of each
approved long-range mining plan shall be evaluated annually by the operator for
five (5) years after the pit fills with groundwater with an intensive fish
mercury monitoring program described in Section
10-5.517 of the Reclamation Ordinance.
(Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.421.   Noise: General standard.
   From 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., noise levels shall not exceed an average noise
level equivalent (Leq) of eighty (80) decibels (dBA) measured at the property
boundaries of the site. However, noise levels shall not exceed an average noise
level equivalent (Leq) of sixty (60) decibels (dbA) for any nearby off-site
residences or other noise-sensitive land uses.
   From 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., noise levels shall not exceed an average noise
level equivalent (Leq) of sixty-five (65) decibels (dBA) measured at the
property boundaries of the site.
   At no time shall noise levels exceed a community noise equivalent (CNEL) of
sixty (60) decibels (dBA) for any existing residence or other noise-sensitive
land use. An existing residence shall be considered the property line of any
residentially zoned area or, in the case of agricultural land, any occupied
offsite residential structures. Achieving the noise standards may involve
setbacks, the use of quieter equipment adjacent to residences, the construction
of landscaped berms between mining activities and residences, or other
appropriate measures.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.422.   Noise: Sonic safety devices.
   If mining occurs within fifteen hundred (1500) feet of residences, equipment
used during nighttime activities shall be equipped with non- sonic warning
devices (e.g., infrared) consistent with the California Office of Safety Hazard
Administration (Cal OSHA) regulations, This may include fencing of the area to
avoid pedestrian traffic, adequate lighting of the area, and placing an
observer in clear view of the equipment operator to direct backing operations.
If appropriate, prior to commencement of operations without sonic warning
devices, operators shall file a variance request with the California OSHA
Standards Board showing that the proposed operation would provide equivalent
safety to adopted safety procedures, including sonic devices. This regulation
applies to all sonic safety devices in use at the mining site, including sonic
warnings on conveyors. (§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.423.   Noise: Traffic.
   Operators shall provide acoustical analysis for future truck and traffic
noise associated with the individual operations along County roadways
identified as experiencing significant impacts due to increased traffic noise.
The study shall identify noise levels at adjacent noise-sensitive receptors and
ways to control the noise to the "normally acceptable" goal of a CNEL of sixty
(60) dB and reduce the increase over existing conditions to five (5) dBA or
less. Typical measures that can be employed include the construction of noise
barriers (wood or masonry), earthen berms, or re-routing of truck traffic.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.424.   Other agency approvals.
   Operators shall obtain any and all permits and approvals required by other
agencies having jurisdiction over the proposed mining operations and shall
provide copies to the County.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.425.   Parking.
   All operations shall provide sufficient off-street parking to accommodate
customers, employees, and all mining equipment.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.426.   Permit life.
   Surface mining permits and permits for aggregate processing facilities shall
be approved for a maximum of thirty (30) years. Extensions of the permits, for
up to twenty (20) years, may be granted, subject to further environmental
review and discretionary approval by the County. All surface mining permits
shall be subject to annual reporting requirements, as well as review by the
County every ten (10) years, to account for changing regulatory requirements.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.427.   Protection of nearby drinking water wells.
   If any off-channel excavation proposes to extend below the level of seasonal
high groundwater, then six (6) months prior to the commencement of excavation
below the average high groundwater level, the operator shall identify and
locate all off-site municipal wells within one thousand (1,000) feet and all
domestic wells within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed wet pit mining
boundary. If active wells are identified, well characteristics (pumping rate,
depth, and locations of screens) shall be determined. If wells are not located
within one thousand (1,000) feet, the pre- mining impact evaluation shall be
considered complete.
   If wet pit mining is proposed within one thousand (1,000) feet of a
municipal water supply or within five hundred (500) feet of a domestic water
supply well, a capture zone analysis shall be conducted using the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency model WHPA (or a similar model of equal
capability and proven reliability, as approved by the Director). The simulation
shall assume thirty (30) days of continuous pumping of the water supply well
(at its maximum probable yield) under analysis. A mining setback shall be
established so that the capture zone and the pit do not coincide.
Alternatively, the operator shall submit a written agreement that the well
owner has agreed to relocate or redesign the well, or accept the potential
impact (at no expense to the County). The analysis shall be prepared and signed
by a Registered Civil Engineer or Certified Hydrogeologist and submitted to the
County for review and approved at least six (6) months prior to the
commencement of excavation below the seasonal high groundwater level.
   Any new drinking water wells proposed for installation within one thousand
(1,000) feet of an approved wet pit mining area shall be subject to review by
the Yolo County Environmental Health Department. The County shall determine,
based on site-specific hydrogeology and available water quality data, whether
to approve the proposed well installation. Analysis of environmental impact for
projects in the vicinity of the wet pits shall include consideration of
potential water quality impacts on the open water bodies.
   The County may retain appropriate staff or a contract consultant to provide
third party critical review of all hydrogeologic reports related to mining
applications.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.428.   Sanitary facilities.
   At least one toilet shall be provided for each off-channel mining operation.
Chemical toilets shall be properly maintained and serviced regularly. Permanent
toilets shall be properly engineered and the design approved by the Yolo County
Building Official and the Environmental Health Division prior to installation.
All on-site water storage facilities shall be labeled "potable" or
"nonpotable."
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.429.   Setbacks.
   All off-channel surface mining operations shall comply with the following
setbacks:
   (a)   New processing plants and material stockpiles shall be located a
minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from public rights-of-way, public
recreation areas, and/or off-site residences, unless alternate measures to
reduce potential noise, dust, and aesthetic impacts are developed and
implemented;
   (b)   Soil stockpiles shall be located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet
from public rights-of-way, public recreation areas, and off-site residences,
unless alternate measures to reduce potential dust and aesthetic impacts are
developed and implemented;
   (c)   Off-channel excavations shall maintain a minimum one thousand (1,000)
foot setback from public rights-of-way and adjacent property lines of off-site
residences, unless a landscaped buffer is provided or site-specific
characteristics reduce potential aesthetic impacts. Where landscaped buffers
are proposed, the setback for off-channel excavations may be reduced to a
minimum of fifty (50') feet from either the property line or the adjoining
right-of-way, whichever is greater. Where mining occurs within one thousand
(1,000) feet of a public right-of-way, operators shall phase mining such that
no more than fifty (50) acres of the area that lies within one thousand (1,000)
feet of the right-of-way would be actively disturbed at any time, except where
operations are adequately screened from public view. Where adequate screening
exists in the form of mature vegetation and/or constructed berms that
effectively block public views, the area of active disturbance within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the right-of-way shall not exceed the area that is
screened by more than fifty (50) acres at any one time. Actively disturbed
areas are defined as those on which mining operations of any kind, or the
implementation of reclamation such as grading, seeding, or installation of
plant material are taking place.
   (d)   Off-channel excavations shall provide a minimum fifty (50) foot
setback from the neighboring property line to allow for access around the pit
during mining and after reclamation for maintenance, safety, and other
purposes.
   (e)   Proposed off-channel excavations located within the streamway
influence zone shall be set back a minimum of seven hundred (700) feet from the
existing channel bank, unless it is demonstrated that a smaller distance will
not adversely affect channel stability. Under no circumstances should off-
channel excavations be located within two hundred (200) feet of the existing
channel bank. Evaluations of proposed off-channel excavations within seven
hundred (700) feet of the channel bank shall demonstrate, at a minimum, the
following:
      (1)   The two-hundred (200) foot setback area does not include portions
of the historically active channel.
      (2)   The two-hundred (200) foot setback area does not include formerly
mined lands separated from the active channel by levees or unmined areas less
than two-hundred (200) feet wide (measured perpendicular to the active
channel).
      (3)   Acceptable channel hydraulic conditions (based on existing or site-
specific hydraulic models) for the Cache Creek channel adjacent to the site and
extending not less than one thousand (1,000) feet upstream and downstream of
the site.
      (4)   Acceptable level of erosion potential of the channel bank adjacent
to the site based on predicted stream flow velocity and shear stress on bank
materials during a 100-year flow and historical patterns of erosion.
      (5)   Acceptable level of stability of the slopes separating the mining
area from the creek channel based on an analytical slope stability analysis in
conformance with Sections
10-4.426 and
10-5.517 of this title that includes evaluation of stability conditions during
100-year peak flows in the channel.
      (6)   Appropriate bank stabilization designs, if needed, consistent with
channel design recommendations of the Cache Creek Resource Management Plan or
approved by the Technical Advisory Committee.
      (7)   The condition of flood protection structures and the integrity of
the land within the approved setback zone separating the mining areas and the
channel shall be inspected annually by a Registered Civil Engineer and reported
to the Director. The annual report shall include recommendations for remedial
action for identified erosion problems (see also Reclamation Ordinance Section
10-5.506).
      Approval of any off-channel mining project located within seven hundred
(700) feet of the existing channel bank shall be contingent upon an enforceable
agreement which requires the project operator to participate in the completion
of identified channel improvement projects along the frontage of their
property, consistent with the CCRMP and CCIP, including implementation of the
Channel Form Template. The agreement shall require that the operator provide a
bond or other financial instrument for maintenance during the mining and
reclamation period of any bank stabilization features required of the mining
project. The agreement shall also require that a deed restriction be placed on
the underlying property which requires maintenance of the streambank protection
by future owners of the property. Maintenance of the bank stabilization
features following completion of reclamation shall be the responsibility of the
property owner.
   (f)   Off-channel excavations shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet from riparian vegetation; and
   (g)   Recreational facilities shall be located a minimum of one hundred
fifty (150) feet from private dwellings, with a landscaped buffer provided to
reduce noise and maintain privacy, unless the dwelling is proposed to be an
integral component of the recreational facility.
   (h)   No mining activities shall occur within two thousand (2,000) feet of
the community boundaries of Capay, Esparto, Madison, Woodland, and/or Yolo.
This setback may be reduced by up to five hundred (500) feet when existing
mature vegetation, proposed landscape buffers of a sufficient height and
density to create a visual buffer (consisting of native species and fence-row
habitat appropriate to the area), or other site-specific characteristics reduce
potential incompatibilities between urban land uses and mining. Commercial
mining shall not take place east of County Road 96.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.430.   Site maintenance.
   During operations, the site shall be kept free of debris and maintained in a
neat and orderly manner so as not to create any hazardous or unsightly
conditions. All overburden shall be stockpiled and all stumps, brush, or other
debris resulting from excavation and/or processing shall be properly disposed.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.431.   Slopes.
   Except where benches are used, all banks above groundwater level shall be
sloped no steeper than 2:1 (horizontal:vertical). Proposed steeper slopes shall
be evaluated by a slope stability study, prepared by a Registered Civil
Engineer, Certified Engineering Geologist, or Professional Geologist. Slopes
below the groundwater level shall be no steeper than 1:1 (horizontal:vertical).
Slopes located five (5') feet or less below the summer low groundwater level
shall not be steeper than 2:1 (horizontal:vertical). This section applies only
to final/reclaimed slopes and not to active mining faces.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.432.   Soil removal.
   Soil shall be cut in maximum depths in order to minimize traffic and limit
compaction. The handling and transportation of soil shall be minimized. To the
extent feasible, all handling of topsoil shall be accomplished when the soil is
dry in order to avoid undue compaction.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.433.   Soil stockpiles.
   Topsoil, subsoil, and subgrade materials in stockpiles shall not exceed
forty (40') feet in height, with slopes no steeper than 2:1 (horizontal:
vertical). Stockpiles, other than aggregate stockpiles, shall be seeded with a
native vegetative cover to prevent erosion and leaching. The use of topsoil for
purposes other than reclamation shall not be allowed without the prior approval
of the Director.
   Slopes on stockpiled soils shall be graded to 2:1 (horizontal:verticaI) for
long-term storage to prevent use by bank swallows. At no time during the active
breeding season (May 1 through July 31) shall slopes on stockpiles exceed a
slope of 1:1, even on a temporary basis. Stockpiles shall be graded to a
minimum 1:1 slope at the end of each workday where stockpiles have been
disturbed during the active breeding season.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.434.   Technical report recommendations.
   The recommendations contained within each technical report submitted with a
surface mining permit application shall be consistent with the OCMP and with
all other technical reports submitted. The recommendations of all technical
reports shall be implemented.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.435.   Transfer of allocation.
   If a property is sold or transferred, the allocation attributed to the
property transfers as well. If the transferred tonnage is still processed at
the original plant site pursuant to the original permit approval, no additional
environmental assessment or permits are required. If that transferred tonnage
is processed elsewhere, additional analysis and approval shall be required. The
new operator shall submit a signed statement of responsibility for reclamation
of the site and post financial assurances with the Agency prior to
commencement.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.436.   Vegetation protection.
   Existing vegetation and habitat to be retained shall be enclosed by
temporary fencing to restrict access, protect against damage and/or provide
buffers to reduce the impact of dust. Temporary fencing shall be a minimum of
four (4') feet high. The disturbance of riparian forest or oak woodland
vegetation, including identified off-channel vegetation, should be avoided if
possible. Replacement habitat and plantings shall be established where complete
avoidance is not possible, according to a habitat restoration plan prepared by
a qualified biologist, consistent with the goals of this plan.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.437.   Wastewater discharge.
   No wastewater shall be directly discharged to Cache Creek. Sediment fines
generated by aggregate processing shall either be used for agricultural soil
enhancement, habitat restoration sites, or shall be placed in settling ponds,
designed and operated in accordance with all applicable regulations, and used
for backfill materials in off-channel excavations. Agricultural tailwater shall
be diverted to catchment basins prior to its release to the creek.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.438.   Watercraft.
   Only motorized dredges and draglines shall be allowed on the wet pit lakes.
All other fuel-powered (gasoline or diesel) watercraft shall not be used on the
wet pit lakes. Fuel-powered watercraft may be allowed for mercury sampling or
bathometric measurements, as necessary, to fulfill requirements of this
chapter. Electric-powered or nonmotorized boats shall be permissible.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.439.   Wetlands.
   Existing jurisdictional wetlands shall be retained to the extent possible.
Impacts to existing wetlands shall be mitigated where complete avoidance is not
possible according to a habitat restoration plan prepared by a qualified
wetland specialist and approved by any required jurisdictional agencies,
ensuring no net loss of wetland acreage or habitat value.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.440.   Wildlife habitat.
   Avoid disturbance to important wildlife habitat features such as bird
nesting trees, colonial breeding locations, elderberry host plants for Valley
Elderberry Longhorn Beetle, and mature riparian forest and oak woodland
habitat. This shall include sensitive siting of haul roads, trails, and
recreational facilities away from these features. Suitable habitat for special-
status species shall be protected and enhanced, or replaced as a part of
mitigation plans prepared by a qualified biologist where necessary, and through
compliance with the Yolo HCP/NCCP for special-status species covered by that
Plan. Mining and reclamation activities shall be performed in accordance with
the State Fish and Game Code, Migratory Bird Treaty Act, and other applicable
regulations to protect bird nests when in active use.
   Native-planted hedgerows and/or other vegetated buffers shall be included
between restored habitat areas and adjoining farmland, in order to minimize the
potential for riparian areas to serve as harbors for predators and insect
pests. These buffers will also reduce the noise, dust, and spraying generated
by agricultural operations, in addition to providing valuable pollinator
resources that in turn could enhance agricultural production.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.441.   Exceptions.
   Where an operator demonstrates to the lead agency that an exception to the
standards specified in this article is necessary, the Commission may approve an
alternative standard for inclusion in the approved surface mining permit.
Exceptions shall only be approved where the strict application of the off-
channel mining standards would deprive the operator of privileges enjoyed by
other mining operators in the vicinity, due to special circumstances associated
with the subject site, including size, shape, topography, location, or
surroundings. Although the Commission may set alternative standards, in no case
may the Commission set any standard which does not meet or exceed the policy
objectives set forth in the OCMP.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Article 5.
Surface Mining Permit Approval Process
Sec. 10-4.501.   Zoning requirements.
   Off-channel surface mining operations shall only be permitted within the
Sand and Gravel Overlay (SG-O) Zone defined in Article 9 of Chapter 2 of Title
8 of the Yolo County Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.502.   Applications: Contents.
   Except as provided for in Section
10-4.503 of this article, all documentation for the surface mining permit shall
be submitted to the Director at one time. Ten (10) complete paper copies of the
application, and one electronic version, shall be provided to the County. An
executive summary and a table of contents shall be submitted with each
application. Applications for proposed surface mining permit shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the following:
   (a)   A narrative description of the proposed surface mining operations,
including the following information:
      (1)   The consistency of the proposed surface mining operations with this
chapter, the General Plan, zoning, and applicable specific plans;
      (2)   The manner in which waste generated by the surface mining operation
will be disposed and the methods by which contamination will be controlled
during surface mining;
      (3)   The methods to be used for on-site and off-site surface water
drainage and erosion control during surface mining operations, including
provisions for ensuring flood protection of the site for the 100-year event;
      (4)   The proposed hours of operation, including the estimated number of
nights when surface mining operations may be necessary;
      (5)   The results of all soil test borings performed within the mined
area, to provide information on soil quality and slope stability;
      (6)   The anticipated quantity and type of minerals for which the
proposed surface mining operation will be conducted, including the estimated
maximum annual production with calculations presented in both tons mined and in
tons sold;
      (7)   A summary table showing the following information, listed by phases
for the proposed surface mining project: the length of time for both mining and
reclamation, acreage proposed for mining, acreages proposed for appropriate
reclaimed uses, projected mineral reserves (both mined and sold), and
Williamson Act contracted acreage.
   (b)   Site-specific technical reports, performed by qualified professionals
in the appropriate area of expertise, shall provide specific proposals for
inclusion in the surface mining permit to address the following potential
environmental impacts:
      (1)   A biological inventory and analysis to evaluate the on-site habitat
value of the proposed mined area, as well as the potential impacts to special-
status species and sensitive natural communities, both on-site and within the
immediate area. The analysis shall propose appropriate measures to reduce any
potential adverse impacts to special- status species or significant suitable
habitat, and shall ensure compliance with the Yolo HCP/NCCP, California Fish
and Game Code, Migratory Bird Treaty Act, and other applicable regulations,
plans and programs. The analysis shall also include a wetland delineation study
for any potential on-site wetlands, and shall provide adequate mitigation and
appropriate authorizations from regulatory agencies, where required. If
landscaping is proposed to screen the surface mining operations from adjoining
public rights-of-way or public and private lands, the biological analysis shall
include an evaluation of the feasibility of the species, weed control, and
irrigation methods to be used;
      (2)   If the maximum depth of proposed mining will exceed the average
high groundwater level for the site, and the proposed pit boundaries are within
one thousand (1,000) feet of an active off-site well, a groundwater analysis
shall be submitted to evaluate the effect of the proposed mining plan on the
groundwater levels and quality of the off-site active wells. The analysis shall
be consistent with the procedures described in Section
10-4.427 of this chapter. A detailed groundwater monitoring program shall be
prepared in conformance with
10-4.417 of this chapter, including maps and hydrographs of the wells to be
used in the monitoring network and their respective groundwater measurements. A
well survey shall be conducted and all wells within one thousand (1,000) feet
of the limits of mining plotted on a scaled map. Each property owner owning
parcels within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed limits of wet pit
mining shall be contacted and queried about wells that may be located near the
wet pit mining area. Measures to reduce the potential for contamination shall
be included within the analysis;
   (3)   A noise analysis to evaluate the impacts of surface mining operations
on adjoining land uses and sensitive receptors (i.e. residences) within the
immediate area. The analysis shall include a map of projected noise contours
generated by the mine, for both daytime and night-time operations, with
appropriate measures to reduce excessive noise levels. The analysis shall be
performed in accordance with Sections
10-4.421 through
10-4.423 of this chapter;
   (4)   A transportation impact analysis to evaluate the impacts of the
proposed operation on haul routes and other impacted county roads (if any)
pursuant to Secs.
10-4.408 and
10-4.409 of the Mining Ordinance, and the County General Plan. The analysis
shall evaluate operations, safety, and truck and vehicle VMT (as required to
ensure compliance with the CCAP and County General Plan). The analysis shall
satisfy the requirements of the County’s Transportation Impact Study Guidelines
and shall include an evaluation of existing road conditions for those routes to
be used, as well as any other information necessary to demonstrate compliance
with applicable county and State standards. The analysis shall also specify the
projected number of average truck trips per year, average truck trips per day,
estimated maximum truck trips on peak days, estimated number of peak days per
year, and estimated months in which peak days will occur. The analysis shall
identify mitigation measures such as capital improvements and maintenance to be
undertaken by the applicant to reduce direct and indirect significant adverse
impacts to traffic flow and/or safety to acceptable levels consistent with
applicable LOS, VMT, pavement condition, and other thresholds in the Yolo
County General Plan and County Transportation Impact Study Guidelines; and
   (5)   A geotechnical study to evaluate any proposed operational slopes
steeper than a 2:1 (horizonal:vertical) ratio to ensure that they will be
stable while mining is being conducted and that the slopes possess an adequate
factor of safety. The study shall include an evaluation of any slopes proposed
to provide flood protection from Cache Creek and shall indicate what measures
are proposed to prevent breaching or pit capture. Measures shall be included
within the study to ensure slope stability and maintenance;
   (6)   A cultural resources survey of the proposed mining area, in order to
evaluate the potential for historic and/or prehistoric artifacts. A survey may
not be required if a preliminary investigation from the Northwest Information
Center indicates that the likelihood of archaeological resources is low for the
proposed site;
   (7)   An engineering analysis to evaluate any off-channel excavations
located within the streamway influence boundary, which are proposed within
seven hundred (700) feet of the existing channel bank. The analysis shall be
performed in accordance with Section
10-4.429 of this chapter. Measures shall be included to reduce adverse impacts
to streamflow characteristics resulting from the proposed mining operations;
and
   (8)   An engineering analysis of the potential for a 100-year flood event to
affect the proposed mining site. Measures shall be included to provide
necessary flood protection for the site, in conformance with Section
10-4.416 of this chapter.
   (c)   A site plan submitted in the form prescribed by the Planning Director,
including all property proposed to be included in the mined area, drawn to a
scale of one inch equals one-hundred feet (1” = 100’), or other scale
acceptable to the Director for larger holdings. Small-scale, reproducible
copies shall be provided along with all site plans submitted. Site plans shall
show the following information:
   (1)   All property lines, including the boundaries of all parcels proposed
for mining and reclamation; the boundaries of any ownerships, leases, and/or
other entitlements vested in the surface mining operator which allow surface
mining and reclamation to be conducted on-site; and all Assessor parcel numbers
for properties included in the application;
   (2)   The location of all streams, residences, roads, railroads, and utility
facilities within, or adjacent to, the lands to be mined;
   (3)   The location and condition of any previously mined areas within the
site, specifically designating those portions of the site, if any, where mining
was completed prior to January 1, 1976, and which is claimed to be exempt from
the requirements of the Act;
   (4)   The existing and proposed topography of all mined lands, including the
location of the control cross-section submitted pursuant to subsection (d) of
this section;
   (5)   The location of all development proposed as a part of the surface
mining operations, including settling basins, drainage conveyances, equipment,
fences, and other man-made structures;
   (6)   The locations for the storage of overburden and topsoil material in
any proposed stockpiles;
   (7)   The proposed points of ingress and egress, access roads, driveways,
haul roads, and parking areas proposed as a part of the surface mining
operation;
   (8)   The location of existing vegetation, including areas where vegetation
is proposed to be removed; and
   (d)   Graphical depictions of control cross-sections located as follows and
including the following information:
   (1)   At least three (3) control cross-sections within the area to be mined,
with two (2) of the cross-sections perpendicular to one another;
   (2)   In no event may the interval between the control cross-sections exceed
twelve hundred (1,200) feet; and
   (3)   The cross-sections shall identify both the existing and proposed
mining elevations, and shall identify the angle of operational slopes.
   (e)   All maps, diagrams, or calculations that require preparation in
accordance with the Professional Engineers Act (Chapter 7 (commencing with
Section 6700) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code), the
Geologist and Geophysicist Act (Chapter 12.5 (commencing with Section 7800) of
Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code), or the Professional Land
Surveyors’ Act (Chapter 15 (commencing with Section 8700) of Division 3 of the
Business and Professions Code) shall be prepared by a California-licensed
professional, shall include his or her license number and name, and shall bear
the signature and seal of the licensee;
   (f)   A Land Survey or Record of Survey for all parcels included in the
application which has a basis of bearing in the California Coordinate System
(NAD 27 or NAD 83);
   (g)   An initial environmental assessment describing the potential impacts
of approving the surface mining permit;
   (h)   A list of all other applicable discretionary permits required by other
public agencies;
   (i)   A proposal for providing a "net gain" to the County, as determined by
the following criteria:
   (1)   Reclamation to multiple or conjunctive uses:
   (2)   Enhancement and enrichment of existing resources; and/or
   (3)   Restoration of past sites where the requirements of reclamation at the
time no longer meet community expectations in terms of good stewardship of the
land.
   (4)   Provision of new dedications and easements to supplement/benefit the
Cache Creek Parkway including reclaimed mining sites, restored habitat, trail
connections, and related enhancements.
   "Net gain" may include participation in an established program whose goals
are consistent with the above criteria. Benefits included in the technical
studies submitted with each application which serve as mitigation measures for
potentially adverse environmental impacts created by the project may not be
included as a "net gain;" and,
   (j)   A set of completed application forms provided by the Agency, and all
pertinent information required therein.
   In addition to the foregoing, the Director may require such other and
further information relevant to the project as needed to determine whether the
proposal may affect the public health and safety.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.503.   Applications: Waiver of information.
   The Director may temporarily waive any of the items of information required
in Section
10-4.502 of this Article, if the following conditions apply:
   (a)   The gathering of such information is precluded by physical conditions
existing on the site on the date of the application; and
   (b)   The operator has provided a statement describing the reasons for the
delay, including the date by which the information required in the application
will be submitted. If granted, the Director shall notify the operator in
writing, specifically describing the information which is being waived and
specifying the date by which the operator shall provide the necessary
information. If all other information required pursuant to this chapter has
been submitted and the appropriate fees have been paid, then the Director shall
receive the application for filing.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.504.   Applications: Filing.
   Applications for surface mining permits shall be submitted to the Director
for review and determination as to completeness. If the application is
determined to be incomplete, the Director shall notify the operator in writing
within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application. The written notice shall
specifically describe the information necessary to complete the application.
The application shall not be processed until the Director has determined it to
be complete and the appropriate fees have been paid, as required under Article
8 of this chapter.
   Once the application has been determined to be complete and the appropriate
fees have been paid, the application shall be processed by the Director, who
shall set it for a hearing pursuant to Section
10-4.506 of this article.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.505.   Applications: Review.
   The Director shall notify the Department in writing of any application for a
surface mining permit within thirty (30) days of its being filed. The
application shall also be circulated to all other agencies of jurisdiction for
their review and comments in accordance with CEQA, or other applicable
regulatory requirements. In addition, a notice of the filing of a reclamation
plan shall be mailed to any other person with an interest in the application,
who has deposited a self-addressed, stamped envelope with the Agency for the
purpose of receiving a notice of the filing.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.506.   Applications: Public hearing.
   Once the application has been processed, the Director shall set a public
hearing before the Commission to consider the proposed surface mining permit.
Said hearing shall be held within six (6) months after the completion of the
final EIR or within three (3) months after the completion of the negative
declaration.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.507.   Public hearing: Notice.
   The Director shall mail notices of the public hearing to the operator and to
all property owners and property occupants located within three hundred (300)
feet of the exterior boundaries of the property containing the proposed site.
Notices shall be mailed to said property owners at the addresses shown on the
latest equalized County assessment roll, as well as the occupants at the site
addresses. In addition, the Director shall publish a notice of the public
hearing at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and
circulated in the area of the proposal, as well as on the County website. All
notices shall be mailed and published at least ten (10) days prior to the
public hearing. The Director shall also provide such other notice as may be
appropriate in the circumstances of the project.
   Notices of public hearing shall state the date, time, and place set for the
commencement of the hearing; shall identify the property included within the
proposal; and shall generally describe the subject matter of the hearing. A
metes and bounds legal description of the subject property shall not be
required. Notices required by this chapter may describe the subject property
using landmarks, Assessor parcel numbers, and/or similar identifying
information.
   Failure to mail or to receive such notice, as a result of mistake or
inadvertence, shall not affect the validity of the hearing or the decision
rendered.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.508.   Public hearing: Review.
   Prior to the hearing, the Director shall submit copies of the following to
the Department for a thirty (30) day review period:
   (a)   A copy of the proposed surface mining permit;
   (b)   A copy of the environmental document for the reclamation plan,
prepared in accordance with CEQA; and
   (c)   Other related documentation, as appropriate.
   No surface mining permit may be approved until the Department has completed
its review, or the thirty (30) day review period has expired. The Director
shall prepare a written response to any written comments received from the
Department regarding the surface mining permit submitted. If applicable, the
Director’s response shall specifically address, in detail, why any comments or
suggestions submitted by the Department were not accepted. The Director shall
forward copies of both the Department’s comments and the Director’s response to
the operator.
   If proposed surface mining operations are located within the 100-year flood
plain of any stream, as shown in Zone A of the Flood Insurance Rate Maps issued
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and within one mile of any County
or State maintained bridge, then the Director shall mail a copy of the proposed
surface mining permit to the State Department of Transportation for a forty-
five (45) day review period. No surface mining permit may be approved until the
Department of Transportation has completed its review or the forty-five (45)
day period has expired.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.509.   Public hearing: Findings for approval.
   The Commission or, on appeal, the Board may approve a surface mining permit
pursuant to this chapter only if all of the following findings are made:
   (a)   That the proposed surface mining permit complies with the Act and this
chapter;
   (b)   That surface mining shall be conducted pursuant to a reclamation plan
approved in accordance with Chapter 5 of this title;
   (c)   That surface mining will not be detrimental to the public health and
safety;
   (d)   That the surface mining permit is consistent with the General Plan,
any applicable specific plans, and the zoning of the site;
   (e)   That surface mining is compatible with the existing uses of
surrounding lands;
   (f)   That the site is physically suitable for surface mining, giving
consideration, but not limited to such factors as local groundwater conditions,
flood protection, drainage, habitat, and aesthetics;
   (g)   That the surface mining operation includes provisions for a “net gain”
to the County;
   (h)   That the environmental document for the proposed surface mining permit
was prepared in accordance with the provisions of CEQA and the State CEQA
Guidelines; and,
   (i)   That a written response to the State Department of Conservation has
been prepared and considered, describing the disposition of major issues raised
by the Department.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.510.   Public hearing: Decision.
   After considering the evidence in the public hearing, the Commission or
Board shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application by a
written decision setting forth the findings supporting the action. Approval may
be granted subject to any relevant condition which the Commission or Board may
deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of the Act and this chapter. Such
conditions may address any or all of the findings required by Section
10-4.509 of this article. If the application is conditionally approved, the
conditions shall be specified in writing.
   Within ten (10) days after the decision of the Commission or Board, the
Director shall mail a copy of the decision to the operator. Copies of the
decision shall also be mailed to any other person with an interest in the
application, who has deposited a self-addressed, stamped envelope with the
Agency for the purpose of receiving a copy of the decision.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Article 6.
Amendments and Modifications to Approved Surface Mining Permits
Sec. 10-4.601.   Amendments and modifications: Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide procedures for changing the
conditions of approval or project description (as described in the application
and accompanying analyses) to account for unanticipated changes in the surface
mining operation, site characteristics, regulations, or other aspects of the
approved surface mining permit.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.602.   Amendments: Applications.
   Applications for amendments to previously approved surface mining permits
shall be submitted to the Director, on forms provided by the Agency, and shall
be accompanied by the appropriate fees, as determined in Article 8 of this
chapter. Such applications shall be processed pursuant to the procedures set
forth in Article 5 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.603.   Amendments: Exceptions.
   Proposed exceptions to the off-channel mining standards may not be included
as part of any application for a minor modification. Any changes in the
conditions of approval or the amount of surface area and/or depth to be
disturbed shall also be treated as a substantial deviation from the approved
plan. Such changes and exceptions shall be processed as an amendment to the
surface mining permit.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.604.   Minor modifications.
   The Director may approve minor modifications of surface mining permits
approved by the Commission pursuant to this chapter. Minor modifications may
only be approved if it is found that such changes would be consistent with the
conclusions of the certified EIR or other applicable environmental document,
and that such changes will not have a significantly adverse effect on the
public health and safety. Such modifications shall be noted on the approved
plans and shall be initialed by the Director.
   The decision of the Director shall be mailed and posted in accordance with
Section
10-4.507 of this chapter. Any minor modification approved by the Director shall
become final within fifteen (15) days, unless appealed to the Commission, as
provided in Article 10 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.605.   Interim permit review.
   Every ten (10) years after a surface mining permit has been approved, the
Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with Article 5 of this
chapter, for the purpose of amending the permit to bring it into conformance
with applicable future environmental regulations and statutory changes. The
Commission shall evaluate the permit to determine if there have been any
subsequently adopted environmental regulations or statutory provisions which
should be made applicable to the mining operation, even if such laws themselves
are not made retroactive to affect the permit. For the purposes of this
article, an environmental regulation or statutory provision is one that is
promulgated by a responsible or trustee agency that has authority for a
particular natural resource (e.g., Yolo-Solano Air Quality Management District,
California Department of Fish and Wildlife, California Department of
Conservation, Regional Water Quality Control Board, State Lands Commission,
State Reclamation Board, etc.), including the County of Yolo.
   As a part of this review, the Commission shall also consider whether per-ton
fees to which the permit is subject, reasonably reflect actual costs. The fees
shall be adjusted up or down accordingly.
   Should the Commission decide to incorporate into the permit new regulatory
or statutory provisions that were not available at the time of project
approval, said provisions shall be applied as an amendment to the permit and
processed in accordance with Article 6 of this chapter. The decision of the
Commission may be appealed, in accordance with Article 10 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Article 7.
Annual Reports
Sec. 10-4.701.   Annual reports: Contents.
   Every surface mining operator shall submit an annual report of surface
mining operations no later than November 1 of each year, describing the
activities of the previous twelve (12) months. Annual reports shall no longer
be required, once final reclamation has been completed and financial assurances
have been released. Operators shall submit one hard copy and one electronic
copy to the County. Such reports shall contain the following information:
   (a)   A site plan submitted in the form prescribed by the Director,
including all property proposed to be included in the reclamation plan, drawn
to a scale of one inch equals one-hundred feet (1" = 100'), or other scale
acceptable to the Director for larger holdings, and showing the following
information:
   (1)   Property boundaries and the boundaries of permitted mining areas,
including the depiction of separate mining phases;
   (2)   The existing contours;
   (3)   Contours which show the areas and depth of mining which have occurred
since the previous annual report;
   (4)   Identification of any significant changes in the topography, such as
bank failures, levee breaches, extensive erosion, etc. which have occurred
since the previous annual report;
   (5)   Identification of erosion control structures, levees, berms,
stockpiles, haul roads, settling ponds, habitat avoidance areas, and processing
facilities;
   (6)   The extent of areas reclaimed since the previous annual report;
   (7)   The extent of any borrow areas, where topsoil and overburden are
excavated for use in the reclamation of mined lands; and
   (8)   Updated graphic depictions of the control cross-sections approved in
the surface mining permit application.
   The site plan shall include a certificate from a licensed land surveyor or
registered civil engineer certifying that the site plan and cross-sections were
prepared by or under the direct supervision of the surveyor or engineer;
   (b)   A statement of the total amount of minerals produced since the date of
the initial permit approval and since the date of the preceding annual report.
Such information shall be consistent with the data submitted to the Department,
as required in Section 2207 et seq. of Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Public
Resources Code of California. Production information shall be considered
confidential under Section
10-4.901 of this chapter. Such reports shall be submitted as a declaration
under penalty of perjury;
   (c)   A statement of the total amount of concrete and asphalt materials
recycled since the date of the preceding annual report, and a statement of the
total amount of aggregate removed from Cache Creek as a result of channel
maintenance and reshaping activities in accordance with the CCRMP;
   (d)   A report prepared by a qualified hydrologist describing the data
obtained from the on-site groundwater monitoring program, prepared in
accordance with Section
10-4.417. The report shall recommend appropriate remedial measures if
contamination in exceedance of established thresholds is indicated;
   (e)   A report describing the previous year’s crop yields on any land in the
process of being reclaimed to agriculture in accordance with the approved
reclamation plan. The report shall include a soil analysis and appropriate
remedial measures prepared by a qualified agronomist if crop yields do not meet
the production standards set forth in the approved reclamation plan;
   (f)   A report prepared by a qualified biologist describing the density,
coverage, and species-richness of any on-site areas that are being revegetated
with plants other than agricultural crops in accordance with the approved
reclamation plan. The report shall compare the observed data with the
performance standards set forth in the approved reclamation plan and shall
recommend remedial measures if the previous year’s revegetation efforts have
not been successful;
   (g)   A report prepared by a Registered Geologist, a Licensed Geotechnical
Engineer, or a Registered Civil Engineer describing the remedial measures
necessary to remediate any slope failures, levee breaches, or other
topographical problems referred to in the site plan above;
   (h)   A report describing the extent of mining carried out over the previous
year and the conformance of the operation with the approved reclamation
timetable and/or phasing plan. Said report shall also describe the proposed
extent of operations to be carried out over the following year;
   (i)   A report describing the compliance of the surface mining operation
with the approved conditions of approval;
   (j)   A table, matrix, or report identifying all adopted CEQA mitigation
measures by number and text, and describing compliance with these measures,
pursuant to the Mitigation Monitoring Program adopted for the project; and
   (k)   A statement describing the status of any permits or approval issued by
other agencies of jurisdiction; and
   (l)   A report describing the compliance with the applicable terms of the
approved Development Agreement.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.702.   Annual reports: Filing.
   Annual reports shall be submitted to the Director for review and
determination as to completeness. If the annual report is determined to be
incomplete, the Director shall notify the operator in writing within thirty
(30) days of receipt of the annual report. The written notice shall
specifically describe the information necessary to complete the annual report.
The annual report shall not be processed until the Director has determined it
to be complete and the appropriate fees have been paid, as required under
Article 8 of this chapter.
   Once the annual report has been determined to be complete and the
appropriate fees have been paid, the annual report shall be filed by the
Director and made available for public review.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.703.   Annual reports: Hearing.
   Every year, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, in
accordance with Article 5 of this chapter, regarding the compliance status of
each surface mining operation permitted pursuant to this title. After
considering the evidence in the public hearing, the Commission shall find that
the operation either complies or does not comply with the Act, this chapter,
and the conditions of approval for the surface mining permit. If the Commission
finds that the operation is not in compliance, then the Director shall commence
Notice of Violation proceedings, pursuant to Article 11 of this Chapter.
   Within ten (10) days after the decision of the Commission, the Director
shall mail a copy of the decision to the operator. Copies of the decision shall
also be mailed to any other person with an interest in the application, who has
deposited a self-addressed, stamped envelope with the Agency for the purpose of
receiving a copy of the decision. The decision of the commission may be
appealed in accordance with Article 10 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Article 8.
Fees
Sec. 10-4.801.   Fees: Application.
   Each application for a surface mining permit or any amendments and
modifications thereto shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as determined
in the Master Fee Resolution adopted by the Board.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.802.   Fees: Inspections and administrative.
   Each operator individually shall be responsible for the payment of fees to
cover the costs incurred by the County in annually inspecting the facilities of
that operation, pursuant to Section
10-4.1103 of this chapter, as determined by the Master Fee Resolution adopted
by the Board and any and all costs associated with the administration of
Article 11. Said fee shall be due within thirty (30) days of written
notification by the Director. This fee shall also cover the costs of the annual
compliance review required under Article 7 of this chapter.
   In addition, each operator shall participate in a funding mechanism to
reimburse the County for any costs associated with administering the Act and
this chapter, not otherwise covered by the fees listed above. Administrative
fees shall be placed in a separate account of the General Fund that is used
solely for the purpose of administering the Act and this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5. 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.803   Fees: Maintenance and remediation fund.
   Each operator shall pay an annual surcharge of two (2¢) cents per ton
(sold)to be placed into a maintenance and remediation fund to be used solely
for purposes directly related to the protection and restoration of the lower
Cache Creek watershed. This surcharge shall be imposed in addition to the
surcharge required for the CCRMP and CCIP. The maintenance and remediation fund
shall be held by the County in a separate trust account, segregated from any
other revenues.
   No expenditures may be drawn from this fund for thirty (30) years. After
2026, interest derived from the maintenance and remediation fund shall be made
available for the following activities: remediation of problems related to
mercury bioaccumulation in wildlife; remediation of hazardous materials
contamination; environmental monitoring; and/or ongoing site maintenance (e.g.,
fencing, berms, drainage, levees, or permanent lakes). After 2046, the County
shall determine whether the fund is still merited. If it is determined that
monitoring, maintenance, and/or remediation is no longer required, then the
entire fund shall be made available for implementation of the goals of the OCMP
and/or CCRMP, such as the restoration or creation of habitat, the creation of
open space and passive recreation opportunities, and restoration and
stabilization of Cache Creek.
   Any disbursement of money from the maintenance and remediation fund shall
require approval by the Board of Supervisors. Use of this fund for any purposes
other than those specified above is prohibited.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.804.   Fees: Delinquent payment.
   Failure to pay the above fees in a timely manner shall be considered a
violation and may be enforced under the provisions of Article 12 of this
chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Article 9.
Confidentiality of Records
Sec. 10-4.901.   Confidentiality of records.
   Any proprietary information submitted in a surface mining permit
application, a report, or other document required by this chapter, which is
considered by the operator to be confidential shall be submitted under separate
cover and shall be so marked by the Director. Proprietary information shall
include, but may not be limited to, the following:
   (a)   Annual production figures, reserves, or rates of depletion of the
aggregate resource being mined, pursuant to Section 2778(a)   of the Act;
   (b)   Well log information; and
   (c)   The location and extent of sensitive archaeological sites.
   The proposed confidential information shall be accompanied by a statement
citing the legal authority supporting the operator’s claim of confidentiality.
The request for confidentiality shall be reviewed by the Director and either
approved or denied.
   The decision to reject or accept the claim of confidentiality by the
Director shall be mailed and posted in accordance with Section
10-4.507 of this chapter. Any request for confidentiality approved by the
Director shall become final within fifteen (15) days, unless appealed to the
Commission, as provided in Article 10 of this chapter. The appellate hearing
shall be conducted such that the information remains confidential until a
decision is reached.
   If the request is approved, then the confidential information shall be filed
under separate cover. The contents of the confidential file shall be made
available only to the Director and those persons authorized in writing by the
operator and by the property owner. If the request is denied, the operator may
withdraw the information and include it with the application or report as a
public document. Failure to submit any necessary information may result in an
incomplete application or report.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Article 10.
Appeals
Sec. 10-4.1001.   Appeals: Planning Commission.
   The action of the Director on any decision made pursuant to this chapter
shall be final unless, within fifteen (15) days after such action, any person
with appropriate standing files a written appeal, and pays the appropriate fee,
to the Clerk of the Commission. The timely filing of an appeal shall stay the
Director’s decision, which shall serve as a recommendation to the Commission.
All such appeals shall reference the decision of the Director and shall
specifically describe the grounds for the appeal.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1002.   Planning Commission appeals: Hearings.
   The hearing on an appeal of a decision by the Director shall be scheduled
within sixty (60) days from when the appeal was filed. The Director shall
provide notice of the appeal hearing, pursuant to Section
10-4.507 of this chapter. Upon hearing the appeal, the Commission shall either
affirm, reverse, or modify the appealed decision, or refer the matter back to
the Director for further action.
   A decision of the Commission may be appealed to the Board, pursuant to this
article. The appeal rights under this section shall be exercised prior to
filing an appeal pursuant to Section
10-3.1007 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1003.   Appeals: Board of Supervisors.
   The action of the Commission on any decision made pursuant to this chapter
shall be final unless, within fifteen (15) days after such action, any person
with appropriate legal standing files a written appeal, and pays the
appropriate fee, to the Clerk of the Board. The timely filing of an appeal
shall stay the Commission’s decision, which shall serve as a recommendation to
the Board. All such appeals shall reference the decision of the Commission and
specifically describe the grounds for the appeal.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1004.   Board of Supervisors: Hearing.
   The hearing on an appeal of a decision by the Commission shall be scheduled
within sixty (60) days from when the appeal was filed. The Clerk of the Board
shall provide notice of the hearing pursuant to Section
10-4.507 of this chapter. Upon hearing the appeal, the Board may either affirm,
reverse, or modify the appealed decision, or refer the matter back to the
Commission for further action. The appeal rights under this section shall be
exercised prior to filing an appeal pursuant to Section
10-4.1007 of this chapter.
   If the Board fails to take one of the above actions, the appeal shall be
considered denied without prejudice. Appeals that are denied without prejudice
may be reconsidered at a new public hearing, noticed in accordance with Section
10-4.505 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1005.   Appeals: Scope.
   Any appeal of a decision or action shall serve only as an appeal of the
specific action or issue identified, based on the grounds and issues described
in the appeal. The appellate body shall consider the record of the decision
being appealed. New evidence not previously introduced in the record of the
decision may not be presented at the hearing regarding the appeal.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1006.   Appeals: Withdrawal.
   Appeals to either the Commission or the Board may be withdrawn at any time.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1007.   Appeals: State Mining and Geology Board.
   An appeal of a decision by the Board may be filed with the State Mining and
Geology Board, if the appellant can substantiate, based on the record, that the
County has failed to act within a reasonable time after receiving a completed
application. If the State Mining and Geology Board remands a decision pursuant
to this section, then the Board shall reconsider their decision in accordance
with the procedures described in this article.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Article 11.
Inspections: Notices of Violations
Sec. 10-4.1101.   Inspections: Purpose.
   The Director shall make such necessary inspections and investigations of all
surface mining operations within the unincorporated portion of the County in
order to accomplish any of the following purposes:
   (a)   To determine compliance with this chapter and the Act;
   (b)   To determine compliance with the conditions of any surface mining
permit approved pursuant to this chapter;
   (c)   To investigate the environmental effects which the surface mining
operations may be causing to the surrounding area; and
   (d)   To verify the information submitted in any application or any annual
report submitted pursuant to this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1102.   Inspections: Annual.
   At least once every year, the Director shall conduct an inspection of each
surface mining operation to determine whether the operator is in compliance
with the Act, the Regulations, and this chapter. Each inspection shall be
conducted within six (6) months after receipt by the County of the operation's
annual report, submitted pursuant to Section 2207 of the Public Resources Code,
and may be combined with other site inspections, as appropriate.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1103.   Annual inspections: Notification.
   All annual inspections shall be documented using forms adopted by the
Department. The Director shall notify the Department of the inspection within
ninety (90) days after it has been completed. Said notice shall include the
following:
   (a)   A statement regarding whether the operation is in compliance with the
Act and this chapter. Any violations of either the Act or this chapter shall be
specifically described;
   (b)   The completed inspection forms;
   (c)   A description of any pending reviews or appeals of surface mining
permits, reclamation plans, financial assurances, amendments or modifications
thereto, or interim management plans pertaining to the operation;
   (d)   Aspects of the surface mining operation, if any, that were found to be
inconsistent with the Act but were corrected before the submission of the
inspection form to the Department;
   (e)   Aspects of the surface mining operation, if any, that were found to be
inconsistent with the Act but were not corrected before the submission of the
inspection form to the Department;
   (f)   A statement describing the County’s intended response to any aspects
of the surface mining operation found to be inconsistent with the Act but were
not corrected before the submission of the inspection form to the Department;
and
   (g)   Any supporting documentation.
   Copies of the notice shall also be provided to the operator.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1104.   Inspections: Designee.
   Inspections shall be conducted by a state-licensed geologist, state-licensed
civil engineer, state-licensed landscape architect, state-licensed forester, or
a qualified County employee, who is experienced in mined land reclamation (as
described in the Act and related regulations) and experienced in activities
governed by the Act, and who has not been employed by the mining operation in
any capacity during the previous twelve (12) months.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1105.   Violations: Notice.
   Whenever the Director has reasonable cause to believe that a surface mining
operation is in violation of the Act or the Regulations, this chapter, any term
or condition of a surface mining permit, or development agreement
(“violation”), the following procedure shall be followed:
   (a)   In the event of a violation of the Act or Regulations, or a violation
that in the sole discretion of the Director poses an imminent and substantial
endangerment to the public health, safety, or the environment, the following
procedures shall be followed:
      i.   The Director shall provide a written notice to the operator at the
time of inspection or as soon thereafter as the violation is made known. The
operator shall be provided thirty (30) days to correct. If correction is not or
cannot be achieved within thirty (30) days, the operator and the County may
enter into a stipulated order to comply, with notice sent to the Department. A
stipulated order to comply shall include a schedule and time for compliance
that the County determines is reasonable after taking into account the actions
and legal processes required to correct the violation.
      ii.   If the operator does not comply with a notice issued pursuant to
(a)(i), above, within thirty (30) days of being served the notice, the County
may issue an Order to Comply, pursuant to Section
10-4.1106 of this Chapter.
   (b)   If the Director determines that a violation other than a violation of
the Act, does not pose an imminent and substantial endangerment to public
health, safety, or the environment, the following procedure shall be followed:
      i.   The Director shall provide written notice to the operator
documenting the potential violation (“condition of concern”). The Director may
request additional information from the operator to assess the site conditions
and determine if a violation exists. The operator shall be provided thirty (30)
days to respond to this initial notice. If the requested information is not
received within thirty (30) days, the Director shall proceed with an Order to
Comply as set forth in Section
10-4.1106. An extension of time may be requested by the applicant in cases
where compilation of the information may take longer, but such extension shall
not exceed sixty (60) days.
      ii.   If the operator resolves the condition of concern within the
timeframe set in (b)(i) above, the Director shall verify by conducting a site
inspection or review of information provided by the operator, whichever is
appropriate. The Director shall notify the operator in writing that the
condition of concern has been satisfactorily resolved.
      iii.   If the Director determines the condition of concern is still
active after the timeframe described in 3(b)(i), the Director shall submit a
notice to the operator requiring submittal of a Correction Plan. The Correction
Plan to be provided by the operator shall at a minimum describe in detail the
sequence, methods, and timeline necessary for each step to correct the
conditions of concern identified by the Director. The Correction Plan must be
received within thirty (30) days from the date of notification. The Director
shall review and accept or request changes to the Correction Plan within thirty
(30) days of receipt. If changes or clarification is requested, the operator
shall then be provided another thirty (30) days to finalize and submit the
final Correction Plan and commence implementation. Implementation must begin
immediately (unless mutually agreed upon and documented in the Correction Plan)
and must be fully completed no later than one year from the date of submission
of the final Correction Plan.
      Once the Correction Plan is finalized, the Director shall forward the
Correction Plan to the Planning Commission as an informational/ correspondence
item with the next Planning Commission agenda packet. No formal action shall be
taken by the Planning Commission on the Correction Plan.
      iv.   In the event that the procedure set forth above does not result in
correction of a violation, an order to comply shall be served to the operator
pursuant to Section
10-4.1106.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1106.   Violations: Order to comply.
   If the violation continues after the timeframes specified in Section
10-4.1105, the Director shall issue an order to comply requiring that the
violation be corrected or abated and that the operator come into compliance
with the applicable law, regulation, or requirement. The order to comply shall
be delivered by personal service or certified mail, with a copy sent to the
Department. An order to comply issued pursuant to this Section shall take
effect thirty (30) days following the service of the order to comply unless
within those thirty (30) days the operator appeals the order and requests a
hearing before the Planning Commission. The order shall specifically describe
both the violation(s) and the remedial steps required for compliance. The order
shall specify a time by which compliance must be completed, as determined by
the Director. A reasonable amount of time shall be allowed to bring the
operation into compliance, taking into account the seriousness of the
violation, the potential harm to public health, safety, and the environment,
and any good faith efforts to comply with the applicable requirements.
   An appeal filed pursuant to this Section shall be noticed and heard at a
public hearing within forty-five (45) days of the filing of the appeal or a
longer period as may be mutually agreed upon by the operator and the County.
Public notice of such hearing shall be given as set forth in Section
10-4.507 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1107.   Violations: Hearing.
   Upon the filing of an appeal pursuant to Section
10-4.1106, the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing to consider
the violation. Before the close of the hearing, the Commission shall take one
of the following actions:
   (a)   Affirm the order to comply of the Director;
   (b)   Remove any of the violations or remedy steps required for compliance,
and affirm the order as modified; or
   (c)   Vacate the order to comply.
   If the order of the Director is affirmed, the Commission's decision shall
become final, unless an appeal is filed with the Board within fifteen (15) days
after the decision, pursuant to Article 10 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1190,
eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1108.   Violations: Revocation.
   If an operator fails to abide by the requirements of an order to comply, the
Director shall initiate procedures to revoke the operator’s permit(s) and
forfeit the operator's financial assurances in accordance with Article 11 of
this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1109.   Violations: Administrative penalties.
   If the operator fails to comply with an order to comply, issued pursuant to
this article, the Commission may issue an order imposing administrative
penalties of up to, but not more than, five thousand dollars ($5,000) per day
for noncompliance with this article in addition to noncompliance with any other
article or chapter, retroactive to the original date of noncompliance. When
determining the amount of the penalty, the Commission shall consider, but may
not be limited to, the following factors:
   (a)   The nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation(s);
   (b)   Any prior history of violations; and,
   (c)   The degree of culpability by the operator.
   The order establishing administrative penalties shall be served by certified
mail to the operator. Any such order shall become effective upon issuance and
the penalties imposed therein shall be paid to the Director within fifteen (15)
days. If the order imposing administrative penalties is appealed to the Board,
the operator shall deposit any amounts due pursuant to Section 10-11.10 with
the County Treasury in an account earning interest at the County pooled rate.
Any appeal to the Board must be filed with the Clerk of the Board within
fifteen (15) days after the order is first mailed. The Board shall hear the
appeal de novo.
   Any decision by the Board to order administrative penalties shall become
effective within thirty (30) days, unless the operator files a petition for
writ of mandate in the superior court for review of the order. If no writ
petition is filed, then the order setting administrative penalties shall not be
subject to review by any court or agency. The order establishing administrative
penalties shall be served by certified mail to the operator.
   Penalties collected by the Director shall only be used to cover the
reasonable costs incurred by the County in administering either the Act or
Chapters 3, 4, and 5 of Title 10 of this Code. (§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September
5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-4.1110.   Violations: Public nuisance.
   Any surface mining operation in violation of this title, or in violation of
any surface mining permit or order to comply issued pursuant to this chapter,
shall be considered a public nuisance. If the operator fails to comply with an
order to comply, issued pursuant to this article, the Director may refer the
violation to County Counsel for abatement or the District Attorney for criminal
remedies. (§ 1, Ord. 1190, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Chapter 5
SURFACE MINING RECLAMATION*
* Sections
10-5.101 through 10-5.1305, codified from Ordinance No. 821, effective February
22, 1979, as amended by Ordinance No. 945, effective February 24, 1983, amended
in their entirety by Ordinance 1191, effective September 5, 1996.
Sections:
Article 1. Title, Authority and Purpose
   
10-5.101   Title.
   
10-5.102   Authority.
   
10-5.103   Purposes.
Article 2. Definitions
   
10-5.201   Scope.
   
10-5.202   Abandon: Abandonment.
   
10-5.203   Act.
   
10-5.204   Agency.
   
10-5.205   Board.
   
10-5.206   CEQA.
   
10-5.207   Commission.
   
10-5.208   County.
   
10-5.209   Department.
   
10-5.210   Director.
   
10-5.211   Financial assurances.
   
10-5.212   Haul road.
   
10-5.213   Idle.
   
10-5.214   Interim management plan.
   
10-5.215   Irrevocable letter of credit.
   
10-5.216   Mined lands.
   
10-5.217   Mining waste.
   
10-5.218   Minor modification.
   
10-5.219   Operator.
   
10-5.220   Overburden.
   
10-5.221   Prime agricultural land.
   
10-5.222   Reclamation.
   
10-5.223   Reclamation plan.
   
10-5.224   Regulations.
   
10-5.225   Responsible agency.
   
10-5.226   Slope.
   
10-5.227   State CEQA guidelines.
   
10-5.228   Surety bond.
   
10-5.229   Surface mining operations.
   
10-5.230   Trustee agency.
   
10-5.231   Trust fund.
Article 3. Scope and Exemptions
   
10-5.301   Incorporation by reference.
   
10-5.302   Scope of regulations.
   
10-5.303   Scope: Area defined.
   
10-5.304   Exemptions: Defined.
   
10-5.305   Exemptions: Applications.
Article 4. Minimum Reclamation Standards: In-Channel Operations (Not used)
Article 5. Minimum Reclamation Performance Standards: Off-Channel Operations
   
10-5.501   Reclamation standards: Scope.
   
10-5.502   Aesthetics.
   
10-5.503   Backfilled excavations: Groundwater flow impacts.
   
10-5.504   Backfilled excavations: Improvements.
   
10-5.505   Backfilled excavations: Inspections.
   
10-5.506   Bank stabilization maintenance.
   
10-5.507   Drainage.
   
10-5.508   Erosion control.
   
10-5.509   Fence row habitat.
   
10-5.510   Fencing.
   
10-5.511   Field drainage.
   
10-5.512   Field releveling.
   
10-5.513   Floodplain development.
   
10-5.514   Habitat conservation plan compliance.
   
10-5.515   Habitat plan referral.
   
10-5.516   Lowered elevations for reclaimed agricultural fields.
   
10-5.517   Mercury bioaccumulation in fish.
   
10-5.518   Mining in reclaimed lands.
   
10-5.519   Motorized watercraft prohibition.
   
10-5.520   Operational areas.
   
10-5.520.1   Parkway Plan consistency.
   
10-5.520.2   Permanent easements.
   
10-5.521   Permanent stockpiles.
   
10-5.522   Phasing plans.
   
10-5.523   Planting plans.
   
10-5.524   Post-reclamation groundwater monitoring.
   
10-5.525   Farmland conversion.
   
10-5.526   Repair of damage due to natural disaster.
   
10-5.527   Recreational and habitat uses of permanent wet pits.
   
10-5.528   Sewage storage prohibition.
   
10-5.529   Shallow depths.
   
10-5.530   Slopes.
   
10-5.531   Soil ripping.
   
10-5.532   Use of overburden and fine sediments in reclamation.
   
10-5.533   Wetland habitat.
   
10-5.534   Exceptions.
Article 6. Reclamation Plan Approval Process
   
10-5.601   Applications: Contents.
   
10-5.602   Applications: Waiver of information.
   
10-5.603   Applications: Confidentiality.
   
10-5.604   Applications: Filing.
   
10-5.605   Applications: Review.
   
10-5.606   Applications: Public hearing.
   
10-5.607   Public hearing: Notice.
   
10-5.608   Public hearing: Review.
   
10-5.609   Public hearing: Conflict of comments.
   
10-5.610   Public hearing: Findings for approval.
   
10-5.611   Public hearing: Decision.
Article 7. Financial Assurances
   
10-5.701   Financial assurances: Scope.
   
10-5.702   Financial assurances: Form.
   
10-5.703   Financial assurances: Pledges of revenue.
   
10-5.704   Financial assurances: Budget set asides.
   
10-5.705   Financial assurances: Term.
   
10-5.706   Financial assurances: Calculations.
   
10-5.707   Financial assurances: Phasing.
   
10-5.708   Financial assurances: Annual adjustments.
   
10-5.709   Financial assurances: Review.
   
10-5.710    Financial assurances: Transfer.
   
10-5.711   Financial assurances: Release.
   
10-5.712   Financial assurances: Disasters.
Article 8. Amendments and Modifications to Approved Reclamation Plans
   
10-5.801   Amendments and modifications: Purpose.
   
10-5.802   Amendments: Applications.
   
10-5.803   Amendments: Exceptions and changes.
   
10-5.804   Minor modifications.
   
10-5.805   Interim management plans: Scope.
   
10-5.806   Interim management plans: Application.
   
10-5.807   Interim management plans: Incomplete.
   
10-5.808   Interim management plans: Review.
   
10-5.809   Interim management plans: Appeal.
   
10-5.810   Interim management plans: Term.
   
10-5.811   Interim management plans: Financial assurances.
   
10-5.812   Interim management plans: Abandonment.
   
10-5.813   Interim management plans: Conditions.
   
10-5.814   Interim permit review.
Article 9. Abandonment
   
10-5.901   Abandonment: Hearing.
   
10-5.902   Abandonment: Notice.
   
10-5.903   Abandonment: Forfeit of financial assurances.
   
10-5.904   Abandonment: Reclamation.
   
10-5.905   Abandonment: Use of financial assurances.
Article 10. Fees
   
10-5.1001   Fees: Applications.
   
10-5.1002   Annual reviews.
Article 11. Appeals
   
10-5.1101   Appeals: Planning Commission.
   
10-5.1102   Planning Commission: Hearings.
   
10-5.1103   Appeals: Board of Supervisors.
   
10-5.1104   Board of Supervisors: Hearing.
   
10-5.1105   Appeals: Scope.
   
10-5.1106   Appeals: Withdrawal.
   
10-5.1107   Appeals: State Mining and Geology Board.
   
10-5.1108   Appeals: Judicial review.
Article 12. Inspections: Notices of Violations
   
10-5.1201   Inspections: Purpose.
   
10-5.1202   Inspections: Annual.
   
10-5.1203   Annual inspections: Notification.
   
10-5.1204   Inspections: Designee.
   
10-5.1205   Annual compliance review.
   
10-5.1206   Violations: Notice.
   
10-5.1207   Violations: Order to comply.
   
10-5.1208   Violations: Hearing.
   
10-5.1209   Violations: Abandonment.
   
10-5.1210   Violations: Administrative penalties.
   
10-5.1211   Violations: Public nuisance.
Article 1.
Title, Authority and Purpose
Sec. 10-5.101.   Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the "The Surface Mining Reclamation Ordinance
of Yolo County" or “Reclamation Ordinance”. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5,
1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.102.   Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the California
Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, Chapter 9 of Division 2 of the
Public Resources Code of the state, commencing with Section 2710; the State
Mining and Geology Board Reclamation Regulations, Chapter 8 of Division 2 of
Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations, commencing with Section 3500;
and pursuant to the powers of the County to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare pursuant to Section 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the
State. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.103.   Purposes.
   The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
   (a)   The reclamation of mined lands is necessary to prevent or minimize the
adverse effects of mining on the environment and to protect the public health
and safety;
   (b)   The reclamation of mined lands shall provide for the protection and
subsequent beneficial use of mined lands. However, mining takes place in
diverse areas, with significantly different geologic, topographic, climatic,
biological, and social conditions, so that the methods and operations of
reclamation plans may vary accordingly to provide for the most beneficial
reclamation of mined lands;
   (c)   In order to provide for reclamation plans that are specifically
adapted to the requirements of particular mined lands; and to ensure that mined
land is reclaimed to end uses such as agriculture, habitat, groundwater
recharge, flood control, and channel stabilization in a consistent manner to
maximize their overall management; this chapter imposes performance standards
by which reclamation methods and operations shall be measured;
   (d)   The continued protection of agriculture and open-space uses is
essential. As such, all off-channel, prime agricultural land and/or off-channel
lands within a Williamson Act contract at the time that mining commences shall
be reclaimed to an agriculturally productive state equal to or greater than
that which existed before mining commenced. Prime agricultural land that is not
within a Williamson Act contract shall be reclaimed to those uses which are
declared by the County to be compatible with agricultural activities. Such uses
include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (1)   Agriculture and range land;
   (2)   Groundwater storage and recharge areas;
   (3)   Native fish, wildlife, invertebrate, and plant habitat;
   (4)   Watercourses and flood control basins; and,
   (5)   Recreational or open space lands;
   (e)   Non-prime agricultural land shall be similarly reclaimed to one of the
alternate uses described above; and
   (f)   Reclamation plans shall be designed to integrate with the long-term
goals of encouraging agriculture and recreation while protecting habitat and
the riparian corridor. Provisions shall be made to continue monitoring and
maintenance activities after reclamation is completed, where appropriate, in
order to ensure that reclaimed uses remain compatible with and enhance local
resource management.
(§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Article 2.
Definitions
Sec. 10-5.201.   Scope.
   The definitions set forth in section 2725 et seq. of the Act and 3500 et
seq. of the Regulations shall apply throughout this chapter. In addition, the
definitions set forth in this article shall also govern the interpretation of
this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.202.   Abandon: Abandonment.
   "Abandon" or "abandonment" shall mean to cease surface mining or reclamation
with the intention of not resuming or reclaiming. Operations that have an
approved interim management plan shall not be considered abandoned, unless the
operator is financially incapable of performing reclamation or has failed to
observe an order to comply. However, any surface mining operation that is idle
for twelve (12) consecutive months or longer shall be considered abandoned. (§
1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.203.   Act.
   "Act" shall mean the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975,
specifically referring to Chapter 9 of Division 2 of the State Public Resources
Code, Sections 2710 et seq. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended
by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.204.   Agency.
   "Agency" shall mean the County Administrator. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1407, eff. April 28, 2011; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.205.   Board.
   "Board" shall mean the Board of Supervisors of the County. (§ 1, Ord. 1191,
eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.206.   CEQA.
   "CEQA" shall mean the California Environmental Quality Act set forth in
Sections 21000 et seq. of Division 13 of the Public Resources Code of
California. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.207.   Commission.
   "Commission" shall mean the Planning Commission of the County, or its
successor in function. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.208.   County.
   "County" shall mean the County of Yolo. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5,
1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.209.   Department.
   "Department" shall mean the State Department of Conservation, or its
successor in function with regards to surface mining and reclamation
regulation. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.210.   Director.
   "Director" shall mean County Administrator, or a designee chosen by
Administrator. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996, (as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1407, eff. April 28, 2011; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13,
2020)
Sec. 10-5.211.   Financial assurances.
   "Financial assurances" shall mean monetary funds, securities, or other
instruments provided by the operator to ensure that surface mining operations
are reclaimed according to the approved reclamation plan, should the operator
abandon the mine site. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.212.   Haul road.
   "Haul road" or “route” shall mean: 1) a road along which material is
transported from the area of excavation to the processing plant or stock pile
area of the surface mining operation; and/or 2) the designated route aggregate
trucks are authorized to take pursuant to Section 104.419. (§ 1, Ord. 1191,
eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.213.   Idle.
   “Idle” means that an operator of a surface mining operation has curtailed
production at the surface mining operation, with the intent to resume the
surface mining operation at a future date, for a period of one year or more by
more than ninety (90%) percent of its maximum annual mineral production within
any of the last five (5) years during which an interim management plan has not
been approved. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord.
1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.214.   Interim management plan.
   "Interim management plan" shall mean an amendment to the approved
reclamation plan to provide measures for maintaining an idle mine site until
operations are resumed. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.215.   Irrevocable letter of credit.
   "Irrevocable letter of credit" shall mean a form of financial assurance
whereby a bank authorized to do business in the State submits a letter granting
credit on behalf of the mine operator. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996;
as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.216.   Mined lands.
   "Mined lands" shall mean the surface, subsurface, and groundwater of an area
in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted,
including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land
excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities,
equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from,
or are used in, surface mining operations are located. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.217.   Mining waste.
   "Mining waste" shall mean the residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid,
vegetation, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property directly
resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations. (§ 1, Ord. 1191,
eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.218.   Minor modification.
   "Minor modification" shall mean a change in the approved reclamation plan
that does not substantially alter the intent or the conditions of the
reclamation plan. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord.
1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.219.   Operator.
   "Operator" shall mean any person who is engaged in surface mining
operations, or who contracts with others to conduct operations on their behalf,
except a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with
wages as their sole compensation. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.220.   Overburden.
   "Overburden" shall mean soil, rock, or other materials that lie above a
natural mineral deposit or in between mineral deposits, before or after their
removal by surface mining operations. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996;
as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.221.   Prime agricultural land.
   "Prime agricultural land" shall mean all land which meets the definition of
prime agricultural land set forth in Section 51201 of the Government Code of
the State as administered by the County in the administration of its
agricultural preserve program. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.222.   Reclamation.
   "Reclamation" shall mean the combined process of land treatment that
minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife
habitat, flooding, erosion, threats to public health or safety, and other
adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface
effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a
usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses. The
process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require
backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization,
or other measures. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord.
1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.223.   Reclamation plan.
   "Reclamation plan" shall mean the operator's completed and approved plan for
reclaiming lands affected by any surface mining operations conducted after
January 1, 1976, as required by Section 2772 of the Public Resources Code of
the State. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.224.   Regulations.
   "Regulations" shall mean the State Mining and Geology Board Reclamation
Regulations, specifically referring to Subchapter 1 of Chapter 8 of Division 2
of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.225.   Responsible agency.
   "Responsible agency" shall mean all public agencies other than the County
which have discretionary approval power over the project. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.226.   Slope.
   "Slope" shall mean the angle of the groundsurface, expressed as a ratio of
the horizontal distance to the vertical distance. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.227.   State CEQA guidelines.
   "State CEQA guidelines" shall mean those regulations set forth in Sections
15000 et seq. of Chapter 3 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations.
(§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.228. Surety bond.
   "Surety bond" shall mean a form of financial assurance whereby an indemnity
agreement is executed in a certain amount, either by the mine operator as
principal and surety, or by a surety firm authorized to do business in the
State. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.229.   Surface mining operations.
   "Surface mining operations" shall mean all, or any part of, the process
involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and
mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals
naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or
surface work incidental to an underground mine. Surface mining operations shall
include, but are not limited to: in-place distillation or retorting or
leaching; the production and disposal of mining waste; and prospecting and
exploratory activities. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.230.   Trustee agency.
   "Trustee agency" shall mean a State agency having jurisdiction by law over
natural resources affected by a project which are held in trust for the people
of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.231.   Trust fund.
   "Trust fund" shall mean a form of financial assurance, including: cash
deposited in a federally insured account; negotiable bonds "held in escrow" by
a political subdivision and endorsed by the operator, and rated "A" or better
by a nationally recognized bond rating organization; or negotiable certificates
of deposit in a federally insured depository. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September
5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Article 3.
Scope and Exemptions
Sec. 10-5.301.   Incorporation by reference.
   The provisions of the Act and the Regulations, as those provisions and
regulations may be amended from time to time, are made a part of this chapter
by reference with the same force and effect as if the provisions therein were
specifically and fully set out herein, excepting that when the provisions of
this chapter are more restrictive than corresponding State provisions, this
chapter shall prevail. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.302.   Scope of regulations.
   Unless otherwise provided in this article, no person shall conduct surface
mining operations within the unincorporated area of the County unless a
reclamation plan has been approved and adequate financial assurances have been
submitted, in accordance with this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be
interpreted as requiring the filing of a reclamation plan or financial
assurances for, or the reclamation of, mined lands where surface mining
operations were completed prior to January 1, 1976.
   No reclamation plan application is required if the operator can provide
evidence of a reclamation plan for the site approved by the County prior to
January 1, 1976, and if the operator has accepted responsibility for reclaiming
the mined lands in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. (as amended
by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.303.   Scope: Area defined.
   This chapter shall apply only to the area located within the boundaries of
the Cache Creek Area Plan of the Yolo County General Plan. (§ 1, Ord. 1191,
eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.304.   Exemptions: Defined.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to those activities and
operations which are exempted by Sections 2714 and 2776 of the Act. Any
exemption granted from the provisions of this chapter shall not, in and of
itself, exempt a project or activity from the application of other applicable
regulations and requirements. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.305.   Exemptions: Applications.
   Applications for exemptions shall be submitted to the Director for review
and determination as to completeness. If the application is determined
incomplete, the Director shall notify the applicant in writing within thirty
(30) days, specifically describing the information necessary to complete the
application. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Director shall
determine whether the operation is exempt or is subject to the provisions of
this chapter. Any person with standing may appeal the Director's decision to
the Commission, pursuant to Article 11 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Article 4.
Minimum Reclamation Standards: In-Channel Operations.
(Not Used)
Article 5.
Minimum, Reclamation Performance Standards: Off-Channel Operations
Sec. 10-5.501.   Reclamation standards: Scope.
   The general standard for the reclamation of mined lands is to restore the
site to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses
consistent with the policies of the County expressed in Article 1 of this
chapter and in the General Plan, specific plans, and zoning laws.
   This article sets forth minimum acceptable practices to be followed in
reclamation operations to implement this general standard. These minimum
acceptable standards shall be considered and discussed in every reclamation
plan approved pursuant to this chapter. In addition, the minimum statewide
reclamation practices and standards set forth in the Regulations shall also be
considered and discussed in every reclamation plan approved pursuant to this
chapter. These standards shall be followed in addition to any other conditions
of approval or regulations imposed on the surface mining permit. (§ 1, Ord.
1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.502.   Aesthetics.
   Means of improving the appearance of the landscape after mining has been
completed shall be assessed based on site-specific visual characteristics, site
lines, and view corridors. The use and placement of berms, vegetative screens,
special plant materials, grading. slopes, and contouring the sides and top
surfaces of modified landforms to mimic surrounding landforms, or other
measures, shall be incorporated into the mine reclamation plan as appropriate.
(§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.503.   Backfilled excavations: Groundwater flow impacts.
   The area of backfilled off-channel excavations extending below the
groundwater table shall be minimized in order to reduce changes to groundwater
levels and flow. Backfilled pits shall be oriented with regard to the direction
of groundwater flow to prevent localized obstructions. If a backfilled off-
channel excavation is proposed to penetrate either fifty (50') feet or one-half
(½) into the saturated thickness of the shallow aquifer, then at least six (6)
months prior to the commencement of excavation below the average high
groundwater level, the applicant shall demonstrate in a manner consistent with
the Technical Studies that the pit design will not adversely affect active off-
site wells within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed pit boundary. If
the application includes a series of backfilled pits, then the applicant shall
also demonstrate that the cumulative effects of the multiple backfilled pits
will not adversely affect groundwater flow, if there are any active off-site
wells within one thousand (1,000) feet of the pit boundaries.
   The applicant shall demonstrate, using MODFLOW (or a similar model of equal
capability and proven reliability, as approved by the Director), that the
proposed pit design would not adversely impact active off-site wells within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed pit boundary or result in well failure.
   Average, historic low groundwater levels, which represent the condition of
maximum threat to water levels in the subject well, shall be used for this
simulation. If an adverse impact is identified by the MODFLOW (or other
approved model) simulation, the mining and reclamation plan shall be modified
or the applicant shall submit a written agreement that the well owner has
agreed to relocate or redesign the well, or accept the potential impact (at no
expense to the County).
   Site-specific aquifer testing shall be conducted, if needed, to determine
aquifer properties for the required modeling. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September
5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.504.   Backfilled excavations: Improvements.
   Improvements, including the construction of buildings, roadways, or other
public facilities proposed for construction in reclaimed mining pits shall
require a geotechnical investigation of the stability of fills conducted by a
Licensed Geotechnical Engineer or a Registered Civil Engineer. A report on the
results and recommendations of the investigation shall be submitted to the
Director prior to the issuance of building permits. The recommendations of the
geotechnical investigations shall be fully implemented by the applicant. (§ 1,
Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13,
2020)
Sec. 10-5.505.   Backfilled excavations: Inspections.
   Backfilled mining areas and slopes shall be inspected by the Director
following strong seismic shaking events. Observable damage shall be reported to
the landowner. If the Director determines that the damage requires repair to
meet the intended use of the reclaimed land, the landowner shall perform the
required repairs. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord.
1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.506.   Bank stabilization maintenance.
   Financial assurances for off-channel mining operations which include mining
within seven hundred (700) feet of the active channel of Cache Creek shall
include adequate funding for maintenance during the mining and reclamation
period of any bank stabilization features approved for the mining permit.
Maintenance of the bank stabilization features following the completion of
reclamation shall be the responsibility of the property owners under the Cache
Creek Resource Management Plan.
   The condition of flood protection structures, bank stabilization measures,
and the integrity of the land within the approved setback zone separating the
mining areas and the creek channel shall be inspected annually by a Registered
Civil Engineer and reported to the Director. The annual report shall include
recommendations for remedial action for identified erosion problems. Following
reclamation, the Director shall inspect the land separating the mining areas
and creek channel every five (5) years. Observable damage shall be reported to
the property owner. If the Director determines that damage requires repair to
meet the intended performance of the separator, the property owner shall
perform the required repairs. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.507.   Drainage.
   Upon the completion of operations, grading and revegetation shall minimize
erosion and convey storm water runoff from reclaimed mining areas to natural
outlets or interior basins. The condition of the land shall allow sufficient
drainage to prevent water pockets or undue erosion. Stormwater drainage shall
be designed so as to prevent flooding on surrounding properties and County
rights-of-way.
   Drainage and detention facilities within the proposed mining areas and
vicinity shall be designed to prevent discharges to the wet pits and surface
water conveyances (i.e., creeks and sloughs) from the twenty (20) year/one-hour
storm or less. For events greater than the twenty (20) year/one-hour storm,
runoff from around the perimeter of the mining areas shall be directed into
surface water conveyances. Runoff from within the lowered mining area shall be
directed away from wet pits to detention/infiltration areas. Drainage plans
shall not rely solely on ditches and berms to direct runoff away from the wet
pit. Without proper maintenance, berms and ditches may deteriorate with time
and become ineffective. Drainage plans shall emphasize grading of disturbed
areas that results in broad gentle slopes that drain away from the pits.
Grading plans shall be reviewed by the County to evaluate compliance with
drainage plan objectives prior to project approval.
   In addition, a restriction shall be recorded on the deed that requires berms
and ditches to be permanently maintained in a condition consistent with the
final approval. The deed restriction shall require an inspection easement which
allows County staff or other authorized personnel access for the inspection of
berms and ditches. If the County determines that evidence of damage to those
facilities exists, the County shall require that the owner have an inspection
report for the property prepared by a Registered Geologist or Registered Civil
Engineer. The inspection report including recommendations for corrective
action, if needed, shall be submitted to the Director. The property owner shall
be required to implement recommended corrective actions, if any. (§ 1, Ord.
1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.508.   Erosion control.
   The grading of final slopes, the replacement of soil, and associated erosion
control measures shall take place prior to November 1 in areas where mining has
been completed. To minimize erosion, the finish grading of mining pit slopes
above the average seasonal high groundwater level, with the exception of the
location of designated haul roads, shall be performed as soon as practical
after the mining of overburden and unsaturated aggregate resources has been
completed. A drought-tolerant, weed-free mix of native grass species shall be
established on slopes prior to November 1 or alternate erosion control (mulch
or netting) shall be placed on exposed soil on the slopes prior to this date.
Phasing of mining to minimize the length of exposed mining slopes during the
rainy season is encouraged. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended
by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.509.   Fence row habitat.
   Where fence row or field margin habitat previously existed, reestablish
similar habitat as part of reclamation to agricultural use to replace and
improve the wildlife habitat value of agricultural lands, allowing for the
reestablishment of scattered native trees, shrubs, and ground covers along the
margins of reclaimed fields. Reestablished habitat can be located in areas
other than where it occurred originally. Restoration plans shall specify
ultimate fence row or field margin locations, identify planting densities for
trees and shrubs, and include provisions for monitoring and maintenance to
ensure establishment. Restoration plans should be reviewed and approved by the
TAC. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.510.   Fencing.
   Open wet pits shall be fenced with a forty-two (42") inch minimum, four (4)
strand barbed wire fence or the equivalent (e.g., welded square "hog" fencing),
prior to the commencement of excavation, during excavation, and during
reclamation. Fencing may enclose the property of which mining is a part, the
mining site, or both. In addition, signs shall be installed at the project site
boundaries and access road, indicating that the excavation area is restricted.
Additional security (e.g., gates with protected locks and wing fences to
prevent drive-arounds) shall be provided at all vehicular routes. The fencing
and gates shall be maintained throughout the mining and reclamation period
after completion of reclamation. A requirement shall be recorded on the deed of
the property which requires the landowner to maintain fences. (§ 1, Ord. 1191,
eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.511.   Field drainage.
   Reclaimed agricultural surfaces shall be graded to provide adequate field
gradients to allow surface/furrow irrigation of crops and allow for adequate
storm water drainage. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.512.   Field releveling.
   The operator shall retain a Licensed Land Surveyor or Registered Civil
Engineer to resurvey any areas reclaimed to agricultural usage after the first
two (2) crop seasons have been completed. Any areas where settling has occurred
shall be releveled to the field grade specified in the approved reclamation
plan. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.513.   Floodplain development.
   New development proposed within the reclamation plan (such as buildings,
levees, or dikes) located within the floodplain shall conform to all applicable
requirements of the Yolo County Flood Protection Ordinance, and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.514.   Habitat conservation plan compliance.
   All reclamation plans shall be consistent with applicable components of the
Yolo Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Community Conservation Plan (HCP/NCCP).
(§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.515.   Habitat plan referral.
   Proposed habitat restoration or mitigation plans for lands within the OCMP
area shall be sent to the California Department of Fish and Wildlife, U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and other interested
parties for review and comment through the CEQA process as applicable, to
ensure that the projects do not conflict with other existing habitat
enhancement efforts. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.516.   Lowered elevations for reclaimed agricultural fields.
   The final distance between lowered surfaces reclaimed to agriculture and the
average high groundwater shall not be less than five (5') feet. The average
high groundwater level shall be established for each proposed mining area. The
degree of groundwater level fluctuation varies with location throughout the
basin and within relatively small areas (proposed mining sites). The
determination of the average high groundwater level shall be conducted by a
Registered Civil Engineer or Certified Hydrogeologist and shall be based on wet
season water level elevation data collected at the proposed site or adjacent
areas with similar hydrogeological conditions. Water level records prior to
1977 shall not be used since they would reflect conditions prior to the
installation of the Indian Valley Dam. The dam caused a significant change in
hydrology of the basin and data collected before its installation shall not be
used in estimating current average high groundwater levels. The wells shall be
adequately distributed throughout the proposed mining site to reflect spatial
variation in groundwater levels and fluctuations. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.517.   Mercury bioaccumulation in fish.
   As part of each approved long-term mining plan involving wet pit mining to
be reclaimed to a permanent pond, lake, or water feature, the operator shall
maintain, monitor, and report to the Director according to the standards given
in this section. Requirements and restrictions are distinguished by phase of
operation as described below.
   (a)   Mercury Protocols. The Director shall issue and update as needed
“Lower Cache Creek Off-Channel Pits Mercury Monitoring Protocols” (Protocols),
which shall provide detailed requirements for mercury monitoring activities.
The Protocols shall include procedures for monitoring conditions in each pit
lake, and for monitoring ambient mercury level in the lower Cache Creek channel
within the CCAP planning area, as described below. The Protocols shall be
developed and implemented by a qualified aquatic scientist or equivalent
professional acceptable to the Director. The protocols shall identify minimum
laboratory analytical reporting limits, which may not exceed the applicable
response threshold identified in subsection (e) below. Data produced from
implementing the Protocols shall meet or exceed applicable standards in the
industry.
   (b)   Ambient Mercury Level. The determination of the ambient or “baseline”
fish mercury level shall be undertaken by the County every ten (10) years in
years ending in 0. This analysis shall be undertaken by the County for use as a
baseline of comparison for fish mercury testing conducted in individual wet
mining pits. The work to establish this baseline every ten (10) years shall be
conducted by a qualified aquatic systems scientist acceptable to the Director
and provided in the form of a report to the Director. It shall be paid for by
the mining permit operators on a fairshare basis. The results of monitoring and
evaluation of available data shall be provided in the report to substantiate
the conclusions regarding ambient concentrations of mercury in fish within the
lower Cache Creek channel within the CCAP planning area.
   (c)   Pit Monitoring.
   (1)   Mining Phase (including during idle periods as defined in SMARA). The
operator shall monitor fish and water column profiles in each pit lake once
every year during the period generally between September and November for the
first five (5) years after a pit lake is created. Fish monitoring should
include sport fish where possible, together with other representative species
that have comparison samples from the creek and/or other monitored ponds. Sport
fish are defined as predatory, trophic level four fish such as bass, which are
likely to be primary angling targets and have the highest relative mercury
levels. The requirements of this subsection apply to any pit lake that is
permanently wet and navigable by a monitoring vessel. If, in the initial five
(5) years after the pit lake is created, the applicable response threshold
identified in subsection (e) is exceeded in any three (3) of five (5)
monitoring years, the operator shall, solely at their own expense, undertake
expanded analysis pursuant to subsection (f) and preparation of a lake
management plan pursuant to subsection (g).
   (2)   Reclamation Phase. No monitoring is required after mining has
concluded, during the period that an approved reclamation plan is being
implemented, provided reclamation is completed within the time specified by
SMARA or the project approval, whichever is sooner.
   (3)   Post-Reclamation Phase. After reclamation is completed, the operator
shall monitor fish and water column profiles in each pit lake at least once
every two (2) years during the period of September-November for ten (10) years
following reclamation. Monitoring shall commence in the first calendar year
following completion of reclamation activities. If fish monitoring results from
the post-reclamation period exceed the applicable response threshold described
in subsection (e) or, for ponds that have implemented mitigation management,
results do not exhibit a general decline in mercury levels, the operator shall,
solely at their own expense, undertake expanded analysis pursuant to subsection
(f) and preparation of a lake management plan pursuant to subsection (g).
   (4)   Other Monitoring Obligation. If monitoring conducted during both the
mining and post- reclamation phase did not identify any exceedances of the
ambient mercury level for a particular pit lake, and at the sole discretion of
the Director no other relevant factors substantially support that continued
monitoring is merited, the operator shall have no further obligations.
   (d)   Reporting.
   (1)   Pit Monitoring Results. Reporting and evaluating of subsection (c) pit
monitoring results shall be conducted by a qualified aquatic scientist or
equivalent professional acceptable to the Director. Monitoring activities and
results shall be summarized in a single report (addressing all wet pit lakes)
and submitted to the Director within six (6) months following each annual
monitoring event. The report shall include, at a minimum: (1) results from
subsection (b) (pit monitoring), in relation to subsection (a) (ambient mercury
levels).
   (2)   Expanded Analysis Results. Reporting and evaluation of subsection (f)
expanded analysis shall be conducted by a qualified aquatic scientist or
equivalent professional acceptable to the Director. Results shall be summarized
in a single report (addressing all affected wet pit lakes) and submitted to the
Director within six (6) months following each annual monitoring event. The
report shall include, at a minimum, the results of the expanded analysis
undertaken pursuant subsection (f).
   (3)   Data Sharing. For pit lakes open to the public, the Director may
submit the data on mercury concentrations in pit lake fish to the state Office
of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment (or its successor) for developing
site-specific fish consumption advisories.
   (e)   Response Thresholds.
   (1)   Fish Consumption Advisory. If at any time during any phase of
monitoring the pit lake’s average sport fish tissue mercury concentration
exceeds the Sport Fish Water Quality Objective, as it may be modified by the
state over time (as of 2019, the level was 0.2 mg/kg), the operator shall post
fish consumption advisory signs at access points around the lake and around the
lake perimeter. Catch-and-release fishing may still be allowed. Unless site-
specific guidance has been developed by the state’s Office of Health Hazard
Assessment or the County, statewide fish consumption guidance shall be
provided.
   (2)   Mining Phase Results. If, during the mining phase of monitoring, the
pit lake’s average fish tissue mercury concentration exceeds the ambient
mercury level for any three (3) of five (5) monitoring years, annual monitoring
shall continue for an additional five (5) years, and the operator shall
undertake expanded analysis pursuant to subsection (f) and preparation of a
lake management plan pursuant to subsection (g).
   (3)   Post-Reclamation Phase Results. If during the first ten (10) years of
the post-reclamation phase of monitoring, the pit lake’s average fish tissue
mercury concentration exceeds the ambient mercury level for any three (3) of
five (5) monitoring years, biennial monitoring shall continue for an additional
ten (10) years, and the operator shall undertake expanded analysis pursuant to
subsection (f) and preparation of a lake management plan pursuant to subsection
(g).
   (f)   Expanded Analysis.
   (1)   General. If during the mining or post-reclamation phase, any pit
lake’s average fish tissue mercury concentration exceeds the ambient mercury
level for any three (3) years, the operator shall undertake expanded analyses.
The analysis shall include expanded lake water column profiling (a minimum of
five (5) profiles per affected wet pit lake plus one or more nonaffected lakes
for control purposes) conducted during the warm season (generally May through
October) in an appropriate deep profiling location for each pit lake. The
following water quality parameters shall be collected at regular depth
intervals, from surface to bottom of each lake, following protocols identified
in subsection (a): temperature, dissolved oxygen, conductivity, pH and
oxidation-reduction potential (ORP), turbidity or total suspended solids,
dissolved organic matter, and algal density by Chlorophyll or Phycocyanin. The
initial analysis shall also include one-time collections of fine grained (clay/
silt) bottom sediments from a minimum of six (6) well distributed locations for
each affected lake, and from one or more nonaffected lakes for control
purposes, to be analyzed for mercury and organic content.
   (2)   Scope of Analysis. The purpose of the expanded analyses is to identify
and assess potential factors linked to elevated methylmercury production and/or
bioaccumulation in each pit lake. The scope of the expanded analyses shall
include monitoring and analysis appropriate to fulfill this purpose, invoking
best practices in the industry. In addition to the analyses described in
subsection (f)(1) above, the analysis should also consider such factors as:
electrical conductivity, bathymetry (maximum and average depths, depth-to-
surface area ratios, etc.), and trophic status indicators (concentrations,
Secchi depth, chlorophyll a, fish assemblages, etc.). Additional types of
testing may be indicated and appropriate if initial results are inconclusive.
   (3)   Use of Results. The results of the expanded analyses undertaken
pursuant to this subsection shall be used to inform the preparation of a lake
management plan described below under subsection (g).
   (g)   Lake Management Activities.
   (1)   General. If monitoring conducted during the mining or post-reclamation
phases triggers the requirement to undertake expanded analysis and prepare and
implement a lake management plan, the operator shall implement lake management
activities designed by a qualified aquatic scientist or equivalent professional
acceptable to the Director, informed by the results of subsection (f). Options
for addressing elevated mercury levels may include (A) and/or (B) below at the
Director’s sole discretion and at the operator’s sole expense.
   (A)   Lake Management Plan. Prepare a lake management plan that provides a
feasible, adaptive management approach to reducing fish tissue mercury
concentrations to at or below the ambient mercury level. Potential mercury
control methods could include, for example: addition of oxygen to or physical
mixing of anoxic bottom waters; alteration of water chemistry (modify pH or
organic carbon concentration); and/or removal or replacement of affected fish
populations. The lake management plan may be subject to external peer review at
the discretion of the Director. Lake management activities shall be appropriate
to the phase of the operation (e.g., during mining or post-reclamation). The
Lake Management Plan shall include a recommendation for continued monitoring
and reporting. All costs associated with preparation and implementation of the
lake management plan shall be solely those of the operator. Upon acceptance by
the Director, the operator shall immediately implement the plan. The lake
management plan shall generally be implemented within three (3) years of
reported results from the expanded analyses resulting from subsection (f). If
lake management does not achieve acceptable results and/or demonstrate
declining mercury levels after a maximum of three (3) years of implementation,
at the sole discretion of the Director, the operator may prepare an alternate
management plan with reasonable likelihood of mitigating the conditions.
   (B)   Revised Reclamation Plan. As an alternative to (A), or if (A) does not
achieve acceptable results and/or demonstrate declining mercury levels after a
maximum of three (3) years of implementation, at the sole discretion of the
Director, the operator shall prepare and submit revisions to the reclamation
plan (including appropriate applications and information for permit amendment)
to fill the pit lake with suitable fill material to a level no less than five
(5) feet above the average seasonal high groundwater level, and modify the end
use to agriculture, habitat, or open space at the discretion of the Director,
subject to Article 6 of the Mining Ordinance and/or Article 8 of the
Reclamation Ordinance as may be applicable.
   (2)   Implementation Obligations.
   (A)   If a lake management plan is triggered during the mining or post-
reclamation phase and the subsequent lake management activities do not achieve
acceptable results and/or demonstrate declining mercury levels, the operator
may propose different or additional measures for consideration by the Director
and implementation by the operator, or
the Director may direct the operator to proceed to modify the reclamation plan
as described in subsection (g)(1)(B).
   (B)   Notwithstanding the results of monitoring and/or lake management
activities during the mining phase, the operator shall, during the post-
reclamation phase, conduct the required ten (10) years of biennial monitoring.
   (C)   If monitoring conducted during the post-reclamation phase identifies
three (3) monitoring years of mercury concentrations exceeding the ambient
mercury level, the operator shall implement expanded analyses as in subsection
(f), to help prepare and implement a lake management plan and associated
monitoring.
   (D)   If subsequent monitoring after implementation of lake management
activities, during the post-reclamation phase, demonstrates levels of fish
tissue mercury at or below the ambient mercury level for any three (3)
monitoring years (i.e., the management plan is effective), the operator shall
be obligated to continue implementation of the plan and continue monitoring, or
provide adequate funding for the County to do both, in perpetuity. (§ 1, Ord.
1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.518.   Mining in reclaimed lands.
   Once the reclamation plan or any portion thereof has been completed, no
further surface mining operations shall be allowed within reclaimed lands,
without approval of an amendment to the surface mining permit and reclamation
plan. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.519.   Motorized watercraft prohibition.
   The use of motorized watercraft on any pond, lake or other body of water
created as a part of the approved reclamation plan is prohibited. (§ 1, Ord.
1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.520.   Operational areas.
   Operational areas and haul roads that are not required for future use of the
site shall be ripped, resoiled, and prepared accordingly, to allow for
replanting. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.520.1.   Parkway Plan consistency.
   Reclamation plans shall be developed to be consistent with, avoid conflict
with, and further the goals of the Cache Creek Parkway Plan. (Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.520.2.   Permanent easements.
   Upon completion of reclamation within each phase of the project, for land
that will not be dedicated or deeded to the County, the operator shall enroll
each parcel reclaimed to agriculture in Williamson Act contract, or other
equivalent long-term easement or deed restriction satisfactory to the County,
for the purpose of protecting the agricultural use of the reclaimed land in
perpetuity. (Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.521.   Permanent stockpiles.
   There shall be no permanent piles of mine waste and/or overburden. Berms
established for visual screening and noise abatement shall be contoured to
conform visually with the surrounding topography. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.522.   Phasing plans.
   All proposed mining and reclamation plans shall present a phasing plan for
mining and reclamation activities. The phasing plan shall be structured to
minimize the area of disturbed agricultural lands during each mining phase, and
encourage the early completion of the reclamation of agricultural land. (§ 1,
Ord. 1191, eff. September 5,1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13,
2020)
Sec. 10-5.523.   Planting plans.
   Site-specific planting plans shall be developed by a qualified biologist for
proposed habitat reclamation projects. Restoration components of reclamation
plans shall include provisions to enhance habitat for special-status species,
where feasible.
   Native-planted hedgerows and other vegetated buffers shall be included
between restored habitat areas and adjoining farmland, in order to minimize the
potential for riparian areas to serve as harbors for predators and insect
pests. These buffers will also reduce the noise, dust, and spraying generated
by agricultural operations, in addition to providing valuable pollinator
resources that in turn could enhance agricultural production. (§ 1, Ord. 1191,
eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.524.   Post-reclamation groundwater monitoring.
   Monitoring during the mining and reclamation period shall be a condition of
the permit. The applicant shall ensure that the groundwater monitoring of wet-
pit mining continues for (10) years after the completion of reclamation. (§ 1,
Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13,
2020)
Sec. 10-5.525.   Farmland conversion.
   All mining permit applications shall identify the location and acreage of
prime farmlands, unique farmland, and farmland of statewide significance, as
shown on the State Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program (FMMP) which, as a
result of reclamation, would be permanently converted to non- agricultural
uses. For each acre of farmland in these categories that would be converted to
non-agricultural use, the reclamation plan shall present provisions to offset
the conversion of these lands, at a ratio consistent with Section
8-2.404 (Agricultural Conservation and Mitigation Program) of the County Code.
This mitigation requirement may be satisfied using a variety of flexible
options identified below so long as the total acreage of benefit is found to be
equivalent to the applicable ratio and acreage required under Section
8-2.404 of the County Code, by type and amount of farmland being impacted, and
so long as a minimum ratio of 1:1 of permanently protected agriculture land of
equivalent or better quality/capability is achieved.
   (a)   Implementation of improvements, identified by a qualified soil
scientist, to the agricultural capability of non-prime lands within the project
site or outside the project site but within the OCMP area, that convert non-
prime to prime agricultural conditions. These improvements can include
permanent improvement of soil capability through soil amendments, reduction of
soil limitations (such as excessive levels of toxins), or improvements in
drainage for areas limited by flooding or low permeability soils.
   (b)   Placement of permanent conservation easements on land of equal or
better quality/capability. The operator shall be encouraged to target property
"at risk" of conversion to non-agricultural uses in selecting areas for
permanent protection. Prior to approval of the conservation easement, the
operator shall consult with the County and/or an appropriate non-profit agency
to determine the relative risk of conversion, to which the proposed property
might otherwise be subject. A minimum ratio of 1:1 is required in this
category.
   (c)   Dedication of land, funding, or equivalent improvements, consistent
with the County’s net gains goals, above and beyond the net gains benefits
otherwise required under the CCAP
program.
   (d)   Dedication of land, funding, or equivalent improvements, consistent
with the Parkway Plan, above and beyond net gains benefits otherwise required
under the CCAP program. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.526.   Repair of damage due to natural disaster.
   The cost of implementing recommendations for repair of reclaimed land caused
during earthquakes or other natural events shall be met through application of
contingency costs provided for by the project's financial assurances as
required by SMARA. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord.
1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.527.   Recreational and habitat uses of permanent wet pits.
   If any permanent wet pit is proposed to be reclaimed for recreational uses
and/or riparian habitat, the design shall account for fluctuations in the
groundwater table. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord.
1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.528.   Sewage storage prohibition.
   The use of off-channel wet pits for the storage and treatment of sewage
effluent, or for landfill purposes, is prohibited. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.529.   Shallow depths.
   All permanent wet pits shall be reclaimed to include valuable wildlife
habitat as a beneficial use of the water lost from wet pits due to evaporation.
(§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.530.   Slopes.
   All final reclaimed slopes shall have a minimum safety factor equal to or
greater than the critical gradient as determined by an engineering analysis of
the slope stability. Final slopes less than five (5') feet below the average
summer low groundwater level shall be designed in accordance with the reclaimed
use and shall not be steeper than 2:1 (horizontal:vertical). Reclaimed wet pit
slopes located five (5') feet or more below the average summer low groundwater
level shall not be steeper than 1:1 (horizontal:vertical), in order to minimize
the effects of sedimentation and biological clogging on groundwater flow, to
prevent stagnation, and to protect the public health.
   The maximum slope angle for all final reclaimed slopes shall be determined
by slope stability analysis performed by a Licensed Geotechnical Engineer or
Registered Civil Engineer and submitted with any mining and reclamation
application for review by the Director. The slope stability analysis shall
conform with industry standard methodologies regarding rotational slope
failures under static and pseudostatic (seismic) conditions. The minimum factor
of safety for all design reclamation slopes located adjacent to levees or below
existing structures shall not be less than 1.5 for static and 1.1 for
pseudostatic (seismic) conditions. Other reclamation slopes shall meet a
minimum factor of safety that is consistent with the post-reclamation use
proposed for the mining area. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.531.   Soil ripping.
   Where areas are to be reclaimed to agricultural usage, all A and B horizon
soil shall be ripped to a depth of three (3') feet after every two (2') foot
layer of soil is laid down, in order to minimize compaction. (§ 1, Ord. 1191,
eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.532.   Use of overburden and fine sediments in reclamation.
   Sediment fines associated with processed in-channel aggregate deposits
(excavated as a result of maintenance activities performed in compliance with
the CCIP) may be used in the backfill or reclamation of off-channel permanent
lakes, for in-channel reshaping or habitat restoration, and/or as a soil
amendment in agricultural fields provided the operator can demonstrate that no
detrimental sediment toxicity exists (consistent with the state’s Stream
Pollution Trends Monitoring Program protocols) and fine-grained soil (<63
micron) do not exceed 0.4 mg/kg total mercury.
   The operator shall use overburden and processing fines whenever possible to
support reclamation activities for pit lakes. If topsoil (A-horizon soil),
formerly in agricultural production, is proposed for use within a pit lake or
its drainage area, the operator must sample the soils prior to placement and
analyze them for pesticides and herbicides (EPA Methods 8141B and 8151A, or
equivalent) as well as for total mercury (EPA Method 7471B, or equivalent). The
operator shall collect and analyze samples in accordance with EPA Test Methods
for Evaluating Solid Waste Physical/Chemical Methods, SW-846 (as updated).
Topsoil that contains pesticides or herbicides above the Maximum Contaminant
Levels for primary drinking water (California Code of Regulations), or that
contains fine-grained soils exceeding on average 0.4 mg/kg total mercury shall
not be placed in areas that drain to the pit lakes.
   Land reclaimed to a subsequent use that includes planting of vegetation
(e.g., agriculture, habitat) shall be provided an adequate soil profile (i.e.,
depth and texture of soil) to ensure successful reclamation. At the discretion
of the Director and at the operator’s sole expense, the proposed reclamation
plan for the project may be peer reviewed by an appropriate expert/
professional, and recommendations, if any, shall be incorporated into the
project as conditions of approval. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.533.   Wetland habitat.
   Off-channel excavations that are proposed to be reclaimed to permanent lakes
shall include riparian and/or wetland habitat. The creation of riparian and/or
wetland habitat along the perimeter of permanent lakes shall include
appropriate features such as: scalloped basin perimeters with extended
peninsulas, islands, and stepped benches of various widths at approximately
three (3') foot vertical intervals both above and below the groundwater level.
Where wetlands are not proposed, either grassland and/or woodland habitat, or
agricultural fields separated from the lake by a berm, shall be established
using only native species in order to provide continuous habitat value around
the permanent lakes. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.534.   Exceptions.
   Where an operator demonstrates to the lead agency that an exception to the
standards specified in this article is necessary, the Commission may approve an
alternative standard for inclusion in the approved reclamation plan. Exceptions
shall only be approved where the strict application of the off-channel
reclamation standards would deprive the operator of privileges enjoyed by other
mining operators in the vicinity, due to special circumstances associated with
the subject site, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings.
Although the Commission may set alternative standards, in no case may the
Commission set any standard which does not meet or exceed the policy objectives
set forth in the OCMP. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Article 6.
Reclamation Plan Approval Process
Sec. 10-5.601.   Applications: Contents.
   Except as provided for in Section 10-5.602 of this article, all
documentation for the reclamation plan shall be submitted to the Director at
one time. Ten (10) complete hard copies of the application, and one electronic
version, shall be provided to the County. An executive summary and a table of
contents for the reclamation plan shall be submitted with each application.
Applications for proposed reclamation plan shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following:
   (a)   A narrative description of the proposed use of mined lands after
reclamation has been completed and the manner in which reclamation will be
accomplished, including the following information:
   (1)   The consistency of the proposed reclaimed use with this chapter, the
General Plan, zoning, and applicable specific plans;
   (2)   The manner by which contamination will be controlled in the reclaimed
use;
   (3)   The manner in which affected streambed channels and streambanks will
be rehabilitated to a condition minimizing erosion;
   (4)   The effect that proposed reclamation will have on future mining, both
on-site and in the surrounding area;
   (5)   A time schedule of reclamation activities, showing the beginning date,
completion dates for each proposed phase, and the final completion date,
supported by a statement indicating that reclamation will be initiated at the
earliest possible time on those portions of the site that will not be subject
to further disturbance by mining;
   (6)   Separate sections demonstrating compliance of the proposal with each
minimum performance standard set forth in the Regulations and Article 5 of this
chapter;
   (7)   A signed statement that the person submitting the application accepts
responsibility for implementing the approved reclamation plan;
   (8)   The acreages of proposed reclaimed uses, such as agriculture,
wetlands, groundwater recharge, etc.;
   (9)   The methods to be used for on-site and off-site surface water drainage
and erosion control after reclamation has been completed, including provisions
for ensuring flood protection of the site for the 100-year event;
   (10)   A discussion of the maximum amount of mined lands to be disturbed at
any one time;
   (11)   A description of whether any portion of the project site is currently
under a Land Conservation Contract (Williamson Act) and/or Agricultural
Preserve, including any lands for which a Notice of Nonrenewal has been filed
and the date of expiration. Proposed mined lands that meet the definition of
"prime farmlands" as defined under the Williamson Act shall also be identified;
   (b)   A narrative description of the type of surface mining proposed to be
employed, including the following information:
   (1)   The name and address of the proposed surface mine operator and the
names and addresses of any persons designated by the operator to act as an
agent for the applicant through the permit process;
   (2)   The anticipated quantity and type of minerals for which the proposed
surface mining operation will be conducted, including the estimated maximum
annual production with calculations presented in both tons mined and in tons
sold;
   (3)   The proposed dates for the initiation and termination of the proposed
surface mining operation;
   (4)   The maximum anticipated depth of the proposed surface mining
operation;
   (5)   Evidence that all owners of a possessory interest in the lands
included in the application have given authority to the applicant to conduct
surface mining as proposed and to implement the reclamation plan as proposed;
   (6)   The acreage of the lands that will be affected by the surface mining
operations (separately identifying buffer and setback areas), as well as
acreages and legal descriptions of the original parcels;
   (7)   A description of the general geology of the region, including a
detailed description of the geology of the area in which surface mining is to
be conducted;
   (8)   The names and addresses of the owners of all surface interests and
mineral interest in the lands to be mined;
   (c)   Site-specific technical studies, performed by qualified professionals
in the appropriate area of expertise, shall provide specific proposals for
inclusion in the reclamation plan to address the following potential
environmental impacts:
   (1)   A biological analysis to evaluate the feasibility of proposed
revegetation efforts, including detailed plans describing planting methods,
appropriate planting times, species to be used, irrigation requirements,
erosion control, weed control, and proposed success rates for plant cover and
density. The analysis shall also include cross-sections for those areas
proposed to be revegetated, including slopes, visual screens, and wildlife
habitat. Plant materials should be collected in the vicinity of the project
site in order to control the origin of the genetic stock and provide the most
site-adapted ecotypes. Native seeds, plants and cuttings used for reclamation
and restoration activities shall be ecotypes of Cache Creek Watershed genetic
origin including areas outside of Yolo County and of Yolo County genetic origin
when materials are used that originate from outside of the Cache Creek
Watershed.
   (2)   If the proposed reclamation plan includes agriculture as an end use,
then a soil analysis shaft be submitted to evaluate the methods and feasibility
of restoring those portions of the mined site to agricultural productivity,
including discussions of current and reclaimed soil conditions and
classifications, the types of crops grown on the lands proposed for reclamation
and their historic yields for a minimum of five (5) years, and projected
production of reclaimed agricultural lands. The analysis shall also include
detailed plans for the removal and replacement of topsoil and overburden,
including cross-sections of the areas to be reclaimed to agriculture, the depth
of soils replaced, field irrigation slope grades, detention basins, and the
relationship between finished field elevations and the groundwater level for
the site; and
   (3)   A geotechnical study to evaluate the proposed final slopes to ensure
that they will be stable once mining has been completed and that the slopes
possess an adequate factor of safety. Measures shall be included within the
study to ensure slope stability and maintenance.
   (d)   A site plan submitted in the form prescribed by the Planning Director,
including all property proposed to be included in the reclamation plan, drawn
to a scale of one inch equals one-hundred feet (1" = 100'), or other scale
acceptable to the Director for larger holdings. Small-scale, reproducible
copies shall be provided along with all site plans submitted. Site plans shall
show the following information:
   (1)   All property lines, including the boundaries of all parcels proposed
for mining and reclamation; the boundaries of any ownerships, leases, and/or
other entitlements vested in the surface mining operator which allow surface
mining and reclamation to be conducted on-site; and all Assessor parcel numbers
for properties included in the application;
   (2)   The location of all streams, roads, railroads, and utility facilities
within, or adjacent to, the lands to be reclaimed;
   (3)   The location and condition of any previously mined areas within the
site, specifically designating those portions of the site, if any, where mining
was completed prior to January 1, 1976, and which is claimed to be exempt from
the requirements of this chapter;
   (4)   The existing and proposed topography of all reclaimed lands, including
the location of the control cross-sections submitted pursuant to subsection (e)
of this section;
   (5)   The location of all development proposed as a part of the reclaimed
end use, including settling basins, drainage conveyances, equipment, fences,
and other man-made structures;
   (6)   The depiction of separate reclamation phases;
   (7)   The locations for the permanent storage of overburden and waste
material in any proposed berms;
   (8)   The proposed points of ingress and egress, access roads, driveways,
and parking areas proposed as a part of the reclaimed end use; and
   (9)   The extent of any borrow areas, where topsoil and overburden material
are excavated to be used in the reclamation of mined lands.
   (e)   Graphic depictions of control cross-sections located as follows and
including the following information:
   (1)   At least three (3) control cross-sections within the area to be
reclaimed, with two (2) of the cross-sections perpendicular to one another;
   (2)   In no event may the interval between the control cross-sections exceed
twelve hundred (1200) feet; and
   (3)   The cross-sections shall identify both the existing and proposed
reclaimed elevations, and shall identify the angle of reclaimed slopes.
   (f)   All maps, diagrams, or calculations that require preparation in
accordance with the Professional Engineers Act (Chapter 7 (commencing with
Section 6700) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code), the
Geologist and Geophysicist Act (Chapter 12.5 (commencing with Section 7800) of
Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code), or the Professional Land
Surveyors’ Act (Chapter 15 (commencing with Section 8700) of Division 3 of the
Business and Professions Code) shall be prepared by a California-licensed
professional, shall include his or her license number and name, and shall bear
the signature and seal of the licensee;
   (g)   An estimate of the financial assurances necessary to implement the
proposed reclamation plan, or phases thereof, prepared in accordance with
Article 7 of this title and including the following information:
   (1)   An estimate of the equipment usage and manhours necessary to complete
reclamation. Estimates for equipment usage shall be substantiated (e.g. the
Caterpillar Performance Handbook or similar reference document) and labor
requirements explained;
   (2)   An estimate of indirect costs, such as supervision, contingency,
mobilization, profit, and overhead;
   (3)   The acreages of each type of area proposed in the reclamation plan
(e.g., agriculture, slopes, roads, habitat, etc.), referenced to a site plan;
and,
   (4)   An estimate of the amounts of soil, subsoil, wash sediments, and
overburden to be used in reclamation, including the average distance from the
soil stockpiles to the areas being reclaimed.
   (h)   A Land Survey or Record of Survey for all parcels included in the
application which has a basis of bearing in the California Coordinate System
(NAD 27 or NAD 83);   
   (i)   An initial environmental assessment describing the potential impacts
of approving the proposed reclamation plan; and,
   (j)   A list of all other applicable discretionary permits required by other
public agencies.
   In addition to the foregoing, the Director may require such other and
further information relevant to the project as needed to determine whether the
proposal may affect the public health and safety.
   (k)   A chart identifying the page number, chapter, appendix, or other
specific location in the reclamation plan application where content meeting the
requirements, as applicable, of Sections 2772, 2773, and 2773.3 and Article 1
(commencing with Section 3500) and Article 9 (commencing with Section 3700) of
Subchapter 1 of Chapter 8 of Division 2 of Title 14 of the California Code of
Regulations, is located. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.602.   Applications: Waiver of information.
   The Director may temporarily waive any of the items of information required
in Section
10-5.601 of this article, if the following conditions apply:
   (a)   The gathering of such information is precluded by physical conditions
existing on the site on the date of the application; and
   (b)   The operator has provided a statement describing the reasons for the
delay, including the date by which the information required in the application
will be submitted. If granted, the Director shall notify the operator in
writing, specifically describing the information which is being waived and
specifying the date by which the operator shall provide the necessary
information. If all other information required pursuant to this chapter has
been submitted and the appropriate fees have been paid, then the Director shall
receive the application for filing. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.603.   Applications: Confidentiality.
   Any information in the reclamation plan application which is considered by
the applicant to be confidential, as provided in Article 9 of Chapter 4 of this
title, shall be submitted under separate cover and shall be so marked by the
Director. The proposed confidential information shall be accompanied by a
statement citing the legal authority supporting the applicant's claim of
confidentiality. The request for confidentiality shall be reviewed by the
Director and either approved or denied.
   The decision of the Director to reject or accept the claim of
confidentiality shall be mailed and posted in accordance with Section
10-5.607 of this chapter. Any request for confidentiality approved by the
Director shall become final within fifteen (15) days, unless appealed to the
Commission, as provided in Article 11 of this chapter. The appellate hearing
shall be conducted such that the information remains confidential until a
decision is reached.
   If the request is approved, then the confidential information shall be filed
under separate cover. The contents of the confidential file shall be made
available only to the Director and those persons authorized in writing by the
operator and by the property owner. If the request is denied, the applicant may
withdraw the information and include it with the application as a public
document. Failure to submit any necessary information may result in an
incomplete application. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.604.   Applications: Filing.
   Applications for reclamation plans shall be submitted to the Director for
review and determination as to completeness. If the application is determined
to be incomplete, the Director shall notify the applicant in writing within
thirty (30) days of receipt of the application. The written notice shall
specifically describe the information necessary to complete the application.
The application shall not be processed until the Director has determined it to
be complete and the appropriate fees have been paid, as required under Article
10 of this chapter.
   Once the application has been determined to be complete and the appropriate
fees have been paid, the application shall be processed by the Director, who
shall set it for a hearing pursuant to Section
10-5.606 of this article. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended
by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.605.   Applications: Review.
   The Director shall notify the Department in writing of any application for a
reclamation plan within thirty (30) days of its being filed. The application
shall also be circulated to all other agencies of jurisdiction for their review
and comments in accordance with CEQA, or other applicable regulatory
requirements. In addition, a notice of the filing of a reclamation plan shall
be mailed to any other person with an interest in the application, who has
deposited a self-addressed, stamped envelope with the Agency for the purpose of
receiving a notice of the filing. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.606.   Applications: Public hearing.
   Once the application has been processed, the Director shall set a public
hearing before the Commission to consider the proposed reclamation plan. Said
hearing shall be held within six (6) months after the completion of the final
EIR or within three (3) months after the completion of the negative
declaration. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.607.   Public hearing: Notice.
   The Director shall mail notices of the public hearing to the applicant and
to all property owners and property occupants located within three hundred
(300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property containing the proposed
site. Notices shall be mailed to said property owners at the addresses shown on
the latest equalized County assessment roll, as well as the occupants at the
situs addresses, as well as the County website. In addition, the Director shall
publish a notice of the public hearing at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation, published and circulated in the area of the proposal. All notices
shall be mailed and published at least ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing. The Director shall also provide such other notice as may be
appropriate in the circumstances of the project.
   Notices of public hearing shall state the date, time, and place set for the
commencement of the hearing; shall identify the property included within the
proposal; and shall generally describe the subject matter of the hearing. A
metes and bounds legal description of the subject property shall not be
required. Notices required by this chapter may describe the subject property
using landmarks, Assessor parcel numbers, and/or similar identifying
information.
   Failure to mail or to receive such notice, as a result of mistake or
inadvertence, shall not affect the validity of the hearing or the decision
rendered. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.608.   Public hearing: Review.
   Prior to the hearing, the Director shall submit copies of the following to
the Department for a thirty (30)- day review period:
   (a)   A copy of the proposed reclamation plan;
   (b)   A copy of the environmental document for the reclamation plan,
prepared in accordance with CEQA; and
   (c)   Other related documentation, as appropriate.
   No reclamation plan may be approved until the Department has completed its
review, or the thirty (30)- day period has expired. The Director shall prepare
a written response to any written comments received from the Department
regarding the reclamation plan submitted. If applicable, the Director's
response shall specifically address, in detail, why any comments or suggestions
submitted by the Department were not accepted. The Director shall forward
copies of both the Department's comments and the Director's response to the
applicant. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.609.   Public hearing: Conflict of comments.
   If there is a conflict between comments submitted by a trustee or
responsible agency and the comments of other reviewing agencies received during
circulation of the reclamation plan, as required by CEQA, the Commission or
Board shall only consider the comments of the trustee or responsible agency. (§
1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.610.   Public hearing: Findings for approval.
   The Commission or, on appeal, the Board may approve a reclamation plan
pursuant to this chapter only if all of the following findings can be made:
   (a)   That the proposed reclamation plan and financial assurances comply
with the Act, the Regulations, and this chapter;
   (b)   That the proposed mining shall be conducted pursuant to a surface
mining permit granted in accordance with this title, or that the operator has
vested rights to conduct surface mining pursuant to Section 2776 of the Act;
   (c)   That the site, during and after reclamation, will not be detrimental
to the public health and safety, giving consideration to the degree and type of
present and probable future exposure of the public to the site;
   (d)   That the proposed reclaimed use is consistent with the General Plan,
any applicable specific plans, and the zoning of the site;
   (e)   That the proposed reclaimed use is compatible with the existing and
probable future uses of surrounding lands, as designated in the General Plan;
   (f)   That the site is physically suitable for the proposed use of the land
in its reclaimed condition, giving consideration, but not limited to, such
factors as on-site soil conditions, local groundwater conditions, surface water
flow, surrounding habitat areas, and public access to the proposed site;
   (g)   That the estimated financial assurances reasonably approximate the
probable costs of carrying out the proposed reclamation plan; and,
   (h)   That a written response to the State Department of Conservation has
been prepared and considered, describing the disposition of major issues raised
by the Department. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord.
1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.611.   Public hearing: Decision.
   After considering the evidence in the public hearing, the Commission or
Board shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application by a
written decision setting forth the findings supporting the action. Approval may
be granted subject to any relevant condition which the Commission may deem
necessary to effectuate the purposes of the Act, the Regulations, and this
chapter. Such conditions may address any or all of the findings required by
Section
10-5.610 of this article. If the application is conditionally approved, the
conditions shall be specified in writing.
   Within ten (10) days after the decision of the Commission or Board, the
Director shall mail a copy of the decision to the applicant. Copies of the
decision shall also be mailed to any other person with an interest in the
application, who has deposited a self-addressed, stamped envelope with the
Agency for the purpose of receiving a copy of the decision. (§ 1, Ord. 1191,
eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Article 7.
Financial Assurances
Sec. 10-5.701.   Financial assurances: Scope.
   Prior to the commencement of any mining activities, all new and existing
surface mining operations conducted within the unincorporated territory of the
County shall submit sufficient financial assurances to ensure the faithful
performance of the reclamation plan approved pursuant to this chapter. (§ 1,
Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996)
Sec. 10-5.702.   Financial assurances: Form.
   Surface mining operations that are not undertaken by governmental agencies
shall provide financial assurances in any one or a combination of the following
forms:
   (a)   Surety bonds;
   (b)   Trust funds;
   (c)   Irrevocable letters of credit; and/or,
   (d)   Such other forms of financial assurances as the State Mining and
Geology Board may adopt.
   In addition those listed above, governmental agencies undertaking surface
mining operations may provide financial assurances in the following forms:
   (e)   Pledges of revenue; and/or,
   (f)   Budget set asides. Financial assurances shall be issued by a corporate
surety authorized to do conduct surety business in the State and shall be made
payable to the “County of Yolo or the Department of Conservation.” Financial
assurances that were approved by the County prior to January 1, 1993, and were
made payable to the State Geologist shall be considered payable to the
Department for the purposes of this chapter.
   The form of such financial assurance instruments shall be subject to the
approval of the County Counsel who may require such additional provisions as
are necessary to ensure the performance of the obligations. (§ 1, Ord. 1191,
eff. September 5, 1996)
Sec. 10-5.703.   Financial assurances: Pledges of revenue.
   The action approving a pledge of revenue shall take the form of a resolution
or other appropriate document from the governing body of the agency responsible
for reclamation. The resolution or document shall remain in effect continuously
until the approved reclamation plan has been determined to be completed by the
Director, pursuant to this chapter. The pledge of revenue shall consist of the
following items:
   (a)   The resolution or document establishing the pledge of revenue;
   (b)   The types and sources of pledged revenue;
   (c)   The period of time that each source of revenue is pledged to be
available;
   (d)   The estimated amount of financial assurances necessary to complete the
approved reclamation plan; and,
   (e)   An authorization for the County or the Department to use the proceeds
of the pledge to complete reclamation, if the operator is incapable of
performing reclamation, as determined in Article 9 of this chapter.
   The government agency may pledge the following types of revenue that it
controls, as long as the revenue is available in a timely manner to perform the
necessary reclamation work:
   (f)   Fees, rents, or other charges;
   (g)   Tax revenues within statutory limitations; and/or
   (h)   Other guaranteed revenues that are acceptable to the lead agency and
the State Mining and Geology Board.
   If the government agency ceases at any time to retain control of its ability
to allocate pledged revenue to complete reclamation, the governing body of the
agency shall notify both the lead agency and the Department within sixty (60)
days after control lapses. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996)
Sec. 10-5.704.   Financial assurances: Budget set asides.
   Government agencies may also submit financial assurances in the form of a
specific fund or line item set aside to provide funds for reclamation. The
budget set aside shall remain in effect continuously until the approved
reclamation plan has been determined to be completed by the Director, pursuant
to this chapter. The budget set aside shall consist of the following items:
   (a)   A resolution or other appropriate document establishing the set aside
or line item including proof of approval by the governing body or appropriate
official of the government agency;
   (b)   The types and sources of specific funds;
   (c)   The period of time that each funding source is to be available;
   (d)   The estimated amount of financial assurances necessary to complete the
approved reclamation plan; and,
   (e)   The authorization for the County or the Department to use the funds to
complete reclamation, if the operator is incapable of performing reclamation,
as determined in Article 9 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5,
1996)
Sec. 10-5.705.   Financial assurances: Term.
   Financial assurances shall remain in effect until the County has determined
that the reclamation plan has been completed as approved. Financial assurances
may be made renewable for periods of at least one year. However, the failure of
an operator to renew any financial assurance before its expiration date shall
be considered a violation of this chapter. New or renewed financial assurances
shall be submitted to the County prior to the expiration date of the existing
financial assurances. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996)
Sec. 10-5.706.   Financial assurances: Calculations.
   The amount of the financial assurances shall be equal to one-hundred (100%)
percent of the estimated cost of implementing the approved reclamation plan.
The estimated cost of reclamation shall be calculated by the operator and shall
be based on the following factors:
   (a)   An analysis of the physical activities and materials necessary to
implement the approved reclamation plan;
   (b)   The lead agency’s unit costs for each of the specified activities, or
the unit costs for a third party contract, if applicable. When calculating the
unit costs of reclamation activities, prevailing wage rates shall not be used,
   (c)   The number of units for each of the specified activities; and,
   (d)   An amount to cover contingency costs, not to exceed ten (10%) percent
of the reclamation costs estimated above.
   The costs associated with the completion of permitted mining shall not be
used in the calculation of financial assurances.
   The salvage value of buildings and equipment left on-site as a result of
abandonment by the operator may be included to offset the costs of reclamation
in the calculation of financial assurances. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5,
1996)
Sec. 10-5.707.   Financial assurances: Phasing.
   If a phased reclamation plan is approved, the initial amount of the
financial assurances shall be no less than one-hundred (100%) percent of the
total cost of all reclamation work to be done in the first approved phase.
Before mining commences in the subsequent phase, additional financial
assurances shall be submitted in an amount equal to one-hundred (100%) percent
of the total cost of reclamation for that phase. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996)
Sec. 10-5.708.   Financial assurances: Annual adjustments.
   As a part of the annual report, each operator shall submit a revised
estimate of financial assurances for the following year. Financial assurances
may be adjusted annually by the Director to account for any of the following
factors:
   (a)   The addition of new permitted lands to be mined in the following year;
   (b)   Previously mined lands which have been completely reclaimed in
accordance with the approved reclamation plan; and,
   (c)   The increased labor and/or material costs of reclamation. Any decision
to either increase or decrease financial assurances shall become final within
fifteen (15) days, unless appealed to the Planning Commission within that
fifteen (15)- day period, as provided in Article 11 of this chapter. The review
of existing financial assurances shall not be considered a project within the
meaning of CEQA, pursuant to the exemption granted under Section 2770(c) of the
Act. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1407,
eff. April 28, 2011)
Sec. 10-5.709.   Financial assurances: Review.
   The Director shall submit a copy of all new and revised financial assurance
estimates and any supporting documentation to the Department for a forty-five
(45)-day review period. No financial assurances may be approved until the
Department has completed its review. The Director shall prepare a written
response to any written comments received from the Department regarding the
financial assurances submitted. If applicable, the Director’s response shall
specifically address, in detail, why any comments or suggestions submitted by
the Department were not accepted. The Director shall forward copies of both the
Department’s comments and the Director’s response to the operator. (§ 1, Ord.
1191, eff. September 5, 1996)
Sec. 10-5.710.   Financial assurances: Transfer.
   If a surface mining operation is sold or ownership is transferred to another
person, the existing financial assurances shall remain in full force and effect
and shall not be released until new financial assurances are secured by the new
owner and approved by the County. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996)
Sec. 10-5.711.   Financial assurances: Release.
   The mining operator shall notify the Director in writing when all or any
portion of the required reclamation work is completed. Within sixty (60) days
after notification to the County by the operator, the Director shall inspect
the site in order to determine whether the site or the portion thereof complies
with the approved reclamation plan. If it is determined that reclamation has
not been completed pursuant to the approved reclamation plan, then the Director
shall notify the operator in writing, specifically describing the remedial
steps required for compliance. If it is determined that reclamation has been
completed as approved, then the Director shall place the matter on the agenda
of the Planning Commission for action within thirty (30) days. The Planning
Commission may release all or a portion of the financial assurances, as
appropriate. The Director shall send written notification of the proposed
release of financial assurances to both the operator and the Department prior
to the Planning Commission action. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996)
Sec. 10-5.712.   Financial assurances: Disasters.
   Prior to final approval of reclamation by the County and the release of
financial assurances, if a reclaimed site or any reclaimed phases thereof have
been adversely affected by a disaster, such as flood, earthquake, or other
natural occurrence beyond the operator’s control, then the Director shall take
the following factors into account in determining the operator’s
responsibility:
   (a)   The extent to which the operator had completed reclamation prior to
the natural occurrence;
   (b)   The extent to which the reclamation work has been destroyed by the
natural occurrence;
   (c)   The effect of the natural occurrence on the public health and safety;
   (d)   The degree to which the site can be reclaimed naturally without human
intervention;
   (e)   The specific reasons a particular monitoring period was established
for reclamation; and,
   (f)   The site characteristics, reclamation program, and the proposed end
use.
   The operator may not be held responsible for the adverse impacts caused by a
natural occurrence if the reclamation has been approved and the financial
assurances released by the County. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996)
Article 8.
Amendments and Modifications to Approved Reclamation Plans
Sec. 10-5.801.   Amendments and modifications: Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide procedures for changing the
conditions of approval or project description (as described in the application
and accompanying analyses) to account for unanticipated changes in the
reclamation, site characteristics, regulations, or other aspects of the
approved reclamation plan. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended
by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.802.   Amendments: Applications.
   Applications for amendments to previously approved reclamation plans shall
be submitted to the Director, on forms provided by the Agency, and shall be
accompanied by the appropriate fees, as determined in Article 10 of this
chapter. Such applications shall be processed pursuant to the procedures set
forth in Article 6 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.803.   Amendments: Exceptions and changes.
   Proposed exceptions to the reclamation standards may not be included as part
of any application for a minor modification. Any changes in the conditions of
approval or the amount of surface area and/or depth to be disturbed shall also
be treated as a substantial deviation from the approved plan. Such changes and
exceptions shall be processed as an amendment to the reclamation plan. (§ 1,
Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13,
2020)
Sec. 10-5.804.   Minor modifications.
   The Director may approve minor modifications of reclamation plans approved
by the Commission pursuant to this chapter. Minor modifications may only be
approved if it is found that such changes would be consistent with the
conclusions of the EIR or other applicable environmental document, and that
such changes will not have a significantly adverse effect on the successful
achievement of the approved reclamation plan. Such modifications shall be noted
on the approved plans and shall be initialed by the Director.
   The decision of the Director shall be mailed and posted in accordance with
Section
10-5.607 of this chapter. Any minor modification approved by the Director shall
become final within fifteen (15) days, unless appealed to the Board, as
provided in Article 11 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5,
1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.805.   Interim management plans: Scope.
   Anytime that the annual production of a surface mining operation is reduced
for a period of one year or more by more than ninety percent (90%) of its
maximum annual mineral production within any of the last five (5) years during
which an interim management plan has not been approved, then the operator shall
submit an interim management plan to provide measures for maintaining the site
until normal production is resumed. The interim management plan shall be
considered an amendment to the approved reclamation plan, but not just cause to
re-examine an approved reclamation plan and/or cause the plan to be
subsequently amended. An interim management plan shall not be considered a
project within the meaning of CEQA, pursuant to the exemption granted under
Section 2770 of the Act. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.806.   Interim management plans: Application.
   Within ninety (90) days of a surface mining operation becoming idle, the
operator shall submit an application for an interim management plan to the
County. A proposed interim management plan shall be reviewed by the Director
within thirty (30) days of receipt to determine whether the application
complies with the requirements of this article. If the application is complete,
then within ninety (90) days of the receipt of the application, a public
hearing shall be held before the Commission to approve or deny the interim
management plan in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article 6 of
this chapter.
   The interim management plan application shall include, at a minimum, the
following:
   (a)   A statement describing why the mining operation is idle, including a
description of those conditions necessary to reactivate the operation;
   (b)   The requested duration of the interim management plan (not to exceed
five (5) years);
   (c)   A description of the measures to be taken to maintain site security;
   (d)   An analysis prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer describing interim
slope angles, slope stability, and erosion control measures to be implemented
during the interim period;
   (e)   A description of the equipment to be retained on the site;
   (f)   A plan prepared by a qualified biologist describing how revegetation
efforts would be maintained in the interim period; and
   (g)   A plan showing the extent of mined areas, areas where reclamation has
not yet been completed, internal haul roads and parking areas, stockpile
locations, and equipment storage.
   In addition to the foregoing, the Director may require such other and
further information relevant to the project as needed to determine whether the
proposal may affect the public health and safety. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.807.   Interim management plans: Incomplete.
   If the application does not comply with the requirements of this article,
then the Director shall notify the applicant in writing, describing any
deficiencies in the plan. The applicant shall have thirty (30) days to submit a
revised plan correcting the deficiencies noted by the Director. If the revised
application is complete, then within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the
revised application, a public hearing shall be held before the Commission to
approve or deny the interim management plan in accordance with the procedures
set forth in Article 6 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5,
1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.808.   Interim management plans: Review.
   The Director shall submit a copy of the interim management plan to the
Department for a forty-five (45) day review period. No interim management plan
may be approved until the Department has completed its review. The Director
shall prepare a written response to any written comments received from the
Department regarding the interim management plan. If applicable, the Director's
response shall specifically address, in detail, why any comments or suggestions
submitted by the Department were not accepted. The Director shall forward
copies of both the Department's comments and the Director's response to the
operator. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.809.   Interim management plans: Appeal.
   The decision of the Commission may be appealed to the Board of Supervisors
within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision, pursuant to Article 11 of
this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.810.   Interim management plans: Term.
   Approved interim management plans shall remain in effect for a period not to
exceed five (5) years. Prior to the expiration of the interim management plan,
the Commission shall take one of the following actions:
   (a)   Renew the interim management plan for an additional period not to
exceed five (5) years, which may be renewed for one additional five (5) year
renewal period at the expiration of the first five (5) year renewal period, if
the Commission finds that the surface mining operator has complied fully with
the interim management plan; or
   (b)   Require the operator to commence reclamation in accordance with its
approved reclamation plan.
   The operator shall notify the Director in writing prior to the reactivation
of the surface mining operation. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.811.   Interim management plans: Financial assurances.
   Financial assurances shall remain in effect during the term of the interim
management plan and any extensions granted thereto. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.812.   Interim management plans: Abandonment.
   Unless the operation has a pending or approved interim management plan, or
an appeal of the interim management plan is pending before the Board of
Supervisors, any surface mining operation which remains idle for more than one
year shall be considered abandoned. All abandoned mining operations shall
commence and complete reclamation in accordance with the approved reclamation
plan, pursuant to Article 9 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5,
1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.813.   Interim management plans: Conditions.
   All applicable conditions of approval shall remain in effect during the
interim period. The Commission may impose additional conditions of approval
necessary to safeguard the environment and the public health and safety. (§ 1,
Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13,
2020)
Sec. 10-5.814.   Interim permit review.
   Every ten (10) years after a reclamation plan has been approved, the
Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with Article 5 of this
chapter, for the purpose of amending the plan to bring it into conformance with
applicable future environmental regulations and statutory changes. The
Commission shall evaluate the plan to determine if there have been any
subsequently adopted environmental regulations or statutory provisions which
should be made applicable to the reclamation plan, even if such laws themselves
are not made retroactive to affect the plan. For the purposes of this article,
an environmental regulation or statutory provision is one that is promulgated
by a responsible or trustee agency that has authority for a particular natural
resource (e.g., Yolo-Solano Air Quality Management District, California
Department of Fish and Wildlife, California Department of Conservation,
Regional Water Quality Control Board, State Lands Commission, State Reclamation
Board, etc.), including the County of Yolo.
   As a part of this review, the Commission shall also consider whether per-ton
fees to which the permit is subject, reasonably reflect actual costs. The fees
shall be adjusted up or down accordingly.
   Should the Commission decide to incorporate into the reclamation plan new
regulatory or statutory provisions that were not available at the time of
project approval, said provisions shall be applied as an amendment to the plan
and processed in accordance with Article 6 of this chapter. The decision of the
Commission may be appealed, in accordance with Article 10 of this chapter. (§
1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Article 9.
Abandonment
Sec. 10-5.901.   Abandonment: Hearing.
   If, at any time, the Director determines that the operator is financially
incapable of performing the required reclamation, or has abandoned the surface
mining operation without completing the approved reclamation plan, or has
failed to observe an order to comply, then a public hearing shall be held
before the Commission as provided for in Article 6 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord.
1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.902.   Abandonment: Notice.
   If the Commission determines that the operator is financially incapable of
performing the required reclamation, or has abandoned the surface mining
operation without completing the approved reclamation plan, or has failed to
observe an order to comply, then the Director shall provide written
notification to the operator by personal service or certified mail that the
County intends to forfeit the financial assurances. The written notification
shall include the specific reasons for the forfeiture. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.903.   Abandonment: Forfeit of financial assurances.
   The operator shall be allowed sixty (60) days to commence reclamation in
accordance with the approved reclamation plan. Reclamation shall be completed
within the time specified in the approved reclamation plan, or at a time
mutually agreed to by the Director and the operator.
   If the operator fails to begin reclamation within the sixty (60) days after
notification, or otherwise fails to complete the approved reclamation plan
within the time specified, then the Director may demand performance of any
surety company issuing the financial assurances and commence reclamation of the
site. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.904.   Abandonment: Reclamation.
   The following persons may enter the mine site and any adjacent property of
the operators to plan or conduct all or any of the work described in the
approved reclamation plan:
   (a)   Officers, employees, and agents of the County;
   (b)   Contractors hired by the County, as well as their subcontractors and
agents; and
   (c)   Surveyors, engineers, and other consultants retained by the County.
   These persons may bring onto the site and use thereon any and all equipment
and machines necessary for completing the reclamation plan, and may use any
equipment, supplies, earth, or other materials abandoned by the operator to
perform required reclamation work.
   The County shall follow the approved reclamation plan and all applicable
permit conditions of approval in completing reclamation work. (§ 1, Ord. 1191,
eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.905.   Abandonment: Use of financial assurances.
   All or any portion of the financial assurances shall be deposited into a
separate fund held by the County for the costs and reasonable expenses and fees
associated with completing the approved reclamation plan. In no event shall the
financial assurances be used for any other purpose.
   If, after the Director has determined that the approved reclamation plan has
been completed and all costs incurred by the County in performing such work
have been accounted for, then any remaining monies from the financial
assurances shall be refunded to the operator or the surety company, as their
interests may appear, in accordance with Section
10-5.711 of this chapter. The operator shall be held responsible for all costs
incurred by the County in completing the reclamation plan which exceed the
amount of the forfeited financial assurances. Costs accrued by the County which
exceed the amount of financial assurances shall be paid according to a schedule
agreed to by the operator and the Director. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5,
1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Article 10.
Fees
Sec. 10-5.1001.   Fees: Applications.
   Each application for a reclamation plan and/or approval of financial
assurances or any amendments and modifications thereto shall be accompanied by
the appropriate fee as determined by the Master Fee Resolution adopted by the
Board. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1002.   Annual reviews.
   Each operator individually shall be responsible for the payment of fees to
cover the costs incurred by the County in annually inspecting the facilities of
that operator, pursuant to Section 10-5.1203 of this chapter, as determined by
the Master Fee Resolution adopted by the Board and any and all costs associated
with the administration of Article 12. Said fee shall be due within thirty (30)
days of written notification by the Director.
   Failure to pay the above fees in a timely manner shall be considered a
violation and may be enforced under the provisions of Article 12 of this
chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff.
February 13, 2020)
Article 11.
Appeals
Sec. 10-5.1101.   Appeals: Planning Commission.
   The action of the Director on any decision made pursuant to this chapter
shall be final unless, within fifteen (15) days after such action, any person
with appropriate legal standing files a written appeal, and pays the
appropriate fee to the clerk of the Commission. The timely filing of an appeal
shall stay the Director's decision, which shall serve as a recommendation to
the Commission. All such appeals shall reference the decision of the Director
and shall specifically describe the grounds for the appeal. (§ 1, Ord. 1191,
eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1102.   Planning Commission: Hearings.
   The hearing on an appeal of a decision by the Director shall be scheduled
within sixty (60) days from when the appeal was filed. The Director shall
provide notice of the appeal hearing, pursuant to Section 10-5.607 of this
chapter. Upon hearing the appeal, the Commission shall either affirm, reverse,
or modify the appealed decision, or refer the matter back to the Director for
further action.
   A decision of the Commission may be appealed to the Board, pursuant to this
article. The appeal rights under this section shall be exercised prior to
filing an appeal pursuant to Section 10-5.1107 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord.
1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1103.   Appeals: Board of Supervisors.
   The action of the Commission on any decision made pursuant to this chapter
shall be final unless, within fifteen (15) days after such action, any person
with appropriate legal standing files a written appeal, and pays the
appropriate fee, to the Clerk of the Board. The timely filing of an appeal
shall stay the Commission's decision, which shall serve as a recommendation to
the Board. All such appeals shall reference the decision of the Commission and
specifically describe the grounds for the appeal. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1104.   Board of Supervisors: Hearing.
   The hearing on an appeal of a decision by the Commission shall be scheduled
within sixty (60) days from when the appeal was filed. The Clerk of the Board
shall provide notice of the hearing pursuant to Section 10-5.607 of this
chapter. Upon hearing the appeal, the Board may either affirm, reverse, or
modify the appealed decision, or refer the matter back to the Commission for
further action. The appeal rights under this section shall be exercised prior
to filing an appeal pursuant to Section
10-5.1107 of this chapter.
   If the Board fails to take one of the above actions, the appeal shall be
considered denied without prejudice. Appeals that are denied without prejudice
may be reconsidered at a new public hearing, noticed in accordance with Section
10-5.605 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended
by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1105.   Appeals: Scope.
   Any appeal of a decision or action shall serve only as an appeal of the
specific action or issue identified, based on the grounds and issues described
in the appeal. The appellate body shall consider the record of the decision
being appealed. New evidence not previously introduced in the record of the
decision may not be presented at the hearing regarding the appeal. (§ 1, Ord.
1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1106.   Appeals: Withdrawal.
   Appeals to either the Commission or the Board may be withdrawn at any time.
(§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February
13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1107.   Appeals: State Mining and Geology Board.
   An appeal of a decision by the Board may be filed with the State Mining and
Geology Board, if the appellant can substantiate, based on the record, that the
County has failed to take any of the following actions:
   (a)   Act according to due process;
   (b)   Consider the specific applicable requirements of Sections 2772, 2773,
and 2773.1 of the Act or this chapter in the denial of a reclamation plan or
financial assurances;
   (c)   Act within a reasonable time after receiving a completed application;
or
   (d)   Review and approve reclamation plans or financial assurances pursuant
to Section 2770 of the Act.
   If the State Mining and Geology Board remands a decision pursuant to this
section, then the Board shall reconsider their decision in accordance with the
procedures described in this article. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996;
as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1108.   Appeals: Judicial review.
   When giving notice to the applicant of its decision to deny, the Board shall
notify the applicant that the time within which judicial review must be sought
is governed by Section 1094.6 of the State Code of Civil Procedure. (§ 1, Ord.
1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Article 12.
Inspections: Notices of Violations
Sec. 10-5.1201.   Inspections: Purpose.
   The Director shall make such necessary inspections and investigations of all
surface mining reclamation activities within the unincorporated portion of the
County in order to accomplish any of the following purposes:
   (a)   To determine compliance with this chapter and the Act;
   (b)   To determine compliance with the conditions of reclamation plan
approved pursuant to this chapter;
   (c)   To investigate the environmental effects which reclamation work may be
causing to the surrounding area; and,
   (d)   To verify the information submitted in any application or any annual
report submitted pursuant to this title. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5,
1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1202.   Inspections: Annual.
   At least once every year, the Director shall conduct an inspection of each
surface mining operation to determine whether the operator is in compliance
with the Act, the Regulations, and this chapter. Each inspection shall be
conducted within six (6) months after receipt by the County of the operation's
annual report, submitted pursuant to Section 2207 of the Public Resources Code,
and may be combined with other site inspections, as appropriate. (§ 1, Ord.
1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1203.   Annual inspections: Notification.
   All annual inspections shall be documented using forms adopted by the
Department. The Director shall notify the Department of the inspection within
ninety (90) days after it has been completed. Said notice shall include the
following:
   (a)   A statement regarding whether the operation is in compliance with the
Act and this chapter. Any violations of either the Act or this chapter shall be
specifically described;
   (b)   The completed inspection forms;
   (c)   A description of any pending reviews or appeals of surface mining
permits, reclamation plans, financial assurances, amendments or modifications
thereto, or interim management plans pertaining to the operation;
   (d)   Aspects of the reclamation, if any, that were found to be inconsistent
with the Act but were corrected before the submission of the inspection form to
the Department;
   (e)   Aspects of the reclamation, if any, that were found to be inconsistent
with this chapter but were corrected before the submission of the inspection
form to the Department;
   (f)   A statement describing the County’s intended response to any aspects
of the reclamation found to be inconsistent with the Act but were not corrected
before the submission of this inspection form to the Department; and
   (g)   Any supporting documentation. Copies of the notice shall also be
provided to the operator. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended
by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1204.   Inspections: Designee.
   Inspections shall be conducted by a state-licensed geologist, state-licensed
civil engineer, state-licensed landscape architect, state-licensed forester, or
a qualified County employee who is experienced in mined land reclamation (as
described in the Act and related regulations) and experienced in activities
governed by the Act, and who has not been employed by the mining operation in
any capacity during the previous twelve (12) months. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff.
September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1205.   Annual compliance review.
   An annual report of reclamation operations shall be filed by each operator
and reviewed by the Commission in a public hearing in order to determine
compliance with the approved reclamation plan, in accordance with Article 7 of
Chapter 4 of this title. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by
Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1206.   Violations: Notice.
   Whenever the Director has reasonable cause to believe that mining
reclamation activities are in violation of the Act or the Regulations, this
chapter, any term or condition of a reclamation plan, or development agreement
(“violation”), the following procedure shall be followed:
   (a)   In the event of a violation of the Act or Regulations, or a violation
that in the sole direction of the Director poses an imminent and substantial
endangerment to the public health, safety, or the environment, the following
procedures shall be followed:
   i.   The Director shall provide written notice to the operator at the time
of inspection or as soon thereafter as the violation is made known. The
operator shall be provided thirty (30) days to correct. If correction is not or
cannot be achieved within thirty (30) days, the operator and the County may
enter into a stipulated order to comply, with notice sent to the Department. A
stipulated order to comply shall include a schedule and time for compliance
that the County determines is reasonable after taking into account the actions
and legal processes required to correct the violation.
   ii.   If the operator does not comply with a notice issued pursuant to (a)
(i), above, within thirty (30) days of being served the notice, the County may
issue an Order to Comply, pursuant to Section
10-5.1207 of this Chapter.
   (b)   If the Director determines that a potential violation other than a
violation of the Act, does not pose an imminent and substantial endangerment to
public health, safety, or the environment, the following procedure shall be
followed:
   i.   The Director shall provide written notice to the operator documenting
the potential violation (“condition of concern”). The Director may request
additional information from the operator to assess the site conditions and
determine if a violation exists. The operator shall be provided thirty (30)
days to respond to this initial notice. If the requested information is not
received within thirty (30) days, the Director shall proceed with an order to
comply as set forth in Section
10-5.1207. An extension of time may be requested by the applicant in cases
where compilation of the information may take longer, but such extension shall
not exceed sixty (60) days.
   ii.   If the operator resolves the condition of concern within the timeframe
set in (b)(i) above, the Director shall verify by conducting a site inspection
or review of information provided by the operator, whichever is appropriate.
The Director shall notify the operator in writing that the condition of concern
has been satisfactorily resolved.
   iii.   If the Director determines the condition of concern is still active
after the timeframe described in 3(b)(i), the Director shall submit a notice to
the operator requiring submittal of a Correction Plan. The Correction Plan to
be provided by the operator shall at a minimum describe in detail the sequence,
methods, and timeline necessary for each step to correct the conditions of
concern identified by the Director. The Correction Plan must be received within
thirty (30) days from the date of notification. The Director shall review and
accept or request changes to the Correction Plan within thirty (30) days of
receipt. If changes or clarification is requested, the operator shall then be
provided another thirty (30) days to finalize and submit the final Correction
Plan and commence implementation. Implementation must begin immediately (unless
mutually agreed upon and documented in the Correction Plan) and must be fully
completed no later than one year from the date of submission of the final
Correction Plan.
   iv.   Once the Correction Plan is finalized, the Director shall forward the
Correction Plan to the Planning Commission as an informational/ correspondence
item with the next Planning Commission agenda packet. No formal action shall be
taken by the Planning Commission on the Correction Plan.
   In the event that the procedure set forth above does not result in
correction of a violation, an order to comply shall be served to the operator
pursuant to Section
10-5.1207. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1207.   Violations: Order to comply.
   If the violation continues after the timeframes specified in Section 10-
5.1206 the Director shall issue an order to comply requiring that the violation
be corrected or abated and that the operator come into compliance with the
applicable law, regulation, or requirement. The order to comply shall be
delivered by personal service or certified mail, with a copy sent to the
Department. An order to comply issued pursuant to this Section shall take
effect thirty (30) days following the service of the order to comply unless
within those thirty (30) days the operator appeals the order and requests a
hearing before the Planning Commission. The order shall specifically describe
both the violation(s) and the remedial steps required for compliance. The order
shall specify a time by which compliance must be completed, as determined by
the Director. A reasonable amount of time shall be allowed to bring the
operation into compliance, taking into account the seriousness of the
violation, the potential harm to public health, safety, and the environment,
and any good faith efforts to comply with the applicable requirements.
   An appeal filed pursuant to this Section shall be noticed and heard at a
public hearing within forty-five (45) days of the filing of the appeal or a
longer period as may be mutually agreed upon by the operator and the County.
Public notice of such hearing shall be given as set forth in Section 10-5.607
of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord.
1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1208.   Violations: Hearing.
   Upon filing of an appeal pursuant to Section
10-5.1207, the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing to consider
the violation. Before the close of the hearing, the Commission shall take one
of the following actions:
   (a)   Affirm the order to comply of the Director;
   (b)   Remove any of the violations or remedy steps required for compliance,
and affirm the order as modified; or,
   (c)   Vacate the order to comply.
   If the order of the Director is affirmed, the Commission's decision shall
become final, unless an appeal is filed with the Board within fifteen (15) days
after the decision,, pursuant to Article 10 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1191,
eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1209.   Violations: Abandonment.
   If an operator fails to abide by the requirements of an order to comply, the
Director shall initiate procedures to revoke the operator’s permit(s) and
forfeit the operator's financial assurances in accordance with Article 9 of
this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1210.   Violations: Administrative penalties.
   If the operator fails to comply with an order to comply, issued pursuant to
this article, the Commission may issue an order imposing administrative
penalties of up to, but not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000) per day
for noncompliance with this article in addition to noncompliance with any other
article or chapter, retroactive to the original date of noncompliance. When
determining the amount of the penalty, the Commission shall consider, but may
not be limited to, the following factors:
   (a)   The nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation(s);
   (b)   Any prior history of violations; and,
   (c)   The degree of culpability by the operator.
   The order establishing administrative penalties shall be served by certified
mail to the operator. Any such order shall become effective upon issuance and
the penalties imposed therein shall be paid to the Director within fifteen (15)
days. If the order imposing administrative penalties is appealed to the Board,
the operator shall deposit any amounts due pursuant to Section
10-11.10 with the County Treasury in an account earning interest at the County
pooled rate. Any appeal to the Board must be filed with the Clerk of the Board
within fifteen (15) days after the order is first mailed. The Board shall hear
the appeal de novo.
   Any decision by the Board to order administrative penalties shall become
effective within thirty (30) days, unless the operator files a petition for
writ of mandate in the superior court for review of the order. If no writ
petition is filed, then the order setting administrative penalties shall not be
subject to review by any court or agency. The order establishing administrative
penalties shall be served by certified mail to the operator.
   Penalties collected by the Director shall only be used to cover the
reasonable costs incurred by the County in administering either the Act or
Chapters 3, 4, and 5 of Title 10 of this Code. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September
5, 1996; as amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-5.1211.   Violations: Public nuisance.
   Any mining reclamation activities in violation of this title, or in
violation of any reclamation plan and/or financial assurances approved pursuant
to this title, shall be considered a public nuisance. If the operator fails to
comply with an order to comply, issued pursuant to this article, the Director
may refer the violation to County Counsel for abatement or the District
Attorney for criminal remedies. (§ 1, Ord. 1191, eff. September 5, 1996; as
amended by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Chapter 6
AGRICULTURE
Sections:
Article 1. Right to Farm: Dispute Resolution: Notice to Purchasers of Nearby
Properties
   
10-6.101   Definitions.
   
10-6.102   Property operated farm not a nuisance.
   
10-6.103   Construction with other laws.
   
10-6.104   Resolution of disputes.
Article 2. Agricultural Nuisances
   
10-6.201   Purpose and Findings.
   
10-6.202   Definitions.
   
10-6.203   Effect on other laws.
   
10-6.204   Administration and enforcement.
   
10-6.205   Nuisance Abatement.
   
10-6.206   Form of Notice to Abate.
   
10-6.207   Service Procedures.
   
10-6.208   Appeals: Agricultural Nuisance Appeals Board.
   
10-6.209   Appeals.
   
10-6.210   Appeals: Notice.
   
10-6.211   Appeals: Recommendations.
   
10-6.212   Appeals: Decision.
   
10-6.213   Appeals: Removal.
   
10-6.214   Summary Abatement.
   
10-6.215   Right of entry of certain persons.
   
10-6.216   Abatement costs.
   
10-6.217   Collection of costs.
   
10-6.218   Notice of abatement lien.
Article 3. Organic Certification
   
10-6.301   Purpose and Findings.
   
10-6.302   Definitions.
   
10-6.303   Program Authority and Fees.
   
10-6.304   Eligibility.
   
10-6.305   Certification Criteria.
   
10-6.306   Enforcement.
Article 4. Nut Theft
   
10-6.401   Legislative Authorization.
   
10-6.402   Definitions.
   
10-6.403   Proof of Ownership Certificate.
   
10-6.404   Proof of Ownership Certificate: Inspection, Presentation and
Retention.
   
10-6.405   Exemptions.
   
10-6.406   Civil Penalties.
   
10-6.407   Transportation or Sale of Nuts to Non-processing Nut Buying
Operations Outside of the Nut Buying Period.
Article 1.
Right to Farm: Dispute Resolution: Notice to Purchasers of Nearby Properties
Sec. 10-6.101.   Definitions.
   As used in this article the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   “Agricultural Land” means those land areas of the County specifically
classed and zoned as Agricultural Preserve (A-P), Agricultural Exclusive (A-E),
and Agricultural General (A-1), as those zones are defined in the Yolo County
Zoning Ordinances.
   (b)   “Agricultural activity, operation, or facility or appurtenances
thereof” means and includes, but is not limited to, the cultivation and tillage
of the soil, dairying, the production, irrigation, frost protection,
cultivation, growing, harvesting, and processing of any commercial agricultural
commodity, including timber, viticulture, agriculture or horticulture, the
raising of livestock, fur-bearing animals, fish or poultry, and any practices
performed by a farmer or on a farm as incident to or in conjunction with such
operations, including the application of pesticides, use of farm equipment,
storage or preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market, or to
carriers for transportation to market. (§ 2, Ord. 1133, eff. January 2, 1992)
Sec. 10-6.102.   Property operated farm not a nuisance.
   (a)   No agricultural activity, operation, or facility, or appurtenances
thereof, conducted or maintained on agricultural lands for commercial purposes,
and in a manner consistent with proper and accepted customs and standards, as
established and followed by similar agricultural operations in the same
locality, shall be or become a nuisance, private or public, due to any changed
condition in or about the locality, after the same has been in operation for
more than three (3) years if it was not a nuisance at the time it began.
   (b)   Subsection (a)of this section shall not apply if the agricultural
activity, operation, or facility, or appurtenances thereof obstructs the free
passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, river, bay,
stream, canal, or basin, or any public park, square, street, or highway.
   (c)   This section shall not invalidate any provision contained in the
Health and Safety Code, Fish and Game Code, Food and Agricultural Code, or
Division 7 (commencing with Section 13000) of the Water Code, if the
agricultural activity, operation, or facility, or appurtenances thereof,
constitute a nuisance, public or private, as specifically defined or described
in any such provision.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no action, alleging
that an agricultural operation has interfered with private property or personal
well-being, shall be maintained unless the plaintiff has sought and obtained a
decision of the agricultural grievance committee provided in Section
10-6.104 of this chapter or a decision has been sought but no decision is
rendered within the time limits provided in said section. This subsection shall
not prevent a public agency from enforcing the provisions of other applicable
laws without first resorting to the grievance procedure. (§ 2, Ord. 1133, eff.
January 2, 1992)
Sec. 10-6.103.   Construction with other laws.
   This chapter shall take precedence over all ordinances or parts of
ordinances or resolutions or parts of resolutions in conflict herewith. (§ 2,
Ord. 1133, eff. January 2, 1992)
Sec. 10-6.104.   Resolution of disputes.
   (a)   Should any controversy arise regarding any inconveniences or
discomfort occasioned by agricultural operations which cannot be settled by
direct negotiation of the parties involved, either party may submit the
controversy to a grievance committee as set forth below in an attempt to
resolve the matter prior to the filing of any court action.
   (b)   Any controversy between the parties shall be submitted to the
grievance committee within thirty (30) days of the later of the date of the
occurrence of the particular activity giving rise to the controversy or the
date a party became aware of the occurrence.
   (c)   The grievance committee shall consist of five (5) members appointed
from the community at large by the Board of Supervisors, and serving at the
pleasure of the Board of Supervisors, two (2) of whom shall be engaged in the
commercial practice of agriculture, two (2) of whom shall have no financial
interest in any agricultural property or operation, and one of whom shall have
knowledge of and expertise in agricultural production practices. A majority of
the members shall constitute a quorum of the grievance committee, and no
decision shall be valid or binding unless taken upon a majority vote of the
members present. The Yolo County Agricultural Commissioner shall be the
Secretary who shall call meetings as the need arises and shall maintain minutes
of each meeting. The committee shall adopt rules of procedure governing the
conduct of its meetings. Members of the committee shall receive no compensation
for carrying out these duties.
   (d)   The effectiveness of the grievance committee as a forum for resolution
of disputes is dependent upon full discussion and complete presentation of all
pertinent facts concerning the dispute in order to eliminate any
misunderstandings. The parties are encouraged to cooperate in the exchange of
pertinent information concerning the controversy.
   (e)   The controversy shall be presented to the committee by written request
of one of the parties within the time limits specified. Thereafter the
committee may investigate the facts of the controversy but must, within twenty-
five (25) days, hold a meeting to consider the merits of the matter and within
five (5) days of the meeting render a written decision to the parties. At the
time of the meeting both parties shall have an opportunity to present what each
considers to be pertinent facts. No party bringing a complaint to the committee
for settlement or resolution may be represented by counsel unless the opposing
party is also represented by counsel. The time limits provided in this
subsection for action by the committee may be extended upon the written
stipulation of all parties in a dispute.
   (f)   Any reasonable costs associated with the functioning of the grievance
committee process shall be borne by the participants. The Board of Supervisors
may, by resolution, prescribe fees to recover those costs. (§ 2, Ord. 1133,
eff. January 2, 1992)
Article 2.
Agricultural Nuisances.
Sec. 10-6.201.   Purpose and Findings.
   (a)   Under Section 25842 of the Government Code, the Board of Supervisors
may provide for the control or destruction of gophers, squirrels, vermin, other
wild animals, noxious weeds, plant diseases, and insects injurious to fruit or
fruit trees, vines, vegetables, or plant life. These items are considered to be
Agricultural Nuisances. Section 25845 of the Government Code provides that the
Board of Supervisors may establish by ordinance a procedure for the abatement
of a nuisance.
   (b)   At present, the enforcement provisions of the Food and Agriculture
Code are set forth in Chapters 6 and 7, Part 1, Division 4. These provisions
call for a lien to be recorded on the subject property within 120 days in the
event of non-payment. If no payment is received within 120 days of recording
the district attorney is required to foreclose on the lien or the lien ceases
to exist. This enforcement provision is onerous and virtually impossible to
implement.
   (c)   The Board finds that prompt and effective control of Agricultural
Nuisances is essential to protect our agricultural operations. An ordinance
with reasonable enforcement provisions is essential to accomplish this. This
ordinance provides for the collection of unpaid abatement costs by the
Treasurer-Tax Collector with the same priority as other County taxes as
provided for under Section 25845(d) of the Government Code.
Sec. 10-6.202.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Abatement” shall include the eradication, destruction, or control, to
the satisfaction of the Agricultural Commissioner, of the Agricultural
Nuisance.
   (b)   “Agricultural Nuisance” include, but are not limited to, gophers,
squirrels, vermin, other wild animals, noxious weeds, plant diseases, and
insects injurious to fruit or fruit trees, vines, or vegetable or plant life.
   (c)   “County Code” means the Yolo County Code.
   (d)   “Person” means any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock
company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of
any of them.
   (e) “Responsible Person” is the person having control of or acting as an
agent for the property. The term “Responsible Person” includes but is not
limited to a property owner, tenant, or a person with a legal interest in, or
possession of, real property where a nuisance occurs or exists.
Sec. 10-6.203.   Effect on other laws.
   The provisions of this chapter are not the exclusive regulation of
Agricultural Nuisances within the unincorporated area of the County. The
provisions of this chapter shall supplement and be in addition to the other
regulatory codes, statutes, and laws heretofore or hereafter enacted by the
County, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
Sec. 10-6.204. Administration and enforcement.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the Agricultural Commissioner. In the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the Agricultural Commissioner or
his designees may enter upon both private and public property to determine
whether an Agricultural Nuisance exists pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
Sec. 10-6.205.   Nuisance Abatement.
   Whenever an Agricultural Nuisance is ascertained to exist by the
Agricultural Commissioner, the Agricultural Commissioner shall notify the
person having control of or acting as an agent for the property, to abate or
remove such nuisance within thirty (30) calendar days. Upon neglect or refusal
of such person to comply with such notice, the Agricultural Commissioner may
abate such nuisance, and the person having control of such premise or place,
shall be liable to the County of Yolo for the cost of such abatement as
provided for in Section
10-6.216.
Sec. 10-6.206.   Form of Notice to Abate.
   The form of all Notices to Abate given under this Chapter shall be as
follows:
   (a)   All notices shall be in writing;
   (b)   All notices shall include a description of the premises sufficient for
identification;
   (c)   All notices shall include a statement as to what Agricultural Nuisance
exists on the property and why the notice is being issued;
   (d)   All notices shall state that the Responsible Person has thirty (30)
calendar days to abate the Agricultural Nuisance;
   (e)   All notices shall inform the Responsible Person of the right to appeal
to the Agricultural Nuisance Appeals Board in writing within fifteen (15) days
of receiving the Notice to Abate; and
   (f)   All notices shall include notification that should the Responsible
Person fail to abate the Agriculture Nuisance, the Agricultural Commissioner or
his designee shall have the right to abate such nuisance, and that the
Responsible Person shall be liable to the    County of Yolo for the cost of
such abatement as provided for in Section
10-6.216.
Sec. 10-6.207.   Service Procedures.
   A Notice to Abate or Remedy shall be served in the following manner:
   (a)   Personal Service. In any case, where a Notice to Abate is issued:
   (1)   The Agricultural Commissioner or his designee shall attempt to locate
and personally serve the Responsible Person and attempt to obtain the signature
of the Responsible Person on the Notice to Abate.
   (2)   If the Responsible Person served refuses or fails to sign the Notice
to Abate, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the
Notice to Abate or of subsequent proceedings.
   (b)   Service of Notice to Abate by Mail and Posting. If the Agricultural
Commissioner is unable to locate the Responsible Person after reasonable
efforts, the Notice to Abate shall be mailed by certified mail, postage prepaid
with return receipt to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized
County assessment roll, to the last registered legal owner of record, and any
other address that is reasonably calculated to give the Responsible Person
actual notice of the Notice to Abate. The Agricultural Commissioner shall also
post the Notice to Abate on the subject real property within the County.
Service shall be effective upon mailing or posting, whichever is later.
Sec. 10-6.208.   Appeals: Agricultural Nuisance Appeals Board.
   The Agricultural Nuisance Appeals Board shall consist of the same members as
the Right To Farm Grievance Committee established in Section
10-6.104(c) of the Yolo County Code.
Sec. 10-6.209.   Appeals.
   The Responsible Person may request a hearing in writing with the
Agricultural Nuisance Appeals Board within fifteen (15) calendar days of
service of notice to abate or remove. A request for a hearing shall temporarily
suspend the obligation to abate or remove the Agricultural Nuisance demanded in
the Notice until the appeal has been heard. Such hearing shall take place as
soon as practicable after the request is made. The right to an appeal shall be
deemed waived if the Responsible Person fails to request an appeal within
fifteen (15) calendar days of service of the Notice to Abate.
Sec. 10-6.210.   Appeals: Notice.
   Notice of a hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days before the
hearing by certified mail, with return receipt, to the person requesting the
hearing. Notice shall also be provided to the owner of the land as shown on the
last equalized County assessment roll and to the last registered and legal
owner of record. If any of such notices are returned undelivered by the United
States Post Office, the hearing shall be continued to a date not less than ten
(10) days from the date of such return.
Sec. 10-6.211.   Appeals: Recommendations.
   All hearings held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be held
before the Agricultural Nuisance Appeals Board, which shall hear all facts and
testimony it deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include testimony on
the condition of the property, or part thereof, and the circumstances
concerning the Agricultural Nuisance. The Agricultural Nuisance Appeals Board
shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The person requesting
the appeal may appear in person at the hearing, or present a written statement
in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the
Agricultural Nuisance on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial.
   The Agricultural Nuisance Appeals Board may recommend to the Board of
Supervisors such conditions and other actions as it deems appropriate under the
circumstances to carry out the purposes of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, a delay in the time for removal of the Agricultural Nuisance, if,
in its opinion, the circumstances so justify. At the conclusion of the hearing,
the Agricultural Nuisance Appeals Board may determine that the property, or
part thereof, is an Agricultural Nuisance, and recommend that the nuisance be
removed from the property and disposed of as provided for in this chapter. The
Agricultural Nuisance Appeals Board may also determine the administrative costs
and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land
on which the Agricultural Nuisance is located in accordance with Section
10-6.216. The recommendation of removal shall include a description of the
property, or part thereof, the correct assessor’s parcel number and the
Agricultural Nuisance to be removed from the property. If a written
presentation is made to the Agricultural Nuisance Appeals Board, the person
providing the written presentation shall be notified in writing of the
recommendation.
Sec. 10-6.212.   Appeals: Decision.
   The Board of Supervisors may adopt the recommendation of the Agricultural
Nuisance Appeals Board without further notice of hearing or may set the matter
for hearing at a regular Board meeting.
   Should the Board of Supervisors adopt the recommendation of the Agricultural
Nuisance Appeals Board, notice of the decision shall be provided to the person
who requested the hearing, as well as the owner of the land as shown on the
last equalized County assessment roll and to the last registered and legal
owner of record.
   Should the Board of Supervisors set the matter for hearing at a regular
Board meeting, notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the person who
requested the hearing. Notice shall also be provided the owner of the land as
shown on the last equalized County assessment roll and to the last registered
and legal owner of record. Notice shall be given at least ten (10) days before
the hearing by certified mail, with a return receipt. If any of such notices
are returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, the hearing shall be
continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of such return.
Sec. 10-6.213.   Appeals: Removal.
   Unless otherwise provided for at the hearing, within fifteen (15) days after
the adoption of the decision declaring the property, or parts thereof, to be an
Agricultural Nuisance, the Agricultural Nuisance must be removed or remedied.
Section
10-6.214.   Summary Abatement.
   Consistent with California Government Code Section 25845(a), nothing in this
Section is intended to prohibit the summary abatement of an Agricultural
Nuisance by the Agricultural Commissioner, if the Agricultural Commissioner
determines that the Agricultural Nuisance constitutes an immediate threat to
public health or safety.
Sec. 10-6.215.   Right of entry of certain persons.
   When the Agricultural Commissioner has contracted for the removal of an
Agricultural Nuisance declared pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, such
person shall be authorized to enter upon the property to remove or cause the
removal the Agricultural Nuisance.
Sec. 10-6.216.   Abatement costs.
   Consistent with California Government Code Section 25845(b), the owner of
the property upon which an Agricultural Nuisance is found to exist shall be
liable for all costs of abatement incurred by the County, including, but not
limited to, administrative costs and any and all costs incurred in the physical
abatement of the nuisance. An invoice detailing these costs shall be mailed to
the Responsible Person, the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized
County assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record.
Sec. 10-6.217.   Collection of costs.
   If the costs of abatement which are charged against the owner of a parcel of
land pursuant to the provisions of Section
10-6.216 of this chapter are not paid within thirty (30) days from the date
payment is requested, pursuant to the provisions of Section 25845(d) of the
Government Code, such costs shall be specially assessed against the parcel of
land and shall be transmitted to the Treasurer-Tax Collector for collection in
the same manner as ordinary County taxes are collected, and shall be subject to
the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as
are provided for ordinary County taxes. Such assessment shall have the same
priority as other County taxes and all laws applicable to the levy, collection,
and enforcement of county taxes are applicable to the special assessment.
Sec. 10-6.218.   Notice of Abatement Lien.
   If the cost of the abatement is assessed against the parcel, a Notice of
Abatement Lien shall be recorded. The notice shall (1) identify the record
owner or possessor of property, (2) state the last known address of the record
owner or possessor, (3) state the date upon which abatement of the nuisance was
ordered and the date the abatement was completed, and (4) include a description
of the real property subject to the lien and the amount of the abatement cost.
Recordation of a Notice of Abatement Lien has the same effect as recordation of
an abstract of a money judgment. The lien created has the same priority as a
judgment lien on real property and continues in effect until released. Upon
order of the Agricultural Commissioner, and Notice of Abatement Lien created
under this section may be released or subordinated in the same manner as a
properly recorded judgment lien on real property may be released or
subordinated. (§ 1, Ord. 1333, effective May 26, 2005)
Article 3.
Organic Certification
Sec. 10-6.301.   Purpose and Findings.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors recognizes the importance of agriculture and
the promotion of sustainable agricultural practices. The Board finds that local
certification of organic products is a unique opportunity to encourage, and
enhance, existing agricultural operations, as well as insure the integrity of
the existing organic program. A local certification program will assist in
verifying compliance with organic standards, providing verification of organic
products for consumers, and facilitating and encouraging the implementation of
organic practices that contribute to a more sustainable management of our
agricultural system.
   (b)   Therefore, for the reasons set forth in subsection (a), the Board of
Supervisors of the County of Yolo makes the following findings:
   (1)   Consumer demand for certified organic products, as defined below, is
increasing, with an annual growth rate of more than 20 percent per year. There
is an expectation by consumers that certified organic products are verifiable.
With this in mind, the County’s Agricultural Commissioner developed an organic
certification program to certify local products as organic with the help of the
agricultural community.
   (2)   Local certification of organic products will accomplish a number of
desirable aims, including: verifying the authenticity of agricultural products
marketed as organically grown; enhancing the credibility of organic
agriculture, as defined below, as a sustainable system; enhancing the
preservation of our environment to optimize the health of microorganisms,
plants, animals, and people; assuring consumers that certified organic products
adhere to established laws and standards; facilitating commerce in fresh and
processed food that is organically produced; and encouraging organic
agriculture in the County of Yolo.
Sec. 10-6.302.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Article, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Accreditation” means a determination made by the Secretary that
authorizes a private, foreign, or State entity to conduct certification
activities as a certifying agent under the National Organic Program.
   (b)   “Act” means the Organic Foods Production Act of 1990, as amended (7
U.S.C. section 6501, et seq.).
   (c)   “Administrator” means the Administrator for the Agricultural Marketing
Service, United States Department of Agriculture, or the representative to whom
authority has been delegated to act in the stead of the Administrator.
   (d)   “Agricultural Commissioner” means the Yolo County Agricultural
Commissioner or the Commissioner’s designated representative.
   (e)   “Agriculture” means the science, art and business of cultivating the
soil, producing crops and/or raising livestock.
   (f)   “Agricultural commodities” means commodities or products of
agriculture, raw or processed, including any commodity or product derived from
livestock that is marketed for human or livestock use or consumption.
   (g)   “Area” means the physical space surrounding food where there is more
than a negligible chance of a prohibited material being absorbed by,
incorporated into, or adhered to the food, soil, or growing medium. The area
may differ significantly depending on the circumstances. Except in the case of
the production of food, area shall not include any physical space surrounding
food if an intervening event, such as the use of a cleaning method for
processing equipment, or the passage of time, has made the chance of a
prohibited material being absorbed by, incorporated into, or adhered to the
food, negligible.
   (h)   “Certify,” “certification,” or “certified” means a determination made
by a certifying agent that a production or handling operation is in compliance
with the Act and its regulations, applicable provisions of California law, and
this ordinance, which shall be documented by a certificate of organic
operation.
   (i)   “Certified organic products” refers to Agricultural Commodities that
are certified in accordance with the Act and its regulations, applicable
provisions of California law, and this ordinance.
   (j)   “Certified operation” or “certified organic operation” means a crop or
livestock production, wild-crop harvesting or handling operation that is
certified by an accredited certifying agent as utilizing a system of organic
production or handling as described by the Act and its corresponding
regulations.
   (k)   “Certifying agent” means any entity accredited by the federal
Secretary of Agriculture as a certifying agent for the purpose of certifying a
production or handling operation as a certified organic operation.
   (l)   “Change in Ownership” means any change in the names, ownership
interest, or status of the business ownership, other than a change among sole
proprietorship and solely owned corporation.
   (m)   “Enforcement Action” means an action taken to enforce the provisions
of this ordinance. Examples of enforcement actions are civil penalties,
suspension or termination of organic certification, or formal referral to the
District Attorney for civil or criminal adjudication. Reference California Food
and Ag Code Section 46009, et seq.
   (n)   “Enforcement authority” means the Agricultural Commissioner, County of
Yolo, or the District Attorney.
   (o)   “Field” means a contiguous area of land for agricultural production
that is managed with a consistent set of production methods.
   (p)   “Growing medium” means a substance that provides nutrients for plants
or fungi but which is separate from the land surface of the world.
   (q)   “Handled” means shipped, packed, repacked, sold for resale,
warehoused, wholesaled, imported into the state, or stored by other than a
grower, producer, processor, or retailer of that food.
   (r)   “Inspector” means a person who performs inspections on behalf of a
certification agent.
   (s)   “Inspection” means the act of examining and evaluating the production
or handling operation of an applicant for certification or certified operation
to determine compliance with the Act and the regulations in this part.
   (t)   “Label” means the information affixed to the product container that
designates the identity, quantity and responsibility for the product
   (u)   “Livestock” means any cattle, sheep, goats, swine, poultry, equine
animals, domesticated game or other cultivated animals raised for food, fiber,
or the production of food and fiber.
   (v)   “National List” means a list of allowed and prohibited substances as
provided in the Act.
   (w)   “National Organic Program” means the program authorized by the Act for
the purpose of implementing its provisions.
   (x)   “Organic agriculture” means a holistic production management system
which promotes and enhances agro-ecosystem health, including biodiversity,
biological cycles, and soil activity; emphasizes the use of management
practices over the use of off-farm inputs; and utilizes cultural, biological
and mechanical methods as opposed to synthetic materials.
   (y)   “Organic certification program” refers to the certification process
established pursuant to this ordinance.
   (z)   “Organic Integrity” means the qualities of an organic product which
are obtained through adherence to organic standards at the production level,
which must be maintained through handling to the point of final sale, in order
for the final product to be labeled and/or marketed as organic.
   (aa)   “Organic production” means a production system that is managed in
accordance with the Act and regulations in this part to respond to site-
specific conditions by integrating cultural, biological, and mechanical
practices that foster cycling of resources, promote ecological balance, and
conserve biodiversity.
   (bb)   “Processed” means cooking, baking, heating, drying, mixing, grinding,
crushing, pressing, churning, separating, extracting juices or other materials,
peeling, fermenting, eviscerating, preserving, dehydrating, freezing, or
manufacturing that materially alters the flavor, keeping quality, or any other
property, or the making of any substantial change of form. “Processed” does not
include refrigeration at temperatures that are above the freezing point nor any
other treatment that merely retards or accelerates the natural processes of
ripening or decomposition.
   (cc)   “Produced” means grown, raised, harvested, handled, or stored under
the control of the grower or producer.
   (dd)   “Producer” means a person who engages in the business of growing or
production of food, fiber, feed, and other agricultural-based consumer
products.
   (ee)   “Raw Agricultural Commodities” means unprocessed agricultural
commodities.
   (ff)   “Reciprocity” means a mutual recognition between organic
certification agents based on equivalent standards and verified competency
assessment.
   (gg)   “Retailer” means a person engaged in the sale to consumers of food
sold as organic and not engaged in the production, handling or processing of
food sold as organic.
   (hh)   “Secretary” means the federal Secretary of Agriculture or a
representative to whom authority has been delegated to act in the Secretary’s
stead.
Sec. 10-6.303.   Program Authority and Fees.
   (a)   A local program to certify producers and handlers of organic products
is hereby established within Yolo County under the supervision of the
Agricultural Commissioner pursuant to California Food and Agriculture Code
section 46000, et seq. A fee program is also hereby established pursuant to
California Food and Agricultural Code section 46014(c) to cover the costs of
the organic certification program. The fees established and collected pursuant
to this ordinance do not exceed the County’s reasonable costs of the organic
certification program established hereunder. Such fees shall be paid directly
to the Agricultural Commissioner.
   (b)   The following fees are hereby adopted to cover the County’s reasonable
costs of the program established by this ordinance:
Fee Structure
Fee Structure
                                Amount
New Application Fee             $165
Site Inspection Fee             $ 55/Hour
Annual Membership Fees for Certification Categories
Producer/Grower (Acres)
0 to 1                          55
1.1 to 5.0                      100
5.1 to 15                       115
15.1 to 50                      200
50.1 and up                     300
Specific Production Category for Hay, Silage and Pasture (Acres)
0 to 50                         75
51 to 200                       115
Over 200                        175
Livestock Producers, Except Dairy
(Number of Animals)
0 to 50                         200
51 to 150                       250
151 to 300                      300
301 to 450                      370
450 and Up                      430
Livestock Producers, Dairy
(Number of Animals)
0 to 50                         390
51 to 150                       585
151 to 300                      750
301 and Up                      1,000
Poultry, Egg Production Only
(Number of Animals)
0 to 50                         75
51 to 200                       150
Over 200                        270
Handler (Gross Sales)
0 to 50,000                     75
50,001 to 100,000               150
100,001 to 250,000              300
250,001 to 500,000              390
500,001 to 1,000,000            660
1,000,001 to 2,500,000          1170
Over 2,500,001                  2000
Handler/Processor (Gross Sales)
0 to 50,000                     150
50,001 to 100,000               215
100,001 to 250,000              330
250,001 to 500,000              500
500,001 to 1,000,000            1015
1,000,001 to 2,500,000          1635
Over 2,500,001                  2415
Document Fees                   25
Change of Ownership/Management  100
Additional Acreage or Operation 150
 
Sec. 10-6.304.   Eligibility.
   A prerequisite to applying for certification under this program is prior
registration with the State of California as an organic producer and/or
handler. The County organic certification program shall apply the requirements
of the California Organic Products Act of 2003, set forth in California Food
and Agriculture Code section 46000, et seq. , as well as the requirements of
the Act and the National Organic Program, as defined above.
Sec. 10-6.305.   Certification Criteria.
   The requirements of the County organic certification program are set forth
in the National Organic Program, which the County adopts as its official
organic standards. The Agricultural Commissioner shall use the requirements of
the National Organic Program to determine eligibility for initial and continued
certification. Additional detail regarding the application and implementation
of these criteria is set forth in Title 7 of the Code of Federal Regulations at
Part 205 (National Organic Program), Subparts A through G. A copy of 7 Code
Fed. Regs. 205 (National Organic Program Final Rule) shall be kept at the
office of the Agricultural Commissioner, and shall be available for reference
by any person during regular business hours.
   Consistent with the National Organic Program, certification in accordance
with this ordinance shall require compliance the requirements and criteria set
forth the Act and in 7 Code Fed. Regs. 205, including:
   Subpart A – Definitions
   Subpart B – Applicability
   Subpart C – Organic Production and Handling Requirements
   Subpart D – Labels, Labeling, and Market Information
   Subpart E – Certification
   Subpart F – Administration
   The denial of a request for certification may be appealed in the same manner
as a notice of proposed civil penalty, as detailed in Section
10-6.306(e), below, except that in no event shall the denial of a request for
certification following an administrative appeal be subject to judicial review
unless otherwise authorized by California law.
Sec. 10-6.306.   Enforcement.
   (a)   Failure to comply with the terms and provisions of certification as
set forth above may result in the initiation of an enforcement action
(including civil penalties, suspension and/or termination of certification), as
determined by the Agricultural Commissioner in his, or her, sole discretion,
which may include the actions set forth below.
   (b)   If the Agricultural Commissioner determines the terms and provisions
of this ordinance have been violated by a person who has been certified as an
organic producer and/or handler under these provisions, the Agricultural
Commissioner shall notify the responsible party concerning the alleged
violation in writing. The responsible party shall have 15 days from the date
the notice is mailed to respond in writing. The Agricultural Commissioner shall
review the response and make a determination as to the appropriate enforcement
action, if any, and advise the responsible party in writing.
   (c)   For a first offense, in lieu of an enforcement action as prescribed in
subdivision (a)or (b), the Agricultural Commissioner may issue a notice of non-
compliance if he or she finds that the violation is of a minor nature.
   (d)   The Agricultural Commissioner may levy a civil penalty against any
person under the enforcement jurisdiction of the County, in an amount not more
five thousand dollars ($5,000) for each violation. The amount of the penalty
assessed for each violation shall be based upon: the nature of the violation,
the seriousness of the effect of the violation, and the impact of the penalty
on the violator, including the deterrent effect on future violations.
   (e)   After receiving a notice of proposed civil penalty, a person shall be
afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the Agricultural Commissioner,
upon request made within 30 days after the issuance of the notice. At the
hearing, the person shall be given the right to review the Commissioner’s
evidence of the violation and to present evidence on his or her own behalf. If
no hearing is requested, the Commissioner shall issue a notice of final civil
penalty, which shall constitute a final and non-reviewable order. If a hearing
is requested and held, the Commissioner shall issue his or her final order
within 30 days after the end of hearing, and that notice of final action and
order may be appealed in the manner described in California Food and
Agricultural Code section 46017(d), as may be amended from time to time.
   (f)   Notwithstanding the penalties prescribed in subdivision (d), if the
Agricultural Commissioner finds that a violation was not intentional, the
Agricultural Commissioner may levy a civil penalty of not more than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) for each violation.
   (g)   A civil penalty levied by the Agricultural Commissioner pursuant to
this section may be recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the
County.
   (h)   The County shall maintain in a central location, and make publicly
available for inspection and copying upon request, a list of all civil
penalties levied by the Agricultural Commissioner within the past five years,
including the amount of each penalty, the person against whom the penalty was
levied, and the nature of the violation. Copies of this list shall also be
available by mail, upon written request and payment of a reasonable fee, for
providing the service as set by the county.
   (i)   The above civil sanctions shall be in addition to and do not otherwise
impair or restrict the imposition of any other sanctions provided by law (§ 1,
Ord. 1344, eff. April 20, 2006)
Article 4. Nut Theft
Sec. 10-6.401.   Legislative Authorization.
   This article is adopted pursuant to Food and Agricultural Code section 866.
(§ 2, Ord. 1441, eff. June 12, 2014)
Sec. 10-6.402.   Definitions.
   As used in this article, the following terms have the following meanings:
   (a)   "Agricultural commissioner" means the Agricultural Commissioner of
Yolo County or his or her designee(s).
   (b)   "Agricultural commodity" means any nut crop of any quantity in a raw
and unprocessed form.
   (c)   "Buyer" means any person engaged in the purchase of an agricultural
commodity, and who is licensed to engage in such business by the state.
   (d)   "Gleaning" means the process through which agricultural commodities
remaining on the ground following the grower's completion of the harvest are
gathered with the permission of a grower and with proof of ownership.
   (e)   "Grower" means any person who has grown and harvested an agricultural
commodity.
   (f)   "Non-processing nut buying operation" means a buyer of nuts which have
not been dried or processed who does not have on-site processing.
   (g)   "Nuts" means the seed or ripened ovule of the walnut, almond or
pistachio tree including the kernel, shell and hull.
   (h)   "Nut buying period" is defined as the period beginning August 1 of the
current calendar year, and proceeding to April 1 of the following calendar
year. Such period shall be proclaimed seventy-two (72) hours in advance by
press release by the Agricultural Commissioner.
   (i)   "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
corporation or other entity growing, possessing, buying, transporting or
selling an agricultural commodity as a principal or as an agent of another.
   (j)   "Proof of ownership" means:
   (1)   If the possessor of the agricultural commodity is the grower of the
commodity, proof that the commodity was grown by the grower. Proof of ownership
in this context shall mean documents or information sufficient to verify that
the possessor is the grower of the commodity.
   (2)   If the possessor of the agricultural commodity is a person other than
the grower of the possessed agricultural commodity, a completed proof of
ownership certificate meeting the requirements of this article.
   (k)   "Seller" means a person who sells or attempts to sell an agricultural
commodity to a buyer or other person. (§ 2, Ord. 1441, eff. June 12, 2014)
Sec. 10-6.403.   Proof of Ownership Certificate.
   (a)   The proof of ownership certificate shall contain the following
information:
   (1)   Name, address, telephone number, and signature of the seller.
   (2)   Name, address, telephone number, and signature of the buyer.
   (3)   The vehicle license plate number of the seller.
   (4)   The driver's license number of the seller.
   (5)   The weight of the agricultural commodity purchased.
   (6)   The date and time of the transaction.
   (7)   The variety and condition of the agricultural commodity.
   (8)   Specific identification of the source of the commodity being sold. If
the seller is the grower of the commodity, this shall mean the address at which
the commodity was grown. If the seller is not the grower of the commodity, this
shall mean the name and address and phone number of the person from whom that
seller obtained the commodity, and if known, the address where the commodity
was grown.
   (b)   It is the responsibility of a buyer to obtain the requisite
information to permit completion of the proof of ownership certificate. The
proof of ownership certificate shall not be valid unless signed by both the
buyer and the seller.
   (c)   The agricultural commissioner shall develop a form consistent with
this section. Persons may use an alternative written certificate, so long as it
contains the information and signatures required by this section and is found
to be acceptable to the agricultural commissioner. (§ 2, Ord. 1441, eff. June
12, 2014)
Sec. 10-6.404.   Proof of Ownership Certificate: Inspection, Presentation and
Retention.
   (a)   The proof of ownership shall be retained with the agricultural
commodity to which it pertains while the commodity is in any person's
possession.
   (b)   Upon probable cause to believe that any agricultural commodity is in
the unlawful possession of any person, the agricultural commissioner or any
peace officer may inspect the commodity and request that proof of ownership be
provided. The possessor of the commodity shall permit inspection of the
commodity and of corresponding proof of ownership.
   (c)   To facilitate inspection by the agricultural commissioner, the buyer
shall purchase and keep the commodity at a place of business in compliance with
the county building and planning/zoning ordinances, until transported for
resale or other handling.
   (d)   Following any sale of the agricultural commodity by a person other
than the grower of the possessed agricultural commodity, the proof of ownership
certificate shall be retained by the buyer for a period of two (2) years from
the date of such sale. (§ 2, Ord. 1441, eff. June 12, 2014)
Sec. 10-6.405.   Exemptions.
   This chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (a)   Commodities transported directly by a grower or agent from the farm or
ranch where they are grown to a commercial packing plant within this state for
processing or packing.
   (b)   Commodities in possession of any person as a result of gleaning
undertaken with the permission of the grower.
   (c)   Commodities transported and accompanied by a valid permit, disposal
order, or certificate issued by the agricultural commissioner for any reason
other than to comply with this article.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the exemptions provided in subdivisions (a) and (b),
the agricultural commissioner or any peace officer may inspect any agricultural
commodity as provided in this chapter and may require that information be
provided sufficient to permit verification that the exemption applies. (§ 2,
Ord. 1441, eff. June 12, 2014)
Sec. 10-6.406.   Civil Penalties.
   Pursuant to Food and Agricultural Code section 885, in lieu of civil
prosecution, the agricultural commissioner may levy a civil penalty against any
person violating the provisions of this article. The civil penalty for each
violation shall be, for a first violation, a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500). For a second or subsequent violation, the fine shall be not
less than one hundred dollars ($100), nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000). Before a civil penalty is levied the person charged with the
violation shall receive notice of the nature of the violation and shall be
given the opportunity to be heard. This shall include the right to review the
evidence and a right to present evidence on his or her own behalf. Food and
Agriculture Code section 43003, subdivision (e) shall apply to any fine levied
pursuant to this section. (§ 2, Ord. 1441, eff. June 12, 2014)
Sec. 10-6.407.   Transportation or Sale of Nuts to Non-processing Nut Buying
Operations Outside of the Nut Buying Period.
   Nuts that have not been dried or processed shall not be transported to, sold
to, or received by a non-processing nut buying operation within Yolo County
outside of the nut buying period. (§ 2, Ord. 1441, eff. June 12, 2014)
Chapter 7
GROUNDWATER
Sections:
Article 1. Declaration of Findings and Purpose
   
10-7.101   Regulation of the extraction and exportation of groundwater from
Yolo County.
Article 2. Definitions
   
10-7.201   Definitions.
Article 3. Permit Process
   
10-7.301   Permit required for export for use outside County.
   
10-7.302   Application for a permit.
   
10-7.303   Procedures for processing.
   
10-7.304   Public review concerning issuance of permit.
   
10-7.305   Granting of permit.
   
10-7.306   Reapplication after denial.
   
10-7.307   Summary permit proceedings.
   
10-7.308   Challenge to approved permit.
   
10-7.309   Duration of permit.
   
10-7.310   Limitation of permit.
Article 4. Inspection
   
10-7.401   Inspection.
Article 5. Effective Date
   
10-7.501   Effective date.
Article 6. Violations
   
10-7.601   Civil penalty.
Article 1.
Declaration of Findings and Purpose
Sec. 10-7.101.   Regulation of the extraction and exportation of groundwater
from Yolo County.
   The Board hereby finds and declares:
   (a)   The groundwater underlying Yolo County has historically provided the
people and lands of Yolo County with water for agricultural, domestic,
municipal and other purposes.
   (b)   The Board recognizes that the principle developed in the case law of
California that water may be appropriated from a groundwater basin if the
groundwater supply is surplus and exceeds the reasonable and beneficial needs
of overlying users.
   (c)   It is essential for the protection of the health, welfare, and safety
of the residents of the County, and the public benefit of the State, that
groundwater resource of Yolo County be protected from harm resulting from the
extraction of groundwater for use on lands outside the County, until such time
as needed additional surface water supplies are obtained for use on lands of
the County, or overdrafting is alleviated, to the satisfaction of the Board.
   (d)   Much of the farm production of the County depends upon the use of
groundwater to produce grapes, nut, fruit, field and vegetable crops which
significantly contribute to the gross value of all agricultural crops produced
in the County, estimated at nearly Three Hundred Million and no/100ths
($300,000,000.00) Dollars for 1994.
   (e)   The groundwater of Yolo County also provides water to several
communities in the County, particularly to the cities of Davis, Winters and
Woodland.
   (f)   The groundwater of Yolo County will be a vital part of future water
use in the County. The present population of the County is nearly 150,000 and
is conservatively projected to increase by the year 2020 to 315,000.
Groundwater resources will serve as an important source of water supply to this
increased population. As the water needs per acre of agriculture and urban
areas are approximately equivalent for this region, and virtually all of the
area to become urbanized is in irrigated agriculture, the consumptive demands
of the groundwater lying beneath the County will remain essentially the same.
   (g)   Surface water supplies obtained in the future will be used
conjunctively with groundwater. That is, surface water will be diverted in
times of relatively high flows and groundwater will be used during dry periods
when surface water is not readily available. In this regard, the greatest
readily and economically available asset the County has in dealing with its
water needs is its groundwater. Loss of the use of the groundwater would result
in additional surface water needs. It is vital that the groundwater be
preserved so that its capacity will be available for future conjunctive use.
   (h)   The Yolo County Water Plan Update 1992 identifies areas in the Yolo-
Zamora Water District and lands along the east side of the Yolo County Flood
Control and Water Conservation District from Cache Creek to Putah Creek,
encompassing the Cities of Davis and Woodland as the areas where groundwater is
most important. These areas have experienced up to four (4’) feet of subsidence
that has aggravated flooding from the Colusa Basin Drain. Where the levees
along Cache Creek are up to four (4’) feet lower than their design elevation,
the risk of flooding, especially to the City of Woodland, is substantially
increased. Similarly, the levees along the Willow Slough Bypass are up to two
(2’) feet lower than their design elevation, thereby posing a risk of flooding
lands near the City of Davis.
   (i)   The Yolo County Water Plan update 1992 concludes that an additional
120,000 acres feet of supplemental surface water per year is needed by the year
2020 to achieve a balanced use of both surface and groundwater for the County.
The County and other public agencies in the County have worked with Federal,
State, and other agencies to attempt to secure this needed supplemental surface
water in order to relieve or alleviate the burden placed on the groundwater
lying beneath the eastern portion of the County.
   (j)   The County seeks to foster prudent water management practices to avoid
significant adverse overdraft-related environmental, social, and economic
impacts. It is therefore essential for the protection of the County’s important
groundwater resources that the County require a permit to extract groundwater
for use outside the County. This chapter requires a permit for the export of
groundwater outside the County and is not intended to regulate groundwater in
any other way.
   (k)   In adopting this chapter, the County in no way intends to limit either
the County or other public entities in managing groundwater under the
Groundwater Management Act and any other applicable laws in a manner consistent
with Yolo County Water Plan. (§ 1, Ord. 1195, eff. December 26, 1996)
Article 2.
Definitions
Sec. 10-7.201.   Definitions.
   (a)   “Groundwater Management Act” means Water Code Sections 10750 et seq.
   (b)   “Aquifer” means a geologic formation that stores, transmits and yields
significant quantities of water to wells and springs.
   (c)   “Board” means the Board of Supervisors of Yolo County.
   (d)   “Commission” means the Planning Commission of the County of Yolo and
the WRA meeting jointly.
   (e)   “County” means the County of Yolo.
   (f)   “Director” means the Director of Community Development or his
designee.
   (g)   “District” means a district wholly or in part located within the
boundaries of the county, which is a purveyor of waters for agricultural,
domestic or municipal use.
   (h)   “Groundwater” means all water beneath the surface of the earth within
the zone below the water table in which the soil is completely saturated with
water, but does not include water which flows in known and definite channels.
   (i)   “Hydraulic gradient” means the slope of the water table.
   (j)   “Hydrology” means the origin, distribution, and circulation of water
through precipitation, stream flow, infiltration, groundwater storage and
evaporation.
   (k)   “Overdraft” means the condition of a groundwater supply in which the
amount of water withdrawn by pumping exceeds the amount of water replenishing
the supply over a period of time and also the point at which extractions from
the supply exceed its safe yield plus any temporary surplus.
   (l)   “Percolation” means the movement of water through the soil to the
groundwater table.
   (m)   “Permeability” means the capability of the soil or another geologic
formation to transmit water.
   (n)   “Piezometric surface” means the surface to which the water in a
confined aquifer will rise.
   (o)   “Porosity” means voids or open spaces in alluvium and rocks that can
be filled with water.
   (p)   “Recharge” means flow to groundwater storage from precipitation,
irrigation, infiltration from streams, spreading basins and other sources of
water.
   (q)   “Safe yield” means the maximum quantity of water which can be
withdrawn annual from a groundwater supply under a given set of conditions
without causing overdraft or adverse water quality conditions. Specifically
safe yields is the amount of water which can be withdrawn without:
   (1)   Exceeding in any calendar year the long-term mean annual water supply
of the basin (considering all sources of recharge and withdrawal);
   (2)   Lowering water levels so as to make further drilling of water wells
uneconomical;
   (3)   Causing water pumped from the basin to deteriorate below drinking
water standards;
   (4)   Violating water rights or restrictions in pumpage in the groundwater
basin as established by court adjudication or application State or Federal law;
   (5)   Other observable environmental damage.
   (r)   “Specific capacity” means the volume of water pumped from a well in
gallons per minute per foot of drawdown.
   (s)   “Spreading water” means discharging native or imported water to a
permeable area for the purpose of allowing it to percolate to the zone of
saturation. Spreading, artificial recharge and replenishment all refer to
operations used to place water in a groundwater table.
   (t)   “Transmissivity” means the rate of flow of water through an aquifer.
   (u)   “Usable storage capacity” means the quantity of groundwater of
acceptable quality that can be economically withdrawn from storage.
   (v)   “Water table” means the surface or level where groundwater is
encountered in a well in an unconfined aquifer.
   (w)   “Water year” means the year beginning March 1 and ending the last day
of the following February.
   (x)   “WRA” means the Water Resources Association of Yolo County.
   (y)   “Zone of saturation” means the area below the water table in which the
soil is completely saturated with groundwater. (§ 1, Ord. 1195, eff. December
26, 1996)
Article 3.
Permit Process
Sec. 10-7.301.   Permit required for export for use outside County.
   It shall be unlawful to extract groundwater underlying County, directly or
indirectly, for use of that groundwater so extracted, outside County
boundaries, without first obtaining a Permit as provided in this Chapter. The
extraction of groundwater to replace a surface water supply to be transferred
for use outside County boundaries shall be considered an indirect extraction of
groundwater for purposes of this section, which shall require a Permit. This
Chapter shall not apply for the extraction of groundwater (1) to prevent the
flood of lands or (2) to prevent the saturation of the root zone of farmland,
or (3) for use within the District boundaries of a District which is in part
located within County and in part in another County(s)   where such extraction
quantities and use are consistent with historical practices of the District, or
(4) for extractions to boost heads for portions of District facilities,
consistent with historical practices of the District, or (5) for use on lands
outside the County which are contiguous and in the same ownership to lands
within the County from which the groundwater is extracted, where such
extraction quantities and the use are consistent with historical practices of
the landowners. The applicant shall have the burden of supporting an assertion
of an historical practice with competent evidence. (§ 1, Ord. 1195, eff.
December 26, 1996, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1210, eff. October 23, 1997)
Sec. 10-7.302.   Application for a permit.
   An application for a permit shall be filed with the Director and shall
contain all information required by the Director. Concurrently, a request for
environmental review shall be filed as required by applicable County
guidelines. The application for a permit and request for environmental review
shall be accompanied by the fees which shall be established from time to time
by the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 1195, eff. December 26, 1996)
Sec. 10-7.303.   Procedures for processing.
   (a)   Within ten (10) calendar days of filing of the permit application, the
Director shall post a notice on the departmental public bulletin board that an
application has been filed, shall send a copy of the notice to the Districts
and Cities within the County which have lands overlying or adjacent to the
location of the extraction and to any interested party who has made a written
request to the Director for such notice within the last twelve (12) calendar
months. The Director shall review the application to determine whether it is
complete for purposes of proceeding under the County guidelines adopted
pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act requirements.
   (b)   The Director may review the matter of the application with the
affected County departments, with the staff of the State Department of Water
Resources, with the staff of the Regional Water Quality Board-Central Valley
Region, and with any interested local water agency within whose boundary the
proposed activity will occur. If the applicant is applying to pump groundwater
from a District, City, or the unincorporated territory in which a groundwater
management plan has been adopted pursuant to the Groundwater Management Act,
the Director shall consider a groundwater management plan or any other relevant
information provided by the District, City, or other local agency. Any
interested person or agency may provide comments relevant to the matter of the
extraction of groundwater. Comments shall be submitted within thirty (30) days
of the date of mailing the notice of filing the permit application.
   (c)   The environmental review shall be undertaken in accordance with the
California Environmental Quality Act and County guidelines. All costs of the
environmental review shall be the responsibility of applicant.
   (d)   Upon completion of the environmental review, the Director shall
forward the application together with any written comments received,
environmental documentations, and the Director’s recommendations, to the
Commission. Upon receipt of the Director’s recommendation, the Commission shall
immediately set a public review on the issuance of the permit which shall be
noticed pursuant to Government Code Section 6061 and may not be held within
fifteen (15) days of the time that the Commission receives the recommendation
from the Director.
   (e)   The Commission shall hear the application in accordance with the
provisions for public review and shall make recommendations to the Board. The
scope of the recommendations extends to any relevant matter that may be
considered by the Board, including but not limited to, the effects that
granting the permit application would have on the affected aquifer, each of the
findings required of the Board, any appropriate conditions to be imposed, and
any mitigation offsetting any adverse effect.
   (f)   Upon receipt of the Commission’s recommendation, the Clerk of the
Board shall immediately set a public review on issuance of the permit which
shall be noticed pursuant to Government Code Section 6061. The Board shall hear
the application in accordance with the provisions for public review and shall
consider matters required to be considered during public review, including but
not limited to, the effects that granting the permit application would have on
the affected aquifer, make each of the findings on matters required for
granting a permit, any appropriate conditions to be imposed, and any mitigation
offsetting any adverse effect. (§ 1, Ord. 1195, eff. December 26, 1996)
Sec. 10-7.304.   Public review concerning issuance of permit.
   The hearing bodies, whether Commission or Board, shall conduct the public
review in accordance with this section.
   (a)   The bodies forming the Commission shall meet jointly, but all actions
shall be taken by a separate vote of each body. Action may be taken only if
there is a majority of the membership of each body comprising the Commission
present at the public review and if a majority of the total membership of each
body concurs in the action. If the bodies are unable to concur on a single
recommendation, each body shall make a separate recommendation.
   (b)   Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to the public review of the
application, but the hearing body may establish such rules as will enable the
expeditious presentation of the matter and relevant information thereto. At the
public review, the applicant shall be entitled to present any oral or
documentary evidence relevant to the application, and the applicant shall have
the burden of proof of establishing the facts necessary for the required
findings. The hearing body may request any additional information it deems
necessary for its decision, the cost of which, if any, shall be borne by the
applicant. The hearing body shall also hear relevant evidence presented by
other interested persons and entities, the Director, other County staff, and
the public. The hearing body shall consider all effects that the granting of
the permit application would have on the affected aquifer including, but not
limited to, the hydraulic gradient, hydrology, percolation, permeability,
piezometric surface, porosity, recharge, safe yield, specific capacity,
spreading water, transmissivity, usable storage capacity, water table and zone
of saturation. (§ 1, Ord. 1195, eff. December 26, 1996)
Sec. 10-7.305.   Granting of permit.
   The permit may only be granted if the Board finds and determines that the
extraction will not cause or increase an overdraft of the groundwater
underlying the County, will not adversely affect the long term ability for
storage or transmission of groundwaters within the aquifer, will not (together
with other extractions) exceed the safe yield of the groundwater underlying the
County unless the safe yield is exceeded only by extractions in connection with
a conjunctive use program approved by the Board and will not otherwise operate
to the injury of the reasonable and beneficial uses of overlying groundwater
users, is otherwise in compliance with Water Code Section 1220, or will not
result in an injury to a water replenishment, storage, or restoration project
operating in accordance with statutory authorization. If the permit is to be
granted, the Board shall impose appropriate conditions upon the permit so as to
prohibit overdraft or other adverse conditions, and may impose other conditions
that it deems necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the people of the
County. Other conditions in the permit may include, but are not limited to,
requirements for observation and/or monitoring wells. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Board may issue the permit if the Board finds that the applicant
has provided for mitigation which will offset any adverse effect that is
determined to exist. (§ 1, Ord. 1195, eff. December 26, 1996)
Sec. 10-7.306.   Reapplication after denial.
   Reapplication for a permit which has been denied by the Board may not be
filed with the Director until the following Water Year and must be accompanied
with information that demonstrates a significant change in conditions in the
groundwater and/or change in the proposed extraction. (§ 1, Ord. 1195, eff.
December 26, 1996)
Sec. 10-7.307.   Summary permit proceedings.
   (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
10-7.303, the Director may grant a permit in summary proceedings upon an
application accompanied by a demonstration satisfactory to the Director showing
that:
   (1)   The extraction is for use in compliance with the provisions of Water
Code Section 1220,
   (2)   The extraction will not exceed 250 acre feet,
   (3)   The term of the extraction will not exceed one year
   (4)   The extraction is in accordance with a conjunctive use program adopted
under the Groundwater Management Act or other applicable laws and approved by
the Board.
   (b)   Upon receipt of an application for summary proceedings, the Director
shall give notice of filing to the Commission and the Board. If the Board shall
so order within twenty-one (21) days of receiving notice of the filing,
proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with Section
10-7.303; in the absence of such an order the Director shall determine the
accuracy of the assertions of the application. The Director may grant a permit
for one year only upon a favorable determination and may impose such
appropriate conditions so as to make such a determination. (§ 1, Ord. 1195,
eff. December 26, 1996)
Sec. 10-7.308.   Challenge to approved permit.
   (a)   Any interested party or public entity may challenge the continuation
of an approved permit during the term of the permit when information exists
that:
   (1)   There is a violation of the conditions of the permit, or
   (2)   The permit was not issued in accordance with the procedure
requirements of this chapter, or
   (3)   Extraction of groundwater pursuant to the permit:
   (i)   Causes or increases an overdraft in the basin, or
   (ii)   Brings about or increases salt water intrusion, or
   (iii)   Adversely affects the long-term ability for storage or transmission
of groundwaters, or
   (iv)   Exceeds the safe yield of the groundwaters, or
   (v)   Operates to the injury of the reasonable and beneficial uses of
overlying groundwater users, or
   (vi)   Is in violation of Water Code Section 1220, or
   (vii)   Results in an injury to a water replenishment, storage, or
restoration project operating in accordance with statutory authorization.
   (b)   A challenge pursuant to this section is commenced by filing a written
request with the Director which alleges any of the above situations and in
general describes the supporting facts for such allegation. In such event, the
Director shall within ten (10) days of receipt of such challenge, give notice
of the challenge to the Commission, the Permittee, Appellant, to any interested
party who filed a written request for such notice within the past twelve (12)
months, and also the Districts and Cities, within the County, which have
boundaries overlying or immediately adjacent to the location of the permitted
extraction. Commission and Board reviews shall be held on the matter following
the procedures set out in Sections
10-7.304 and
10-7.305. The recommendations and decision may be to deny the challenge, grant
the challenge and terminate the permit, or to establish modified conditions to
the permit.
   (c)   The standard for review shall be substantial evidence. The burden of
proof is upon the person or entity filing the challenge. (§ 1, Ord. 1195, eff.
December 26, 1996)
Sec. 10-7.309.   Duration of permit.
   All permits shall be valid for a term set by the Board, not to exceed three
(3) water years from the date of the issuance of the permit, or, if the permit
is for extraction as part of a conjunctive use program that has been approved
by the Board, the permit shall not exceed the length of the term of the
program. For purpose of calculation, the water year in which the permit is
granted shall not be counted in determining the three (3) year time period if
less than four (4) months remain in the then water year. Provided, however,
nothing contained in this chapter nor in the conditions of the permit shall be
construed as to give exclusive right to groundwater to permittee nor establish
a compensable right in the event that the permit is subsequently discontinued
or modified by the Board after a hearing on a challenge to the permit. (§ 1,
Ord. 1195, eff. December 26, 1996)
Sec. 10-7.310.   Limitation of permit.
   The permit process of this chapter is not to be construed as a grant of any
right or entitlement but rather the permit evidences that the health, welfare,
and safety of the residents of the County will not be harmed by the extraction
and exportation of groundwater outside the County boundaries. The permit in no
way exempts, supersedes, or replaces any other provisions of Federal, State,
and (with approval of the Board) District or local laws and regulations
including but not limited to Water Code Section 1220, the Groundwater
Management Act, and any actions provided for in California groundwater law,
well drilling and maintenance or building permit requirements. (§ 1, Ord. 1195,
eff. December 26, 1996)
Article 4.
Inspection
Sec. 10-7.401.   Inspection.
   The Director, with good cause, may at any and all reasonable times enter any
and all places, property, enclosures and structures, for the purposes of making
examinations and investigations to determine whether any provision of this
chapter is violated. (§ 1, Ord. 1195, eff. December 26, 1996)
Article 5.
Effective Date
Sec. 10-7.501.   Effective date.
   These provisions of this chapter shall be effective as to the unincorporated
portions of the County within thirty (30) days of its passage. The provisions
of this chapter shall become effective in the incorporated portions of the
cities within Yolo County upon adoption of each city by an Ordinance which
makes the provisions of this chapter applicable to the incorporated area or
which independently establishes an Ordinance incorporating compatible
provisions. (§ 1, Ord. 1195, eff. December 26, 1996)
Article 6.
Violations.
Sec. 10-7.601.   Civil penalty.
   The County may elect to proceed with a civil action against a violator,
including injunctive relief. Any person or entity who violates this chapter
shall be subject to fines of up to Five Thousand and no/100ths ($5,000.00)
Dollars per separate violation. A person shall be deemed to have committed
separate violations for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
such violation is committed, continued, or permitted as well as for and each
and every separate groundwater well with which any such violation is committed,
continued, or permitted. (§ 1, Ord. 1195, eff. December 26, 1996)
CHAPTER 8
AGRICULTURAL SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION ORDINANCE
Sections:
Article 1.
Title, Authority, and Purpose
   
10-8.101   Title.
   
10-8.102   Authority.
   
10-8.103   Purposes.
Article 2.
Definitions
   
10-8.201   Scope.
   
10-8.202   Abandon: Abandonment.
   
10-8.203   Act.
   
10-8.204   Agency.
   
10-8.205   Backfill.
   
10-8.206   Board.
   
10-8.207   CEQA.
   
10-8.208   Commission.
   
10-8.209   County.
   
10-8.210   Department.
   
10-8.211   Director.
   
10-8.212   Financial Assurances.
   
10-8.213   Haul Road.
   
10-8.214   Idle.
   
10-8.215   Interim Management Plan.
   
10-8.216   Lead Agency.
   
10-8.217   Mined Lands.
   
10-8.218   Minerals.
   
10-8.219   Mining Waste.
   
10-8.220   Operator.
   
10-8.221   Overburden.
   
10-8.222   Prime Agricultural Land.
   
10-8.223   Reclamation.
   
10-8.224   Reclamation Plan.
   
10-8.225   Regulations.
   
10-8.226   Resoiling.
   
10-8.227   Slope.
   
10-8.228   State CEQA Guidelines.
   
10-8.229   Surface mining operations.
   
10-8.230   Topsoil.
Article 3.
Scope and Exemptions
   
10-8.301   Incorporation by Reference.
   
10-8.302   Scope of Regulations.
   
10-8.303   Scope: Area defined.
   
10-8.304   Exemptions: Defined.
   
10-8.305   Exemptions: Applications.
Article 4.
Agricultural Mining and Reclamation Standards
   
10-8.401   Scope.
   
10-8.402   Access roads.
   
10-8.403   Accident reporting.
   
10-8.404   Annual production limits.
   
10-8.405   County road improvements.
   
10-8.406   Cultural resources.
   
10-8.407   Drainage.
   
10-8.408   Dust control.
   
10-8.409   Equipment maintenance.
   
10-8.410   Erosion control.
   
10-8.411   Fence row habitat.
   
10-8.412   Field drainage.
   
10-8.413   Field releveling.
   
10-8.414   Lighting.
   
10-8.415   Mining in reclaimed lands.
   
10-8.416   Noise: General standard.
   
10-8.417   Noise: Sonic safety devices.
   
10-8.418   Operational areas.
   
10-8.419   Other agency approvals.
   
10-8.420   Parking.
   
10-8.421   Stockpiles.
   
10-8.422   Phasing plans.
   
10-8.423   Planting plans.
   
10-8.424   Repair of damage due to Natural Disaster.
   
10-8.425   Sanitary facilities.
   
10-8.426   Setbacks.
   
10-8.427   Site maintenance.
   
10-8.428   Slopes.
   
10-8.429   Soil removal.
   
10-8.430   Soil ripping.
   
10-8.431   Soil stockpiles.
   
10-8.432   Soil use.
   
10-8.433   Vegetation protection.
   
10-8.434   Wetlands.
   
10-8.435   Wildlife habitat.
   
10-8.436   Exceptions.
Article 5.
Surface Mining Permit and Reclamation Plan Approval Process
   
10-8.501   Scope.
   
10-8.502   Applications: Contents.
   
10-8.503   Public hearing: Findings for Approval.
Article 6.
Amendments and Modifications to Approved Surface Mining Permits And Reclamation
Plans
   
10-8.601   Scope.
Article 7.
Annual Reports
   
10-8.701   Scope.
   
10-8.702   Annual Reports: Contents.
Article 8.
Fees.
   
10-8.801   Fees: Applications.
   
10-8.802   Annual reviews and inspections.
Article 9.
Confidentiality of Records
   
10-8.901   Scope.
Article 10.
Appeals
   
10-8.1001   Scope.
Article 11.
Inspections: Notices of Violations
   
10-8.1101   Scope.
Article 12.
Financial Assurances
   
10-8.1201   Scope.
Article 13.
Abandonment
   
10-8.1301   Scope.
Article 1.
Title, Authority, and Purpose
Sec. 10-8.101.   Title.
   This chapter shall be known as “The Agricultural Surface Mining and
Reclamation Ordinance of Yolo County.” (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.102.   Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the California
Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, Chapter 9 of Division 2 of the
Public Resources Code of the State, commencing with Section 2710; and pursuant
to the powers of the County to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
pursuant to Section 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the State. (§ 2,
Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.103.   Purposes.
   The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
   (a)   The preservation of agriculture is essential to the continued economic
and social well-being of the County. In certain limited circumstances, however,
it is necessary to mine soil from an agricultural property in order to protect,
maintain, and/or enhance its existing productivity. Although the County
recognizes the need for agricultural surface mining, consideration must also be
balanced by other societal values, including but not limited to soil
conservation, public health and safety, and wildlife habitat;
   (b)   Due to concerns about the impacts of surface mining on crop and
livestock productivity, mining will be minimized and will only be permitted
where it is wholly integral and necessary to the conduct of agricultural
activities, including but not limited to the following circumstances: to
improve soil quality, as a by-product of land leveling, to develop aquaculture
facilities, to create or enhance wildlife habitat, or to maintain or improve
drainage and flood control facilities;
   (c)   The potential environmental impacts, operational methods, and
reclaimed end uses of surface mining necessary for agricultural operations are
significantly different from those associated with commercial surface mining.
Thus, it is appropriate to provide performance standards, procedures, and
findings for agricultural surface mining and reclamation activities in addition
to those already included within the County Code, the Act, and the Regulations.
These additional measures will ensure that the impacts created by agricultural
mining and reclamation activities are addressed and that the unique interests
of the farm community are protected;
   (d)   Agricultural surface mining and reclamation takes place in diverse
areas, where the geologic, hydrologic, biological, and social conditions are
significantly different. While agricultural mining permits and reclamation
plans may vary to account for site-specific circumstances, they must also
achieve the common goals of minimizing impacts on surrounding properties and
providing for the long-term viability of on-site farming. Therefore, this
chapter imposes general performance standards, by which agricultural surface
mining and reclamation activities shall be regulated in order to limit their
effects on surrounding properties and to safeguard productive farmland;
   (e)   Agricultural surface mining and reclamation must be carefully
monitored, in order to reduce hazards to the public health and safety, minimize
adverse effects on the environment, and to ensure the continued strength of the
County’s farm economy. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Article 2.
Definitions
Sec. 10-8.201.   Scope.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff.
December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.202.   Abandon: Abandonment.
   “Abandon” or “abandonment” shall mean to cease surface mining or reclamation
with the intention of not resuming or reclaiming. Unless an Interim Management
Plan is currently pending before the County, any surface mining operation that
is idle for twelve (12) consecutive months or longer shall be considered
abandoned. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.203.   Act.
   “Act” shall mean the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975,
specifically referring to Chapter 9 of Division 2 of the State Public Resources
Code, Sections 2710 et seq. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.204.   Agency.
   “Agency” shall mean the Planning and Public Works Department of the County,
or its successor in function. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.205.   Backfill.
   “Backfill” shall mean earth, overburden, mine waste, or imported material
used to replace material removed during mining. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December
6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.206.   Board.
   “Board” shall mean the Board of Supervisors of the County. (§ 2, Ord. 1276,
eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.207   CEQA.
   “CEQA” shall mean the California Environmental Quality Act set forth in
Sections 21000 et seq. of Division 13 of the Public Resources Code of
California. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.208.   Commission.
   “Commission” shall mean the Planning Commission of the County, or its
successor in function. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.209   County.
   “County” shall mean the County of Yolo . (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6,
2001)
Sec. 10-8.210.   Department.
   “Department” shall mean the State Department of Conservation, or its
successor in function with regards to surface mining and reclamation
regulation. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.211.   Director.
   “Director” shall mean the Director of the County Planning and Public Works
Department, a designee chosen by the Director, or the Director’s successor in
function. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.212.   Financial Assurances.
   “Financial assurances” shall mean monetary funds, securities, or other
instruments, approved by the State Mines and Geology Board in regulation,
provided by the operator to ensure that surface mining operations are reclaimed
according to the approved reclamation plan, should the operator abandon the
mine site. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.213.   Haul Road.
   “Haul road” shall mean a road along which material is transported from the
area of excavation to the processing plant or stock pile area of the surface
mining operation. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.214.   Idle.
   “Idle” shall mean those surface mining operations where production has been
reduced by more than 90 percent of the operation’s previous maximum annual
mineral production, for a period of one year or more, with the intent to resume
operations at a later date. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.215.   Interim Management Plan.
   “Interim Management Plan” shall mean an amendment to the approved
reclamation plan to provide measures for maintaining an idle mine site until
operations are resumed. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.216.   Lead Agency.
   “Lead Agency” shall mean the County, which has the principal responsibility
for approving a surface mining operation or reclamation plan pursuant to this
chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.217.   Mined Lands.
   “Mined lands” shall mean the surface, subsurface, and groundwater of an area
in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted,
including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land
excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities,
equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from,
or are used in, surface mining operations are located. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff.
December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.218.   Minerals.
   “Minerals” shall mean any naturally occurring chemical element or compound,
or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and
organic substances, including, but not limited to, coal, peat, and bituminous
rock, but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas, and petroleum. (§ 2,
Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.219   Mining Waste.
   “Mining waste” shall mean the residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid,
vegetation, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property directly
resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations. (§ 2, Ord. 1276,
eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.220.   Operator.
   “Operator” shall mean any person who is engaged in surface mining
operations, or who contracts with others to conduct operations on their behalf,
except a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with
wages as their sole compensation. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.221.   Overburden.
   “Overburden” shall mean soil, rock, or other materials that lie above a
natural mineral deposit or in between mineral deposits, before or after their
removal by surface mining operations. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.222   Prime Agricultural Land.
   “Prime agricultural land” shall mean all land which meets the definition of
prime agricultural land set forth in Section 51201 of the Government Code of
the State and administered by the County in the administration of its
agricultural preserve program. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.223   Reclamation.
   “Reclamation” shall mean the process of land treatment that minimizes water
degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding,
erosion, threats to public health or safety, and other adverse effects from
surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to
underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition
which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses. The process may extend to
affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading,
resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures. (§
2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.224.   Reclamation Plan.
   “Reclamation Plan” shall mean the operator’s completed and approved plan for
reclaiming lands affected by any surface mining operations conducted after
January 1, 1976, as required by Section 2772 of the Public Resources Code of
the State. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.225.   Regulations.
   “Regulations” shall mean the State Mining and Geology Board Reclamation
Regulations, specifically referring to Subchapter 1 of Chapter 8 of Division 2
of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations, Articles 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, and 12. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.226.   Resoiling.
   “Resoiling” shall mean the process of artificially building or
reconstructing a soil profile. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.227.   Slope.
   “Slope” shall mean the angle of the ground surface, expressed as a ratio of
the horizontal distance to the vertical distance. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff.
December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.228.   State CEQA Guidelines.
   “State CEQA Guidelines” shall mean those regulations set forth in Sections
15000 et seq. of Chapter 3 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations.
(§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.229.   Surface Mining Operations.
   “Surface mining operations” shall mean all, or any part of, the process
involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and
mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals
naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or
surface work incidental to an underground mine. Surface mining operations shall
include, but are not limited to: in-place distillation or retorting or
leaching; the production and disposal of mining waste; and prospecting and
exploratory activities. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.230.   Topsoil.
   “Topsoil” shall mean the upper part of the soil profile that is relatively
rich in humus, which is technically known as the A-horizon of the soil profile.
(§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Article 3.
Scope and Exemptions
Sec. 10-8.301.   Incorporation By Reference.
   The provisions of the Act and the Regulations, as those provisions and
regulations may be amended from time to time, are made a part of this chapter
by reference with the same force and effect as if the provisions therein were
specifically and fully set out herein, excepting that where the provisions of
this chapter are more restrictive than corresponding state provisions, this
chapter shall prevail. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.302.   Scope of Regulations.
   Unless otherwise provided in this article, no person shall conduct surface
mining operations within an agriculturally zoned property, unless a surface
mining permit, reclamation plan, and financial assurances have been approved in
accordance with this chapter, except where the subject property has an existing
Sand and Gravel (SG) overlay zone and a mining permit, reclamation plan, and
financial assurances approved pursuant to Chapter 4 of Title 10 of this Code.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as requiring the filing of a
surface mining permit and/or reclamation plan application for lands where
surface mining operations were completed prior to January 1, 1976. (§ 2, Ord.
1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.303.   Scope: Area defined.
   This chapter shall apply only to those areas designated as agricultural
lands within the Yolo County General Plan. Specifically, agricultural surface
mining operations shall only be permitted within the Agricultural General (A-
1), Agricultural Exclusive (A-E), Agricultural Preserve (A-P), and/or
Agricultural Industrial (AGI) Zones, as defined in Articles 4, 5, 6, and 6.1 of
Chapter 2 of Title 8 of this Code. The conduct of mining within the channel of
Cache Creek is regulated by Chapter 3 of this title and shall not be subject to
the provisions of this chapter. The conduct of commercial aggregate surface
mining within the Cache Creek Area Plan, but outside the channel of Cache
Creek, is regulated by Chapters 4 and 5 of this title and shall not be subject
to the provisions of this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.304.   Exemptions: Defined.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any operation where mined
materials do not leave the property being excavated. This chapter shall also
not apply to any operation where mined materials are transferred between
parcels, if the mined materials are used for agricultural purposes (e.g., land
leveling, road building, levee repair, etc.) and there is no exchange of goods
and/or services for the mined materials. In addition, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to those activities and operations that are exempted by
Section 2714 of the Act and/or Section 3505.a of the Regulations.
   Specifically, this chapter shall not apply to those operations conducted
within the Cache Creek Settling Basin, Fremont Weir, and/or the Sacramento Weir
for the purpose of cleaning out sediment materials to restore those flood
control facilities to their engineered design capacity, as provided for under
Section 3505.(a).(2) of the Regulations. In order to qualify for this
exemption, operations may only occur where the final grade of the excavated
area does not exceed the as-built approved design specifications contained the
approved documents for the    Cache Creek Settling Basin , Fremont Weir, and/or
Sacramento Weir.
   Any exemption granted from the provisions of this chapter shall not, in and
of itself, exempt a project or activity from the application of other
applicable regulations and requirements. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6,
2001)
Sec. 10-8.305.   Exemptions: Applications.
   Applications for exemptions shall be submitted to the Director for review
and determination as to completeness. If the application is determined
incomplete, the Director shall notify the operator in writing within thirty
(30) days, specially describing the information necessary to complete the
application. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Director shall
determine whether the operation is exempt or is subject to the provisions of
this chapter and shall submit the decision in writing to the applicant. Any
person with standing may appeal the Director’s decision to the Commission,
pursuant to the provisions of Article 10 of Chapter 4 of Title 10.
   If the County determines that a proposed operation is subject to the
provisions of this chapter, an exemption may only be granted by the State Mines
and Geology Board under Section 2714 of the Act. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December
6, 2001)
Article 4.
Agricultural Mining and Reclamation Standards
Sec. 10-8.401.   Scope.
   The general standard for the operation of agricultural surface mines is to
ensure the protection of the public health and safety, of the natural
environment, and of the productivity of surrounding farm operations. The
general standard for agricultural reclamation is to ensure that the
agricultural productivity of reclaimed lands either meets or exceeds farm
production levels established prior to mining. This article sets forth minimum
acceptable mining and reclamation standards to implement these general
standards. These minimum acceptable standards shall be considered and discussed
in every surface mining permit and reclamation plan approved pursuant to this
chapter. In addition, the minimum practices and standards set forth in the Act
shall also be considered and discussed in every surface mining permit and
reclamation plan approved pursuant to this chapter. These standards shall be
followed in addition to any other conditions of approval or regulations imposed
on the agricultural surface mining permit or reclamation plan. (§ 2, Ord. 1276,
eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.402.   Access roads.
   Where an access road is sued by trucks to haul mined material away from the
permit mine site, the first one-hundred(100) feet intersecting a County-
maintained road shall be surfaced in a manner approved by the Public Works
Department, with an approach constructed to County standards. Traffic control
and warning signs shall be installed as required by the Public Works
Department. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.403.   Accident reporting.
   The operator shall immediately notify the Director of any events such as
fires, explosions, spills, land or slope failures, or other conditions at the
site that could pose a hazard to life or property. Action shall be immediately
undertaken to alleviate the hazard. Upon request by any County agency, the
operator shall provide a written report of any such event, within thirty (30)
days, which shall include, but not be limited to, a description of the facts of
the event, the corrective measures used, and the steps taken to prevent a
recurrence of the incident. This condition does not supersede nor replace any
requirement of any other governmental entity for reporting incidents.
   If required, a copy of the operators’ approved Business Emergency Response
Plans and the approved Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure Plans shall
be submitted to the Yolo County Health Department, prior to the commencement of
mining. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.404.   Annual production limits.
   Each surface mine shall operate within the limits of the annual production
level established in the mining and reclamation plan. Annual production may not
exceed the established annual level. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.405.   County road improvements.
   Each operator shall pay its fair share toward improvements required to
maintain Level of Service (LOS) “C” operations on County roads designated as
part of the haul route for the mine site. Fair share costs shall also be
required to improve existing operational deficiencies of the transportation
system. Where necessary, each operator shall participate in a funding program
operated by the County designed to ensure that all improvements are made in a
timely manner and that a reimbursement mechanism is in place to ensure
repayment of any costs contribution in excess of fair share amounts. (§ 2, Ord.
1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.406.   Cultural resources.
   Damaging effects on cultural resources shall be avoided whenever possible.
If avoidance is not feasible, the importance of the site shall be evaluated by
a qualified professional prior to the commencement of mining operations. If a
cultural resource is determined not to be important, both the resource and the
effect on it shall be reported to the Agency, and the resource need not be
considered further. If avoidance on an important cultural resource is not
feasible, a mitigation plan shall be prepared and implemented. The mitigation
plan shall explain the importance of the resource, describe the proposed
approach to mitigate destruction or damage to the site, and demonstrate how the
proposed mitigation would serve the public interest.
   If human skeletal remains are encountered during mining, all work within
seventy-five (75) feet shall immediately stop, and the    County Coroner shall
be notified within twenty-four (24) hours. If the remains are of Native
American origin, the appropriate Native American community identified by the
Native American Heritage Commission shall be contacted, an agreement for
treating or disposing of, with appropriate dignity, the remains and associated
grave goods shall be developed. If any cultural resources, such as chipped or
ground stone, historic debris, building foundations, or paleontological
materials are encountered during mining, then all work within seventy-five (75)
feet shall immediately stop and the Director shall be notified at once. Any
cultural resources found on the site shall be recorded by a qualified
archaeologist and the information shall be submitted to the Agency. (§ 2, Ord.
1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.407.   Drainage.
   During mining and reclamation operations, grading and revegetation shall
minimize erosion and convey storm water runoff from reclaimed mining areas to
natural outlets or interior basins. The condition of the land shall allow
sufficient drainage to prevent water pockets or undue erosion. Natural and
stormwater drainage shall be designed so as to prevent flooding on surrounding
properties and County rights-of-way. Appropriate erosion control measures shall
be incorporated into all surface water drainage systems. Grading plans shall be
reviewed by the County to evaluate compliance with drainage plan objectives
prior to project approval. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.408.   Dust control.
   The following measures shall be implemented in order to control fugitive
dust:
   (a)   All stockpiled oils shall be enclosed, covered, or adequately watered
to keep soil moist at all times. Inactive soil stockpiles should be vegetated
or adequately watered to create an erosion-resistant outer crust.
   (b)   During operating hours, all disturbed soil and unpaved roads shall be
adequately watered to keep soil moist.
   (c)   All disturbed but inactive portions of the site shall either be seeded
or watered until vegetation is grown or shall be stabilized using methods such
as chemical soil binders, jute netting, or other Yolo-Solano Air Quality
Management District approved methods. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.409.   Equipment maintenance.
   All internal combustion engine driven equipment and vehicles shall be kept
tuned according to the manufacturer’s specifications and properly maintained to
minimize the leakage of oils and fuel. No vehicles or equipment shall be left
idling for a period of longer than ten (10) minutes. Fueling and maintenance
activities of heavy equipment are prohibited within one-hundred (100) feet of
open bodies of water during mining and reclamation. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff.
December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.410.   Erosion control.
   The grading of final slopes, the placement of soil, and associated erosion
control measures shall take place prior to November 1 in areas where mining has
been completed. To minimize erosion, the finish grading of disturbed slopes
shall be performed as soon as practical after mining has been completed. A
drought-tolerant, weed-free mix of native and non-native grass species shall be
established on slopes prior to November 1 or alternate erosion control (mulch
or netting) shall be placed on exposed soil on the slopes prior to this date.
Phasing of mining to minimize the length of exposed mining slopes during the
rainy season is encouraged. An extension to the November 1 deadline may be
granted in writing at the discretion of the Director, weather conditions
permitting. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.411.   Fence row habitat.
   Where fence row or field margin habitat previously existed, similar habitat
shall be reestablished as part of reclamation to replace and improve the
wildlife habitat value of agricultural lands. Reestablished fence row habitat
shall include, but not be limited to scattered native trees, shrubs, and ground
covers along the margins of reclaimed fields. Reestablished habitat can be
located in areas other than where it occurred originally. Restoration plans
shall specify ultimate fence row or field margin locations, identify planting
densities for trees and shrubs, and include provisions for monitoring and
maintenance to ensure establishment. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.412.   Field drainage.
   Reclaimed agricultural surfaces shall be graded to provide adequate field
gradients to allow surface/furrow irrigation of crops and allow for adequate
storm water drainage. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.413.   Field releveling.
   The operator shall retain a Licensed Land Surveyor or Registered Civil
Engineer to survey any areas reclaimed to agricultural usage after the first
two (2) crop seasons have been completed. Any areas where settling has occurred
shall be releveled to the field grade specified in the appropriated reclamation
plan. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.414.   Lighting.
   All lighting shall be arranged and controlled so as not to illuminate public
rights-of-way or adjacent properties. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.415.   Mining in reclaimed lands.
   Once the reclamation plan or any portion thereof has been completed, no
further surface mining operations shall be allowed within reclaimed lands,
without approval of an amendment to the surface mining permit and reclamation
plan. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.416.   Noise: General standard.
   From 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., noise levels shall not exceed an average noise
level equivalent (Leq) of eighty (80) decibels (dBA) measured at the property
boundaries of the site. Noise levels shall not exceed an average noise level
equivalent (Leq) of sixty (60) decibels (dBA) for any nearby off-site
residences or other noise-sensitive land uses.
   From 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., noise levels shall not exceed an average noise
level equivalent (Leq) of sixty –five (65) decibels (dBA) measured at the
property boundaries of the site.
   At no time shall noise levels exceed a community noise equivalent (CNEL) of
sixty (60) decibels (dBA) for any existing residence or other noise-sensitive
land use. An existing residence shall be considered the property line of any
residentially zoned area or, in the case of agricultural land, any occupied
off-site residential structures. Achieving the noise standards may involve
setbacks, the use of quieter equipment adjacent to residences, the construction
of landscaped berms between mining activities and residences, or other
appropriate measures. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.417.   Noise: Sonic safety devices.
   If mining occurs within fifteen-hundred (1500) feet of residences, equipment
used during nighttime activities shall be equipped with non-sonic warning
devices consistent with the California Office of Safety Hazard Administration
(Cal OSHA) regulations, which may include fencing of the area to avoid
pedestrian traffic, adequate lighting of the area, and placing an observer in
clear view of the equipment operator to direct backing operations. Prior to
commencement of operations without sonic warning devices, operators shall file
a variance request with the California OSHA Standards Board showing that the
proposed operation would provide equivalent safety to adopted safety
procedures, including sonic devices. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.418.   Operational areas.
   Operational areas and haul roads that are not required for future use of the
site shall be ripped, resoiled, and prepared accordingly, to allow for future
agricultural usage. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.419.   Other agency approvals.
   Operators shall obtain any and all permits and approvals required by other
agencies having jurisdiction over the agricultural mining and reclamation
operations and shall provide copies to the County prior to commencement of
operations. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.420.   Parking.
   All operations shall provide sufficient off-street parking to accommodate
customers, employees, and all mining equipment. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December
6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.421.   Permanent stockpiles.
   There shall be no permanent piles of mine waste, soil stockpiles, and/or
overburden once reclamation has been completed. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December
6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.422.   Phasing plans.
   All proposed mining and reclamation plans shall present a phasing plan for
mining and reclamation activities. The phasing plan shall be structured to
minimize the area of disturbed agricultural lands during each mining phase, and
encourage the early completion of the reclamation of agricultural land. (§ 2,
Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.423.   Planting plans.
   Site-specific planting plans shall be developed by a qualified biologist
where habitat reclamation is proposed. Restoration components of reclamation
plans shall include provisions to enhance habitat for special-status species,
where feasible. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.424.   Repair of damage due to Natural Disaster.
   The cost of implementing recommendations for repair of land damaged during
earthquakes or other natural events while in the process of reclamation shall
be met through application of contingency costs provided for by the project’s
financial assurances as required by the Act. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6,
2001)
Sec. 10-8.425.   Sanitary facilities.
   At least one toilet shall be provided for each off-channel mining operation.
Chemical toilets shall be properly maintained and serviced regularly. Permanent
toilets shall be properly engineered and the design approval by the Yolo County
Building Official and the Environmental Health Department prior to
installation. All on-site water storage facilities shall be labeled “potable”
or “non-potable.” (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.426.   Setbacks.
   All agricultural surface mining operations shall comply with the following
setbacks:
   (a)   Soil and/or material stockpiles shall be located a minimum of five-
hundred (500) feet from public rights-of-way, public recreation areas, and off-
site residences, unless alternate measures to reduce potential noise, dust and
aesthetic impacts are developed and implemented;
   (b)   If appropriate, mining located within one-thousand (1,000) feet of
either public rights-of-way or off-site residences shall be effectively
screened fro public view by a fence row buffer or constructed berm. Fence row
landscaping plans shall identify planting densities for trees and shrubs, and
include provisions for monitoring and maintenance to ensure establishment; and
   (c)   All agricultural mines shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25)
feet from riparian vegetation. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.427.   Site maintenance.
   During operations, the site shall be kept free of debris and maintained in a
neat and orderly manner so as not to create any hazardous or unsightly
conditions. All overburden shall be stockpiled and all stumps, brush, or other
debris resulting from mining and/or processing shall be properly disposed. (§
2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.428.   Slopes.
   All banks shall be sloped no steeper than 2:1 (horizontal:vertical).
Proposed steeper slopes shall be evaluated by a slope stability study, prepared
by a Registered Civil Engineer, registered in the State of California . (§ 2,
Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.429.   Soil removal.
   Soil shall be cut in maximum depths in order to minimize traffic and limit
compaction. The handling and transportation of soil shall be minimized. All
handling of topsoil shall be accomplished when the soil is dry in order to
avoid undue compaction. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.430.   Soil ripping.
   Areas reclaimed to agricultural usage shall have all A and B horizon soil
ripped to a depth of three (3) feet after every two (2) foot layer of soil is
laid down, in order to minimize compaction. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6,
2001)
Sec. 10-8.431.   Soil stockpiles.
   Topsoil, subsoil, and subgrade materials in stockpiles shall not exceed
forty (40) feet in height, with slopes no steeper than 2:1 (horizontal:
vertical). Soil stockpiles shall be seeded with a vegetative cover to prevent
erosion and leaching. The use of topsoil for purposes other than reclamation
shall not be allowed. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.432.   Soil use.
   Topsoils classified as prime agricultural land shall be reserved for on-site
crop reclamation. If mined areas are not proposed to be reclaimed to crop uses,
then such topsoils shall be used to supplement and/or enhance the productivity
of other agriculture lands. Topsoils removed from prime agricultural land shall
not be used for backfill or other non-agricultural uses. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff.
December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.433.   Vegetation protection.
   Existing vegetation and habitat to be retained shall be enclosed by
temporary fencing to restrict access, protect against damage and/or provide
buffers to reduce the impact of dust. Temporary fencing shall be a minimum of
four (4) feet high. Replacement habitat and plantings shall be established
where complete avoidance is not possible, according to a habitat restoration
plan prepared by a qualified biologist, consistent with the goals of this plan.
(§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.434.   Wetlands.
   Existing jurisdictional wetlands shall be retained to the extent possible.
Replacement wetlands shall be provided where complete avoidance is not possible
according to a habitat restoration plan prepared by a qualified wetland
specialist and approved by jurisdictional agencies, ensuring no net loss of
wetland acreage or habitat value. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.435.   Wildlife habitat.
   Disturbance to important wildlife habitat features such as nest areas and
essential cover associated with riparian and/or hedgerow areas shall be
avoided. This shall include the sensitive siting of activities associated with
the mining and reclamation operations away from important wildlife habitat.
Such activities may include but shall not be limited to haul roads, soil
stockpiles, and equipment storage/operational areas. Essential habitat for
special-status species shall be protected and enhanced, or replaced in
accordance with a habitat restoration plan prepared by a qualified biologist.
(§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.436.   Exceptions.
   Where an operator demonstrates to the lead agency that an exception to the
standards specified in this Article is necessary, the Commission may approve an
alternative standards for inclusion in the approved surface mining permit.
Exceptions shall only be approved where the strict application of the
agricultural mining and reclamation standards would deprive the operator of
privileges enjoyed by other agricultural mining operators in the vicinity, due
to special circumstances associated with the subject site, including size,
shape, topography, location, or surroundings. Although the Commission may set
alternative standards, in no case may the Commission set ay standard that does
not meet or exceed the policy objectives set forth in this chapter and the
standards contained in the Act. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Article 5.
Surface Mining Permit and Reclamation Plan Approval Process
Sec. 10-8.501.   Scope.
   The procedures set forth in Article 5 of Chapter 4 and Article 6 of Chapter
5 of Title 10 shall apply throughout this chapter, unless specified otherwise
herein. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.502.   Applications: Contents.
   Except as provided for in Section
10-4.503 of the County Code , all documentation for the surface mining permit
shall be submitted to the Director at one time. One (1) complete copy of the
application shall be provided to the County. Applications for proposed surface
mining permits and reclamation plans shall include, but shall not be limited
to, the following:
   (a)   A description of the proposed agricultural surface mining and
reclamation operations, including the following information;
   (1)   A signed statement that the person submitting the application accepts
responsibility for implementing the approved reclamation plan;
   (2)   The name and address of the proposed surface mine operator and the
names and addresses of any persons designated by the operator to act as an
agent for the applicant through the permit process;
   (3)   The names and addresses of the owners of all surface interests and
mineral interest in the lands to be mined;
   (4)   Evidence that all owners of a possessory interest in the lands
included in the application have given authority to the applicant to conduct
surface mining as proposed and to implement the reclamation plan as proposed;
   (5)   The anticipated quantity and type of minerals for which the proposed
surface mining operation will be conducted, including the estimated maximum
annual production;
   (6)   The length of time for mining and reclamation. If phasing is proposed,
beginning and completion dates shall be provided for each phase. Total acreage
proposed for mining and for reclaimed agricultural uses shall also be provided.
   (7)   The maximum anticipated depth of the proposed surface mining
operation.
   (8)   An assessment of the effect of implementation of the reclamation plan
on future mining in the area;
   (9)   A description of the general geology of the region, including a
detailed description of the geology of the area in which surface mining is to
be conducted;
   (10)   The manner in which waste generated by the surface mining operation
will be disposed and the methods by which contamination will be controlled
during surface mining;
   (11)   A description of the manner in which affected streambed channels and
streambanks will be rehabilitated to a condition minimizing erosion and
sedimentation;
   (12)   A description of any lands within the project site that are currently
under a Land Conservation (Williamson) Act Contract and/or in an Agricultural
Preserve, including any lands for which a Notice of Nonrenewal has been filed
and the date of expiration. Proposed mined lands that meet the definition of
“prime agricultural land” shall also be identified;
   (13)   A description of how the proposed project complies with the
compatibility findings provided in Section 51238 et seq. of the California
Government Code (the Williamson Act), if applicable;
   (14)   The methods to be used for on-site and off-site surface water
drainage and erosion control during surface mining and reclamation operations;
   (15)   The proposed hours of operation, including the estimated number of
nights when surface mining operations may be necessary;
   (16)   The projected number of average truck trips per year, average truck
trips per day, estimated maximum truck trips on peak days, estimated number of
peak days per year, and estimated months in which peak days will occur. The
information shall also specify a designated truck route;
   (17)   A soil analysis to evaluate the methods and feasibility of restoring
those portions of the mined site to agricultural productivity, including
discussions of current and reclaimed soil conditions and classifications, the
types of crops grown on the lands proposed for reclamation and their historic
yields for a minimum of five (5) years, and projected production of reclaimed
agricultural lands. The analysis shall also include detailed plans for the
removal and replacement of topsoil and overburden, including cross-sections of
the areas to be reclaimed to agriculture, the depth of soils replaced, field
irrigation slope grades, detention basins, and the relationship between
finished field elevations and the groundwater level for the site;
   (18)   If the proposed reclaimed agricultural use is for aquaculture,
livestock, dairy, or other alternative non-crop production, the applicant shall
provide information regarding projected yields and sales for a three-year
period after mining has been completed, as well as comparisons between the
estimated price of the alternative agricultural production and historic on-site
price and yield data; and
   (19)   A description of all lands within the subject site under conservation
easement and a copy of the easement agreement.
   (b)   A site plan submitted in the form prescribed by the Planning Director,
including all property proposed to be included in the mined area, drawn to a
scale of one inch equals one-hundred feet (1” = 100’), or other scale
acceptable to the Director for larger holdings. Small-scale, reproducible
copies shall be provided along with all site plans submitted. Site plans shall
show the following information;
   (1)   All property lines, including the boundaries of all parcels proposed
for mining and reclamation; the boundaries of any ownerships, leases, and/or
other entitlements vested in the surface mining operator which allow surface
mining and reclamation to be conducted on-site; and all Assessor parcel numbers
for properties included in the application;
   (2)   The location of all streams, residences, roads, railroads, and utility
facilities within, or adjacent to, the lands to be mined;
   (3)   The location and condition of any previously mined areas within the
site, specifically designating those portions of the site, if any, where mining
was completed prior to January 1, 1976, and which is claimed to be exempt from
the requirements of the Act;
   (4)   The existing and proposed topography of all mined and reclaimed lands;
   (5)   The location of all development proposed as a part of the surface
mining operations, including settling basins, drainage conveyances, equipment,
fences, and other man-made structures;
   (6)   The locations for the storage of overburden and topsoil material in
any proposed stockpiles;
   (7)   The proposed access roads, driveways, haul roads, and parking areas
proposed as a part of the surface mining operation; and
   (8)   The location of existing vegetation, including areas where vegetation
is proposed to be removed and/or avoided;
   (c)   A legal description for all parcels included in the application with a
basis of bearing in the California Coordinate System (NAD 27 or NAD 83);
   (d)   An estimate of the financial assurances necessary to implement the
proposed reclamation plan, or phases thereof, prepared in accordance with
Article 12 of this chapter.
   (e)   A set of completed application forms provided by the Agency, and all
pertinent information required therein.
   (f)   In addition to the foregoing, the Director may require such other and
further information relevant to the project as needed to determine whether the
proposal may affect the public health and safety. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff.
December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.503.   Public Hearing: Findings for Approval
   The Commission or, on appeal, the Board may approve an agricultural surface
mining permit and/or reclamation plan at a public hearing pursuant to this
chapter only if all of the following findings are made:
   (a)   That the proposed agricultural surface mining permit, reclamation
plan, and financial assurances comply with the Act and this chapter;
   (b)   That the proposed agricultural mining and reclamation shall be
conducted pursuant to a surface mining permit and reclamation plan granted in
accordance with this chapter, or that the operator has vested rights to conduct
surface mining pursuant to the Act;
   (c)   That the site, during agricultural surface mining and after
reclamation, will not be detrimental to the public health and safety, giving
consideration to the degree and type of present and probably future exposure of
the public to the site;
   (d)   That the agricultural surface mining permit and reclamation plan and
consistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plans, and the zoning
of the site;
   (e)   That agricultural surface mining and reclamation are compatible with
the existing and probable future uses of surrounding lands, as designated in
the General Plan;
   (f)   That the site is physically suitable for agricultural surface mining
and reclamation, giving consideration, but not limited to such factors as on-
site soil conditions, local groundwater conditions, flood protection, drainage,
wildlife habitat, public access, and aesthetics;
   (g)   That the environmental document for the proposed surface mining permit
was prepared, in accordance with the provisions of CEQA and the State CEQA
Guidelines;
   (h)   That a written response to the State Department of Conservation has
been prepared and considered, describing the disposition of major issues raised
by the Department;
   (i)   That the estimated financial assurances reasonably approximate the
probably costs of carrying out the agricultural reclamation plan;
   (j)   That the proposed mine is consistent with all of the applicable
findings included within Section 51238 et seq. of the California Government
Code (the Williamson Act), for any lands located within a Land Conservation
(Williamson) Act Contract. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Article 6.
Amendments and Modifications to Approved Surface Mining Permits and Reclamation
Plans
Sec. 10-8.601.   Scope.
   The procedures set forth in Article 6 of Chapter 4 and Article 8 of Chapter
5 of Title 10 shall apply throughout this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff.
December 6, 2001)
Article 7.
Annual Reports
Sec. 10-8.701.   Scope.
   The procedures set forth in Article 7 of Chapter 4 of Title 10 shall apply
throughout this chapter, unless specified otherwise herein. (§ 2, Ord. 1276,
eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.702.   Annual Reports: Contents.
   In addition to the annual mine report required by Public Resources Code
Section 2207, every surface mining operator shall submit to the County an
annual report of surface mining and reclamation operations no later than
November 1 of each year, describing the activities of the previous twelve (12)
months. Annual reports shall no longer be required, once final reclamation has
been completed and financial assurances have been released. Such reports shall
include, but may not be limited to, the following information.
   (a)   A site plan submitted in the form prescribed by the Planning Director,
including all property approved under the reclamation plan, drawn to a scale of
one inch equals one-hundred feet (1” = 100’), or other scale acceptable to the
Director for larger holdings, and showing the following information.
   (1)   property boundaries and the boundaries of permitted mining areas,
including the depiction of separate mining phases;
   (2)   Existing contours, including the areas and depth of mining which have
occurred since the previous annual report;
   (3)   Identification of soil stockpiles, haul roads, settling ponds, habitat
avoidance areas, and processing facilities; and
   (4)   The extent of areas reclaimed since the previous annual report;
   (b)   A statement of the total amount of minerals produced since the date of
the initial permit approval and since the date of the preceding annual report.
Such information shall be consistent with the data submitted to the Department,
as required in the Act. Production information shall be considered confidential
under Article 9 of this chapter. Such reports shall be submitted as a
declaration under penalty of perjury;
   (c)   A statement describing the extent of mining carried out over the
previous year and the conformance of the operation with the approved
reclamation timetable and/or phasing plan. Said statement shall also describe
the proposed extent of operations to be carried out during the following year;
   (d)   A report describing the previous year’s crop yields on any land in the
process of being reclaimed to agriculture in accordance with the approved
reclamation plan. The report shall include appropriate remedial measures
prepared by a qualified agronomist if crop and/or livestock yields do not meet
the production standards set forth in the approved reclamation plan;
   (e)   A statement describing the compliance of the agricultural surface
mining and reclamation operation with the approval conditions of approval;
   (f)   A statement describing the status of any permits or approval issued by
other agencies of jurisdiction;
   (g)   A report describing any slope failures or other erosion-related
problems located within the permitted mine area, occurring during the prior
twelve months, and the measures proposed to remediate erosion problems;
   (h)   A report describing the density, coverage, and survival of landscaping
or habitat for any on-site areas that are being revegetated with plans other
than agricultural crops in accordance with the approval reclamation plan. The
report shall compare the observed data with the performance standards set forth
in the approval reclamation plan and shall describe the remedial measures
proposed if the previous year’s revegetation efforts were not successful. (§ 2,
Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Article 8.
Fees
Sec. 10-8.801.   Fees: Applications.
   Each application for an agricultural surface mining permit, reclamation
plan, financial assurance, and/or any amendments and modifications thereto
shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as determined by the Master Fee
Resolution adopted by the Board. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 10-8.802.   Annual reviews and inspections.
   The operator shall be responsible for the payment of fees to cover the costs
incurred by the County in annually inspecting each mine site, as required under
the Act. Inspection fees shall be as determined by the Master Fee Resolution
adopted by the Board. This fee shall also cover the costs of the annual review
required under Article 7 of this chapter. Said fee shall be due within thirty
(30) days of written notification by the Director. Failure to pay the above
fees in a timely manner shall be considered a violation and may be enforced
under the provisions of Article 11 of this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff.
December 6, 2001)
Article 9.
Confidentiality of Records
Sec 10-8.901.   Scope.
   The procedures set forth in Article 9 of Chapter 4 of Title 10 shall apply
throughout this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Article 10.
Appeals
Sec. 10-8.1001.   Scope.
   The procedures set forth in Article 10 of Chapter 4 and Article 11 of
Chapter 5 of Title 10 shall apply throughout this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 1276,
eff. December 6, 2001)
Article 11.
Inspections: Notices of Violations
Sec. 10-8.1101. Scope.
   The procedures set forth in Article 11 of Chapter 4 and Article 12 of
Chapter 5 of Title 10 shall apply throughout this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 1276,
eff. December 6, 2001)
Article 12.
Financial Assurances
Sec. 10-8.1201.   Scope.
   The procedures set forth in Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 10 shall apply
throughout this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
Article 13.
Abandonment
Sec. 10-8.1301.   Scope.
   The procedures set forth in Article 9 of Chapter 5 of Title 10 shall apply
throughout this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 1276, eff. December 6, 2001)
CHAPTER 9
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
Sections:
Article 1.
General Provisions
   
10-9.101   Title.
   
10-9.102   Findings.
   
10-9.103   Purpose and Intent.
   
10-9.104   Definitions.
   
10-9.105   Construction.
   
10-9.106   Applicability.
   
10-9.107   Regulatory Consistency.
   
10-9.108   Compliance Disclaimer.
   
10-9.109   Severability.
   
10-9.110   Administration.
   
10-9.111   Disclaimer of Liability.
 
Article 2.
Prohibited Discharges
   
10-9.201   Prohibited Discharges.
   
10-9.202   Exceptions to Prohibited Discharges.
   
10-9.203   Exception to Otherwise Applicable Exemptions.
   
10-9.204   Threatened Prohibited Discharge.
   
10-9.205   Illicit Connections Prohibited.
   
10-9.206   Negligence or Intent Not Required.
   
10-9.207   Waste Disposal Prohibitions.
   
10-9.208   Discharges in Violation of Industrial or Construction Activity NPDES
Storm Water Discharge Permit.
Article 3.
Reduction of Pollutants in Stormwater
   
10-9.301   General Requirements.
   
10-9.302   Containment and Notification of Spills.
   
10-9.303   Best Management Practices.
   
10-9.304   Administrative Rules and Regulations.
Article 4.
Inspection and Monitoring
   
10-9.401   Authority to Enter and Inspect.
   
10-9.402   Authority to Sample, Establish Sampling Devices, and Test.
   
10-9.403   County Inspection of Stormwater Conveyance System.
   
10-9.404   Fee Structure Authorized.
Article 5.
Violations, Enforcement and Abatement
   
10-9.501   Violations.
   
10-9.502   Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance.
   
10-9.503   Violation of an Existing NPDES Permit.
   
10-9.504   Potential Violation of the Federal and/or State Stormwater Acts.
   
10-9.505   Enforcement Authority.
   
10-9.506   Notice of Violation.
   
10-9.507   Appeal.
   
10-9.508   Abatement by County.
   
10-9.509   Charging Cost of Abatement/Liens.
   
10-9.510   Compensatory Action.
   
10-9.511   Urgency Abatement.
Article 1.
General Provisions
Sec. 10-9.101.   Title.
   This Chapter shall be known as the “STORMWATER ORDINANCE” of Yolo County,
and may be so cited. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.102.   Findings.
   (a)   The Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., provides for
the regulation and reduction of pollutants discharged into the waters of the
United States by extending National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) requirements to stormwater and urban runoff discharge into the County
storm drain system.
   (b)   The State Water Resources Control Board (“State Board”) is the state
water pollution control agency for all purposes of the Clean Water Act pursuant
to Section 13160 of the California Water Code. The State Board is authorized by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) to administer the
NPDES program within the State. The Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act
(Water Code Section 13000 et seq.) provides authority for the State NPDES
program, including provisions to issue NPDES Permits and waste discharge
requirements to regulate discharges of stormwater to waters of the State.
   (c)   Due to amendments to the Clean Water Act, the USEPA developed a Phase
I and a Phase II program requiring municipalities to develop and implement
stormwater pollution management programs. Smaller municipalities and contiguous
areas with small, but still urban, communities come under the Phase II
regulations of the State Board’s General Permit for Discharges of Storm Water
from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (hereafter called the “Small
MS4 General Permit” where MS4 stands for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System). Yolo County falls under the Phase II regulations, which requires the
submittal of a Notice of Intent (NOI) to seek coverage under the “Small MS4
General Permit.”
   (d)   The County's Stormwater Management Program, adopted by the County on
December 7, 2004, requires the County to effectively prohibit non-stormwater
discharges from the unincorporated area of the County into the County storm
drain system except as otherwise permitted by law.
   (e)   The Board finds in this regard that the provisions of this Chapter are
necessary to provide the County with the legal authority necessary to implement
and otherwise comply with the requirements of the Stormwater Management Program
and to protect the waters of the State for the benefit of its people and the
environment. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.103.   Purpose and Intent.
   (a)   This Chapter is adopted pursuant to Article XI, Section 7 of the
California Constitution, which authorizes the County to exercise the police
power of the State by adopting regulations promoting the public health, public
safety, and the general welfare of its citizens. The purpose and intent of this
Chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water
bodies within the unincorporated areas of the County in a manner consistent
with the Clean Water Act, the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, and the
County Stormwater Management Program, by reducing pollutants in stormwater
discharges to the maximum extent practicable and by prohibiting non-stormwater
discharges from entering the storm drain system.
   (b)   It is the intent of the Board in adopting this Chapter to provide the
County with the legal authority to accomplish the following goals:
   (1)   to benefit the people and environment of the County by protecting
water quality in waters of the State;
   (2)   to reduce the discharge of pollutants in stormwater to the maximum
extent practicable, whether those discharges are made to the County storm drain
system, or directly to natural surface waters;
   (3)   to effectively prohibit non-stormwater discharges into the County
storm drain system or to natural surface waters;
   (4)   to establish requirements for stormwater management, including source
controls and best management practices, for development, redevelopment,
construction, post-construction, industrial, and municipal activities;
   (5)   to comply with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act, the
Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, and the Small MS4 General Permit as
they apply to the discharge of pollutants into and from the County storm drain
system;
   (6)   to fully implement and enforce the County's Stormwater Management
Program;
   (7)   to provide for the recovery of regulatory costs incurred by the County
in the implementation of this Chapter or its Stormwater Management Program,
including, but not limited to, enforcement activities, compliance assistance,
inspections, investigations, sampling and monitoring; and
   (8)   to establish appropriate enforcement procedures and penalties for
violations of the provisions of this Chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24,
2006)
Sec. 10-9.104.   Definitions.
   Any term(s)   defined in the Clean Water Act, as amended, and/or defined in
the regulations for the stormwater discharge permitting program issued by the
Environmental Protection Agency, as amended, and which are not specifically
defined in this Chapter shall, when used in this Chapter, have the same meaning
as set forth in said act or regulation.
   Certain words and phrases defined in the preceding sections of this Chapter
shall have the meanings set forth above. Additional defined terms used in this
Chapter shall have the meanings set forth below unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
   (a)   Administrator shall mean the Assistant Director of the County of
Yolo's Planning, Resources and Public Works Department and his or her
designees.
   (b)   Best Management Practices or BMPs shall mean schedules of activities,
prohibition of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce to the maximum extent practicable the
discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into stormwater conveyance
systems, receiving waters or to natural surface waters. BMPs shall also include
structural controls, treatment practices, source controls, training
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, and drainage from raw materials
storage.
   (c)   Board shall mean the Board of Supervisors of the County of Yolo.
   (d)   County shall mean the County of Yolo.
   (e)   County Storm Drain System shall mean those public man-made facilities
within the unincorporated area of the County that are owned, operated,
maintained or controlled by the County by which stormwater may be conveyed to
natural surface waters, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, catch basins, water quality basins,
detention basins, constructed wetlands, artificial channels, aqueducts,
ditches, altered drainage channels, reservoirs, sumps, pumping stations, storm
drain inlets, and storm drains.
   (f)   Development shall mean any activity that moves soils or substantially
alters the preexisting vegetated or man-made cover of any land. This includes
any activity that may be considered new development or redevelopment consisting
of, but not limited to, grading, digging, cutting, scraping, stockpiling or
excavating soil, placement of fill materials, paving, pavement removal,
exterior construction, substantial removal of vegetation where soils are
disturbed or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves streambed
alterations or the diversion or piping of any watercourse. Development does not
include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity, or the original purpose of the facility, nor does it include
emergency construction activities (i.e. land disturbances) required to protect
public health and safety.
   (g)   Discharge shall mean the release, threatened release, or placement of
any material into the County storm drain system or natural surface waters,
including, but not limited to, stormwater, wastewater, pollutants, solid
materials, liquids, hazardous waste, raw materials, debris, litter or any other
substance.
   (h)   Discharger shall mean any person who discharges, or causes to
discharge, either directly or indirectly, stormwater or any other material into
the County storm drain system or to natural surface waters.
   (i)   Illicit Connection shall mean any physical connection, including but
not limited to any drain or conveyance, to the County storm drain system or
natural surface waters, which is not expressly authorized by the County.
   (j)   Illicit Discharge shall mean any direct or indirect non-permitted or
non-exempt discharge to the County storm drain system or to the natural surface
waters that violates this Chapter, or a discharge prohibited by federal, state,
or local laws, which tend to degrade the quality of natural surface waters.
   (k)   Industry or Industrial Activity shall mean any service, business,
enterprise, or any other activity conducted by any person for the purpose of
monetary or other compensation, or in support of or promotion of such activity.
This term shall also mean any similar activity conducted by a non-profit
corporation as defined by the State of California.
   (l)   Hazardous Materials shall mean any material, including any substance,
waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infections characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   (m)   Material shall mean any substance, including, but not limited to, raw
materials, finished products, garbage and debris, lawn clippings, leaves and
other vegetation, biological and fecal waste, sediment and sludge, oil and
grease, gasoline, paints, solvents, cleaners and any fluid or solid containing
chemicals.
   (n)   Maximum Extent Practicable shall mean a technology-based standard
established by Congress in the Clean Water Act § 402(p)(3)(B)(iii) that applies
to municipalities regulated by the Small MS4 General Permit. The major focus is
on technology-based pollution prevention and source control BMPs as the first
line of defense with feasibility, cost, effectiveness, and public acceptance as
relevant considerations. As knowledge about controlling pollution of urban
runoff continues to evolve, so will what constitutes the Maximum Extent
Practicable.
   (o)   National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit or NPDES Permit
shall mean general, group, and individual storm water discharge permits which
regulate facilities defined in federal NPDES regulations promulgated pursuant
to the federal Clean Water Act. The Regional Board, as defined below, and the
State Board, as defined above, have adopted general storm water discharge
permits, including but not limited to the General Construction Activity and
General Industrial Activity permits.
   (p)   Natural Surface Waters shall mean creeks, natural ponds or lakes,
wetlands, the Sacramento River, Cache Creek, Putah Creek, the Yolo Bypass and
shall include any waters of the State and any waters of the United States
contained within the boundaries of the State. Natural Surface Waters shall not
mean any wet or dry detention basin, constructed wetland, stormwater treatment
facility, artificial lake or pond or other man-made body of water.
   (q)   Non-Stormwater Discharge shall mean any discharge to the County storm
drain system or directly to natural surface waters that is not composed
entirely of storm water, including discharges that do not originate as surface
runoff and drainage from rainstorm events and snow melt, but essentially result
partly or entirely from human activities, or materials or processes under a
person’s control. Non-stormwater discharges include, but are not limited to,
discharges of: (1) water that has been used by a person for any purpose such as
cleaning, rinsing, cooling, irrigating, aquaculture, recreation, cooking, and
industrial purposes; (2) water or wastewater that originates or flows from
equipment, valves, piping, hoses, containers, tanks, or other man-made
apparatus; or (3) any discharge of materials or wastes other than water.
   (r)   Person shall mean any natural person as well as any corporation,
partnership, public agency, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint
venture, business entity or other similar entity, or the agent, employee or
representative of any of the above.
   (s)   Pollutant shall mean any substance that causes or contributes to
pollution, as defined herein. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to:
solid, medical, or industrial waste; wrecked or discarded equipment or
machinery; hazardous substances or radioactive material; dredged soil, rock or
sand; volatile organic carbons; oil, grease, or other petroleum hydrocarbon;
pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers; animal or human wastes or sewage;
dissolved and particulate metals; wastes resulting from construction activities
(including, but not limited to, sediments, slurries and concrete rinsates); and
noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
   (t)   Pollution shall mean the human-made or human-induced alteration of the
quality of waters by pollutants to a degree which unreasonably affects, or that
has the potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses
or the facilities, which serve these beneficial uses. Pollution includes, but
is not limited to, the alteration of the quality of waters by pollutants to a
degree that that causes or contributes to an exceedance of water quality
standards contained in the Statewide Water Quality Control Plan, the California
Toxics Rule, or in the applicable Regional Water Quality Control Board Basin
Plan.
   (u)   Regional Board shall mean the California Regional Water Quality
Control Board, Central Valley Region.
   (v)   Stormwater shall mean any surface flow, runoff, and drainage
consisting entirely of water resulting from rainstorm events and snow melt,
which has not been polluted as a result of contact with man-made or natural
sources of pollutants.
   (w)   Subject Activities shall mean any activities, operations, or
facilities which discharge or have the potential to discharge pollutants into
the County storm drain system, natural surface waters, or watercourses. A
subject activity may be stationary or mobile, but that generate quantities or
concentrations that may cause pollution.
   (x)   Threatened Prohibited Discharge shall mean any condition or activity
that does not currently result in a prohibited discharge but is nevertheless
determined by the Administrator to be a condition which results in a
substantial likelihood of a future prohibited discharge.
   (y)   Watercourses shall mean any channel or depression in which a flow of
water occurs, either continuously or intermittently, including above ground
portions of the storm drain system.
   (z)   Waters of the State shall mean all surface watercourses and water
bodies as defined at 40 Code of Federal Regulations § 122.2, including all
natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may
carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and
storms and may not carry stormwater at or during all times and seasons.
   (aa)   Waters of the United States shall have the same meaning as set forth
in Part 122.2 of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations or any successor
provisions. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.105.   Construction.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with
the requirements of the Clean Water Act and the Porter-Cologne Act and any acts
amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing
regulations, and Small MS4 General Permit and any amendment, revision or re-
issuance thereof. In the event of a conflict between this Chapter and any
Federal or State law, regulation, order or permit, the requirement that
establishes the higher standard for public health and safety shall govern. (§
1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.106.   Applicability.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all dischargers and
potential dischargers located within or without the unincorporated area of the
County that discharge either directly or indirectly into the County storm drain
system. This Chapter shall also apply to stormwater and non-stormwater
discharges made directly to natural surface waters within the unincorporated
area of the County.
   This Chapter shall apply to facilities subject to the State Construction
General Permit issued by the State Board; the pollutant control provisions of a
County-issued Building Permit; or any other instrument of the County that
establishes pollutant control provisions for construction sites. (§ 1, Ord.
1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.107.   Regulatory Consistency.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall take precedence over and are
controlling with respect to any conflicting or inconsistent provisions in this
Code. This Chapter shall also be construed to assure consistency with the
requirements of the Clean Water Act and the Porter-Cologne Act and acts
amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, any applicable implementing
regulations, and the Small MS4 General Permit, and any amendment, revision or
re-issuance thereof. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.108.   Compliance Disclaimer.
   Compliance by any person with the provisions of this Chapter shall not
preclude the need to comply with other local, state or federal statutory or
regulatory requirements relating to the control of pollutant discharges or
protection of stormwater quality, or both. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24,
2006)
Sec. 10-9.109.   Severability.
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases
of this Chapter. The Board hereby declares that it would have adopted this
Chapter and each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof without regard to whether any other section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter would
subsequently be declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. (§ 1, Ord. 1352,
eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.110.   Administration.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the authority to implement this Chapter
is vested in the Administrator who shall be responsible for the administration,
implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. Unless
otherwise specified herein, any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the
Administrator may be delegated by the Administrator to other County employees
or, upon the approval of the Board, to employees of other public agencies. (§
1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.111.   Disclaimer of Liability.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this Chapter are
minimum standards; therefore this Chapter does not imply that compliance will
ensure that there will be protection from liability including civil penalties
or that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge
of pollutants into natural surface waters or the waters of the United States.
This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the County, or any
officer or employee thereof for any damages that result from any discharger’s
reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Article 2.
Prohibited Discharges
Sec. 10-9.201.   Prohibited Discharges.
   Except as provided in Section
10-9.202, it shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made an
illicit discharge of any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or
waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of
applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater into the County storm
drain system, natural surface waters, or watercourses. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff.
August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.202.   Exceptions to Prohibited Discharges.
   The following non-stormwater discharges to the County storm drain system or
natural surface waters are exempt from otherwise applicable discharge
prohibition set forth in Section
10-9.201:
   (a)   Any discharge regulated under a NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the State of
California under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency
or under State authority, provided the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted by the County
of Yolo for any discharge to the storm drain system.
   (b)   The discharge of stormwater containing pollutants that has been
reduced to the maximum extent practicable by the application of best management
practices or other management measures set forth in the County’s Stormwater
Management Program
   (c)   Any discharge from any of the following activities, unless the
Administrator determines any otherwise exempt discharge causes or significantly
contributes to violations of the Clean Water Act, Porter-Cologne Act, or this
Chapter, or conveys significant quantities or concentrations of pollutants to
the County storm drain system, natural surface waters, or watercourses:
   (1)   water line flushing;
   (2)   landscape irrigation;
   (3)   diverted stream flows;
   (4)   rising groundwater;
   (5)   uncontaminated ground water infiltration [as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005
(20)];
   (6)   uncontaminated pumped ground water;
   (7)   discharges from potable water sources;
   (8)   foundation drains;
   (9)   air conditioning condensate;
   (10)   irrigation water;
   (11)   water from natural springs;
   (12)   water from crawl space pumps;
   (13)   footing drains;
   (14)   lawn watering;
   (15)   individual residential car washing;
   (16)   flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
   (17)   dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; or
   (18)   discharges of flows from emergency fire fighting activities.
   (d)   Any discharges that the Administrator, the County Health Officer or
the Regional Board determines in writing are necessary for the protection of
public health and safety.
   (e)   With written concurrence of the Regional Board, the Administrator may
exempt in writing additional categories of non-stormwater discharges determined
not to be sources of pollutants to the County of Yolo storm drain system or
natural surface waters. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.203.   Exception to Otherwise Applicable Exemptions.
   Notwithstanding the exemptions provided for in Section
10-9.202 above, if the Regional Board or the Administrator determines that a
discharge which is otherwise exempt from the prohibition on discharges causes
or significantly contributes to the violation of any Receiving Water Limitation
or results in the conveyance of significant quantities or concentrations of
pollutants into the County storm drain system or to natural surface waters, or
is otherwise a danger to public health or safety, the Administrator may give
written notice to the discharger that the exception shall not apply to the
discharge at issue following expiration of the thirty (30) day period
commencing upon delivery of the notice. Upon expiration of such thirty (30) day
period, any such discharge shall be unlawful. Upon finding that any discharge
poses an immediate significant threat to the environment or to public health
and safety, the Administrator may waive the thirty (30) day waiting period and
require immediate cessation of the discharge. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24,
2006)
Sec. 10-9.204.   Threatened Prohibited Discharge.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, or cause to be maintained,
a threatened prohibited discharge after having received notice of the
Administrator's determination as to the existence of a threatened prohibited
discharge. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.205.   Illicit Connections Prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, use or maintain, or
cause to establish, use or maintain, any illicit connection. Illicit
connections shall be subject to removal or abatement by the County pursuant to
Article 5 of this Chapter.
   (b)   The prohibition set forth in subsection (a)above shall apply to
illicit connections in existence at the time this Chapter becomes effective.
Upon the effective date of this Chapter, any person who maintains an illicit
connection shall have thirty (30) days to disconnect and discontinue use of
such connection or secure approval of such connection. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this Section, any person who maintains an illicit connection, as
defined in Section
10-9.104, may apply to the County for a permit to continue the connection
subject to applicable County Standards. The submission of a permit application
is not a substitute for compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and any
applicable requirements of state or federal law, and the County, irrespective
of whether a permit application has been submitted, may enforce this Chapter.
No permit shall be issued for any connection or any physical facility or
apparatus that is installed, intended, serves, or is known to convey a
prohibited illicit discharge to the County storm drain system, natural surface
waters, or watercourses in violation of this Chapter or any provision of state
or federal law. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.206.   Negligence or Intent Not Required.
   A violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall occur irrespective of
the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate or
utilize an illicit connection or to cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited
discharge. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.207.   Waste Disposal Prohibitions.
   No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be
thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private
property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the
County storm drain system, natural surface waters, or water of the U.S., any
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
articles, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to
pollution. Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for purposes
of municipal waste collection are exempted from this prohibition. (§ 1, Ord.
1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.208.   Discharges in Violation of Industrial or Construction Activity
NPDES Storm Water Discharge Permit.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm
water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof
of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the
Public Works Director prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site
plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of
the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other
reasonable cause. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Article 3.
Reduction of Pollutants in Stormwater
Sec. 10-9.301.   General Requirements.
   (a)   The Administrator is authorized to designate as subject activities any
activities, operations, or facilities identified as sources or potential
sources of pollutant discharges to the County storm drain system, natural
surface waters, or watercourses. A subject activity may occur at a stationary
facility or it may occur as a mobile activity that takes place at various job
sites.
   (b)   All persons engaged in subject activities that may result in
pollutants entering the County storm drain system, natural surface waters, or
watercourses shall implement Best Management Practices (BMPs), to the maximum
extent practicable, to prevent and/or reduce such pollutants from entering non-
stormwater discharges and/or stormwater discharges in accordance with Section
10-9.303, Best Management Practices, below.
   (c)   All BMPs shall be protected, inspected, and maintained to ensure
continuous and fully effective performance as designed. A maintenance and
inspection schedule for both dry and wet season BMPs shall be in writing and a
record shall be kept with dates, BMP inspected or maintained, a description of
any maintenance activity, and the name of the inspector or maintenance foreman.
This record shall be made available to the Administrator upon request.
   (d)   Every person owning or occupying property adjacent to or through which
a watercourse passes, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within said property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation,
and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly obstruct
the flow of water through the watercourse. The property owner or occupant shall
be responsible for obtaining and complying with any and all required permits
necessary for conducting such activities.
   (e)   Whenever the Administrator finds that a discharge of pollutants is
taking place or has occurred that results in or resulted in pollutants entering
the County storm drain system or natural surface waters, the Administrator
shall require by written notice to the owner or occupant of the property that
the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored within a
specified time pursuant to the provisions of Article 5, “Enforcement” below.
   (f)   The Administrator shall by written notice require that persons engaged
in subject activities and/or owning or operating designated facilities, which
may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illicit discharges, and/or
non-stormwater discharges into the County storm drain system, natural surface
waters, or watercourses, to undertake at said person’s expense such monitoring
and analyses and furnish such reports to the Administrator as deemed necessary
to determine compliance with this Chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24,
2006)
Sec. 10-9.302.   Containment and Notification of Spills.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or person conducting any subject activity that has
information of any spill, release or suspected release of pollutants or
prohibited materials which result or may result in an illegal discharge into
the County storm drain system or natural surface waters shall immediately take
all reasonable action to ensure the discovery, containment, cleanup, and to
otherwise minimize any such spill or release.
   In the event such a spill or release is of a hazardous material, said
responsible person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the
incidence by means of emergency dispatch services (911). Said responsible
person shall notify the County Communication line at (530) 666-8920 for
assistance.
   For a non-hazardous prohibited material spill or release that has been
contained and cleaned up, said responsible person shall notify the County
Department of Planning, Resources and Public Works in person, by telephone, or
facsimile no later than 5:00 p.m. the next business day. Notifications made in
person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice within three
business days of the personal or telephoned notice.
   For any discharge subject to the reporting requirements of the State of
California Water Code Sections 13271 and 13272, notification in compliance
therewith shall constitute sufficient notification for the purposes of this
Section. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.303.   Best Management Practices.
   (a)   Any person performing construction activities for which a building
permit has been issued shall implement appropriate Best Management Practices
(BMPs) to prevent the discharge of pollutants, to the maximum extent
practicable, from the site into the County storm drain system or natural
surface waters. These pollutants may include, but are not limited to, soils,
construction wastes or debris, contaminants from construction materials, tools,
and equipment.
   (b)   New development and redevelopment projects shall be required to
implement post-construction BMPs to control the volume, rate, and potential
pollutant load of stormwater runoff, including, but not limited to,
requirements to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants.
The owners or operators of facilities required to implement post-construction
BMPs shall enter into a maintenance agreement with the County for maintenance
of such features.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the presence or absence of requirements promulgated
pursuant to subsections (a)and (b), any person engaged in activities or
operations, or owning or operating facilities or property which will or may
result in pollutants entering the County storm drain system, or natural surface
waters shall implement BMPs to the maximum extent practicable to prevent and
reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide at the owner or operator’s expense all reasonable
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
pollutants into the County storm drain system or natural surface waters.
   (d)   Any facility which demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Administrator that it is in compliance with a State or Federal NPDES permit
waste discharge requirements or waiver from waste discharge requirements for
stormwater discharges shall be deemed to have met the requirements of the
Chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.304.   Administrative Rules and Regulations.
      (a)   The Administrator shall have the authority to implement all
previsions of this Chapter by promulgation of rules and regulations that are
consistent with this Chapter.
   (b)   Any rules and regulations promulgated by the Administrator, or
amendments thereof, shall be filed with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
The Clerk shall cause announcement of said rules or regulations to be published
in a newspaper of general circulation within ten calendar days. Such
announcements shall provide a reasonable summary of the content of the rule. In
addition, the Administrator shall make a reasonable effort to identify, notify,
and provide copies to any industries that are specifically designated by the
Administrator as subject to a rule or regulation. However, neither the failure
of the Administrator to provide such notice nor the failure to receive
individual notice shall exempt an industry from that rule or regulation. No
regulations promulgated by the Administrator, or amendments thereof, shall be
enforced or become effective until thirty (30) calendar days following the date
on which notification of the regulations are published.
   (c)   Any person who asserts that he or she is aggrieved by the terms or
application of a regulation issued pursuant to this Section may appeal the
issuance of such regulation by filing a written notice of appeal with the Clerk
of the Board pursuant to Yolo County Code Chapter 4, Appeals, of Title 1.
   (d)   Any regulation from which an appeal is filed prior to its effective
date shall not become effective until the date of a final determination by the
Board on the merits of the appeal. Any regulation from which an appeal is filed
on or subsequent to the effective date thereof shall remain in full force and
effect during the pendency of the appeal, and any decision that rescinds or
modifies the regulation shall apply prospectively. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August
24, 2006)
Article 4.
Inspection and Monitoring
Sec. 10-9.401.   Authority to Enter and Inspect.
   (a)   The Administrator, or the Administrator’s representative, has
authority to conduct inspections related to purposes of implementing this
Chapter on private or public property. Inspections shall be based upon such
reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the
objectives of the Chapter, including, but not limited to, visual evidence of an
actual or potential violation of any provision of this Chapter, complaints
received, knowledge or physical evidence of subject activities or other
pollutant sources, random sampling, sampling in areas with evidence of
stormwater contamination, illicit connections, discharge of non-stormwater to
the County storm drain system or natural surface waters, or similar factors.
   (b)   In the event the owner, occupant or operator refuses the
Administrator, or the Administrator’s representative, entry to said property
for purposes of conducting an inspection to determine compliance with this
Chapter, the Administrator is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any
court of competent jurisdiction to obtain such entry by the use of an
administrative inspection warrant or a criminal search warrant.
   (c)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of
this Chapter, or whenever the Administrator has cause to believe that there
exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this Chapter, the Administrator or his or her
designee may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same
and to inspect and copy records relating to compliance with the provisions of
this Chapter. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry a request to
enter and inspect has been made, the Administrator is hereby authorized to seek
assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain such entry. (§ 1,
Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.402.   Authority to Sample, Establish Sampling Devices, and Test.
   Authorization is hereby given the Administrator to enter private property
and to take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the
pursuit of an investigation and to record site activities. Notwithstanding
Section
10-9.301 (f)above, which requires the person owning, occupying, or operating
the premises at his expense to supply the Administrator samples and testing
results upon written notice, this Section gives the Administrator the authority
to enter private property and take such samples and perform such tests deemed
necessary in a stormwater violation investigation. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August
24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.403. County Inspection of Stormwater Conveyance System.
   County staff will inspect and monitor the stormwater conveyance system to
determine if illicit connections are present and if illegal discharges are
entering the stormwater conveyance system, County storm drain system, or
natural surface waters. If illegal discharges are detected, County staff will
inspect the system to determine the source of the illegal discharge. County
staff will notify the Administrator upon the detection of illicit connections
and illegal discharges so that the provisions of this Chapter can be
implemented. Regular inspection of the stormwater conveyance system will also
include periodic sampling of the stormwater to monitor its quality. The County
will impose a fee (based upon a fee schedule) for inspections of private
stormwater collection system discharges to the County system. (§ 1, Ord. 1352,
eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.404.   Fee Structure Authorized.
   The Administrator shall collect such fees as authorized by the Board of
Supervisors to provide for the recovery of regulatory costs, including, but not
limited to, routine inspections and other regulatory functions associated with
implementation of this Chapter. Any such fees shall be established by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Article 5.
Violations, Enforcement and Abatement
Sec. 10-9.501.   Violations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter. A violation or failure to
comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 2 of this
Code. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.502.   Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties hereinbefore
provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this Chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare,
and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored
by the County at the violator's expense, and/or civil action to abate, enjoin,
or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the County.
(§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.503   Violation of an Existing NPDES Permit.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit,.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the Administrator prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan,
building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the
facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other
reasonable cause. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.504   Potential Violation of the Federal and/or State Stormwater
Acts.
   Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or any provision of
any requirement issued pursuant to this Chapter, may also be in violation of
the Clean Water Act and/or the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and may
be subject to sanctions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties.
Any enforcement action authorized under this Chapter shall also include written
notice to the violator of such potential liability. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff.
August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.505.   Enforcement Authority.
   (a)   Any person who violates a provision of this Chapter is subject to
either administrative, civil, or criminal liability as provided in this
Chapter.
   (b)   The Administrator is granted the authority to use any of the
provisions of Sections
10-9.506 through
10-9.511, where appropriate, to correct violations of and to secure compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.506.   Notice of Violation.
   (a)   Whenever the Administrator determines that a person in responsible
position has violated this Chapter, or that a violation may occur, the
Administrator may provide a warning to the person responsible for the condition
giving rise to such violation or potential violation. At the Administrator’s
discretion such warning may include the distribution of educational materials
to assist in future compliance with this Chapter. Issuance of a warning shall
not be a requirement prior to using any enforcement provisions of this Chapter
   (b)   Whenever the Administrator determines that a violation has occurred,
or may occur, the Administrator may serve a Notice of Noncompliance to any
person responsible for the violation or potential violation. Each Notice of
Noncompliance shall contain the following information:
   (1)   The date of the violation;
   (2)   The address or a definite description of the location where the
violation occurred;
   (3)   The Chapter Section violated and a description of the violation;
   (4)   A description of how the violation can be corrected;
   (5)   A time limit by which the noncompliance shall be corrected;
   (6)   A description of further enforcement and/or corrective actions to be
taken by the County if noncompliance is not fully corrected by the time limit.
   (7)   The name and signature of the individual preparing the Notice of
Noncompliance; and
   (8)   Notice of potential liability under the Clean Water Act or Porter-
Cologne Water Quality Act.
   (c)   In lieu of or following the procedures set forth in subsections (a)and
(b), above, if the Administrator finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this Chapter, the Administrator may order
compliance by issuing a written notice of violation to the responsible person.
Such notice may require without limitation the following:
   (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
   (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
   (3)   The violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
   (4)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination
and the restoration of any affected property;
   (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
   (6)   The implementation or maintenance of source control facilities or
treatment BMP’s.
   (7)   Notice of potential liability under the Clean Water Act or the Porter-
Cologne Water Quality Act.
   (d)   If abatement for a violation and/or restoration of affected property
is required, the notice shall set fourth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise
that, should the violator fail to remedy or restore within the established
deadline, the work will be done by the County or a contractor designated by the
Administrator and the expense thereof shall be changed to the violator pursuant
to Section
10-9.509 below. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.507.   Appeal.
   Notwithstanding the provisions in Section
10-9.509 below, any person receiving a written notice of violation under
Section
10-9.506 above may appeal the determination of the Administrator pursuant to
the provisions of Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August
24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.508.   Abatement by County.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in Section
10-9.506 above, or in the event of an appeal under Section
10-9.507, within 10 days of the decision of the Board of Supervisors upholding
the decision of the Administrator, then the County or a contractor designated
by the Administrator shall enter upon the subject private property and is
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or
restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or
person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the Administrator or
designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth
above. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.509.   Charging Cost of Abatement/Liens.
   Within 30 days after abatement of the nuisance by the County, the
Administrator shall notify the property owner of the cost of abatement,
including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest
objecting to the amount of the assessment with the County Clerk within 14 days.
The County Clerk shall set the matter for public hearing by the Board of
Supervisors. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be set forth by
resolution and shall be final.
   If the amount due is not paid within 10 days of the decision of the Board of
Supervisors or the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal under this
article, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and
shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. A
copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the County Auditor so that the
auditor may enter the amounts of the assessment against the parcel as it
appears on the current assessment roll, and the tax collector shall include the
amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes levied against the parcel of
land. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.510.   Compensatory Action.
   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by
this Chapter, the Administrator may impose upon a violator alternative
compensatory actions, including but not limited to storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. (§ 1, Ord. 1352, eff.
August 24, 2006)
Sec. 10-9.511.   Urgency Abatement.
   The Administrator is authorized to require immediate abatement of any
violation of this Chapter that constitutes an immediate threat to the health,
safety or well being of the public. If any such violation is not abated
immediately as directed by the Administrator, the County is authorized to enter
onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remedy the
violation. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the County
shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. (§ 1,
Ord. 1352, eff. August 24, 2006).
Chapter 10
HABITAT MITIGATION ORDINANCE
Sections:
Article 1. Title and Purposes
   
10-10.101   Title.
   
10-10.102   Purposes.
Article 2. Definitions
   
10-10.201   Agriculture or Agricultural.
   
10-10.202   Applicant.
   
10-10.203   Covered Habitat Mitigation Project.
   
10-10.204   Create or Creation.
   
10-10.205   Deciding Authority.
   
10-10.206   Director.
   
10-10.207   Enhance or Enhancement.
   
10-10.208   General Plan.
   
10-10.209   Grading.
   
10-10.210   Habitat.
   
10-10.211   Person.
   
10-10.212   Preserve or Preservation.
   
10-10.213   Project.
   
10-10.214   Restore or Restoration.
   
10-10.215   Site.
   
10-10.216   Substantial Evidence.
Article 3. Permits
   
10-10.301   Permit requirement; exemptions and excluded activities.
   
10-10.302   Permit contents, processing, and decisions.
   
10-10.303   Decisionmaking criteria.
   
10-10.304   Permit term; amendments.
Article 4. Appeals
   
10-10.401   Appeal procedure.
Article 5. Violations
   
10-10.501   Generally.
   
10-10.502   Public nuisance.
Article 6. Periodic Reviews; Mapping
   
10-10.601   Initial review.
   
10-10.602   Future reviews.
   
10-10.603   Failure to conduct reviews.
   
10-10.604   Project mapping.
Article 1. Title and Purposes
Sec. 10-10.101.   Title.
   This Chapter shall be known as the "Habitat Mitigation Ordinance" of the
County. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.102.   Purposes.
   The County's land use planning efforts have consistently anticipated that
local landowners—often in conjunction with assistance from non-profits and
state agencies—will voluntarily undertake a modest amount of habitat creation,
restoration, enhancement, and preservation actions. Similarly, the County has
long coordinated urban development and related land use planning matters with
the incorporated cities of Woodland, Davis, Winters, and West Sacramento.
Projects within these jurisdictions have occasionally impacted biological
resources, and the County intends to continue to accommodate the preservation
of land in the unincorporated area as compensatory mitigation for such local
habitat impacts.
   In the foreseeable future, however, the County expects that the
unincorporated area will increasingly be the subject of mitigation projects and
similar efforts that arise in connection with impacts to biological resources
occurring largely or entirely outside the geographic boundaries of the County.
Such projects include mitigation banks with service areas extending far beyond
the County—of which there are already a number—as well as various other
endeavors to create, restore, enhance, and preserve habitat as a consequence of
projects and activities occurring in locations outside of the County. These
projects are the focus of this Chapter, while other purely local preservation
and mitigation efforts are generally outside of its scope.
   This Chapter provides for limited County regulation of certain habitat
projects taking place within the County in connection with projects and
activities occurring largely or entirely outside of the County. Such projects
are unique in many respects. For example, wetland habitat projects can provide
important habitat areas for fish, wildlife, and plants. They can also help
maintain and enhance water quality, facilitate groundwater recharge, mitigate
flooding, and control erosion. Some wetland habitat projects can also provide
educational, scientific study, and recreational opportunities. The same is true
of other types of habitat projects undertaken as compensatory mitigation. For
these and other reasons, such projects can thus be a significant asset to the
environment and the general public so long as they adequately replace the
habitat area, values, and functions lost due to urban development or other
projects or activities.
   Nonetheless, to assure these projects benefit the County and do not unduly
interfere with its land use planning efforts or the eventual implementation of
the Yolo Natural Heritage Program, careful planning is necessary. Attention to
matters of location, design, construction, and long-term monitoring and
management is essential. Particularly for larger projects, early consideration
of ways to integrate appropriate educational, recreational, scientific, and
other opportunities is also desirable. Finally, the potential local and
regional environmental and economic impacts of habitat projects—such as the
conversion of farmland and existing species habitat, as well as conflicts with
surrounding land uses and activities—deserves close attention and
consideration. It is for these reasons that the Delta Reform Act of 2009 states
that the goals of "providing a more reliable water supply for California and
protecting, restoring, and enhancing the Delta ecosystem" are to be achieved in
a manner "that protects and enhances the unique cultural, recreational, natural
resource, and agricultural values of the Delta as an evolving place."
   Accordingly, this Chapter is intended to promote the foregoing objectives
and to achieve the following purposes:
   (a)   To help ensure that out of county mitigation projects are located,
constructed, and managed in a manner that is consistent with the General Plan
and the developing Yolo Natural Heritage Program, compatible with surrounding
land uses to the extent feasible, and sensitive to the need for a strong local
economy, the protection of existing biological resources, flood protection,
vector control, and other appropriate local and regional concerns.
   (b)   To encourage the proponents of such habitat projects—particularly
large out of county mitigation projects—to design and implement projects that
achieve multiple environmental and community objectives, and that include
management plans or similar means of ensuring the responsible stewardship of
such projects over time.
   (c)   To ensure that habitat projects undertaken in furtherance of the
"coequal goals" and the habitat restoration objectives of the Delta Reform Act
proceed in a manner that is faithful to the Act in its entirety, including its
basic policy direction that the coequal goals of "providing a more reliable
water supply for California and protecting, restoring, and enhancing the Delta
ecosystem" are to be achieved in a manner "that protects and enhances the
unique cultural, recreational, natural resource, and agricultural values of the
Delta as an evolving place."
   (d)   To expand opportunities for the County and interested citizens to
participate in the process of reviewing such habitat projects by establishing a
permitting process that includes public hearing requirements and other
opportunities for public input.
   (e)   To continue to encourage wildlife-friendly agricultural practices and
voluntary habitat restoration and preservation efforts, and to continue to
accommodate other habitat projects undertaken in connection with impacts to
biological resources arising from local projects and actions.
   Nothing in this Chapter is intended to restrict or in any way affect or
impair the agricultural use of land within the County. In some cases, state and
federal laws may regulate certain types or characteristics of projects covered
by this Chapter. This Chapter shall be construed to provide the County with the
maximum control consistent with such other laws. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February
28, 2013)
Article 2. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings stated below:
Sec. 10-10.201.   Agriculture or Agricultural.
   "Agriculture" or "agricultural" shall have the meaning set forth in Yolo
County Code Section
8-2.307. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.202.   Applicant.
   "Applicant" shall mean a person who files an application for a permit under
this Chapter and who is either the owner of the site, a vendee of that person
pursuant to a contract of sale for the site, or an authorized agent for either
of those persons. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.203.   Covered Habitat Mitigation Project.
   A "covered habitat mitigation project" is any project within the scope of
that term as it is defined in Title 8, Chapter 2 of the Yolo County Code. (§ 5,
Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.204.   Create or Creation.
   "Create" or "creation," in the context of a habitat project, shall mean to
construct or otherwise introduce new habitat area, functions, and values by
excavating, flooding, or otherwise altering land not currently or historically
occupied by such habitat. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.205.   Deciding Authority.
   "Deciding Authority" shall mean the public official(s) or County employee
with authority to decide an application for a permit under this Chapter. (§ 5,
Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.206.   Director.
   "Director" shall mean the Director of the Planning and Public Works
Department, or his or her designee or successor in function. (§ 5, Ord. 1426,
eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.207.   Enhance or Enhancement.
   "Enhance" or "enhancement," in the context of a habitat project, shall mean
to rehabilitate a degraded or disturbed natural habitat area to bring back one
or more functions or values that have been partially or completely lost due to
natural causes or actions such as draining, grading, or other land uses and
activities. Any project that changes the function or values of an existing
habitat type so that it more closely resembles the natural (i.e., prior to
disturbance by human activities) condition of a site shall be considered a
habitat enhancement project for the purposes of this Ordinance. (§ 5, Ord.
1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.208.   General Plan.
   "General Plan" shall mean the adopted General Plan of Yolo County, as may be
amended from time to time. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.209.   Grading.
   "Grading" shall have the same meaning as in Appendix J of the California
Building Code, 2007 edition, as may be amended from time to time. (§ 5, Ord.
1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.210.   Habitat.
   "Habitat" shall mean the environmental factors that support one or more
plant or wildlife species at a particular place or region, providing food,
water, cover, and space needed for survival and reproduction. (§ 5, Ord. 1426,
eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.211.   Person.
   "Person" shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, or local
agency (as defined in Government Code Section 53090), their successors or
assigns, or the agent of any of the foregoing, and shall include any applicant
or permit holder under this Chapter.
Sec. 10-10.212.   Preserve or Preservation.
   "Preserve" or "preservation" means the permanent protection of ecologically
important habitat resources through the implementation of appropriate legal and
physical mechanisms, including but not limited to conservation easements.
(§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.213.   Project.
   "Project" shall mean the whole of any activity or activities undertaken in
connection with creating, enhancing, restoring, or preserving habitat on a
site, and shall be interpreted broadly to include all related activities. This
includes, by way of example only and without limitation, activities such as
pilot projects, conservation easement transactions, grading, tree or vegetation
removal, and the creation, restoration, or enhancement of associated buffer
areas. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.214.   Restore or Restoration.
   "Restore" or "restoration," in the context of a habitat project, shall mean
to restore lost habitat area, generally by excavating, flooding, and otherwise
manipulating the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of a site
with the goal of reestablishing the natural or historic habitat values and
functions of that area. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.215.   Site.
   "Site" shall mean all areas of real property that are within the boundaries
of a proposed project, and may include more than one legal parcel. (§ 5, Ord.
1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.216.   Substantial Evidence.
   "Substantial evidence" includes facts, a reasonable assumption predicated
upon facts, or expert opinion supported by facts. Substantial evidence is not
argument, speculation, unsubstantiated opinion or narrative, or evidence that
is clearly inaccurate or erroneous. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Article 3. Permits
Sec. 10-10.301.   Permit Requirement; Exemptions and Excluded Activities.
   (a)   Generally. Subject to the exemptions set forth below, no person shall
engage in grading, clearing, or other activities, including the recordation of
a conservation easement, with the intent to implement a covered habitat
mitigation project without first applying for and receiving a use permit under
this Chapter, together with any other approvals required by federal, state, or
local law.
   (b)   Advisory Determination Regarding Coverage. Prior to asserting an
exemption under subsection (c)(iii) or (vi), below, a prospective project
applicant must conduct a pre-application consultation regarding the need for a
use permit under this Chapter or other potential County approvals. This
consultation may be initiated by contacting the Office of the County
Administrator, Natural Resources Division and submitting a written project
description with sufficient detail to enable an evaluation of the applicability
of one or more exemptions. Prospective project applicants asserting their
project is exempt under other provisions of subsection (c) may, but are not
required to, also seek a pre-project consultation in the same manner.
   (c)   Exemptions. The following projects shall be exempt from the use permit
requirement and the other provisions of this Chapter:
   (i)   All covered habitat mitigation projects that do not create 10 or more
acres of habitat.
   (ii)   All covered habitat mitigation projects that do not enhance, restore,
or preserve 40 or more acres of habitat. This exemption may not be combined
with the exemption in subsection (a), above, to exempt any covered habitat
mitigation project that creates, enhances, restores, or preserves 40 or more
acres of habitat.
   (iii)   Covered habitat mitigation projects that create, enhance, restore,
or preserve riparian corridor (buffer), oak woodland, vernal pool, or native
grassland/prairie habitats, unless any such project also includes one or more
other habitat types that exceed the acreage limits set forth in subsections (a)
or (b), above. The proponent of any project that qualifies for this exemption
shall provide notice to the County of the proposed project before commencing
construction or other activities in furtherance of the project.
   (iv)   Any covered habitat mitigation project that received all necessary
County approvals prior to the effective date of this Chapter, or for which a
complete application for such approval(s) was submitted prior to effective date
(for projects of less than 160 acres only) of Yolo County Ordinance No. 1401,
which established a moratorium on certain types of habitat projects.
   (v)   Any covered habitat mitigation project(s) undertaken by a person that
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding or similar written agreement with
the County addressing the implementation of such project(s) during the term of
Yolo County Ordinance No. 1401 (including the term extension approved pursuant
to Ordinance No. 1402), which established a moratorium on certain types of
habitat projects. This exemption shall be limited in scope to the project and/
or other activities specifically described in the Memorandum of Understanding.
   (vi)   Limited term pilot projects undertaken for scientific research and
related purposes, including feasibility assessments, in connection with the
potential future implementation of a covered habitat mitigation project. Such
projects are not covered by this Chapter so long as they occur in a time and
manner that does not substantially interfere with the reasonable agricultural
use of the pilot project site or adversely affect surrounding lands.
   (vii)   Activities that require discretionary approval pursuant to Chapters
3, 4, or 5 of this Title 10.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any expansion or other change to a covered
habitat mitigation project previously covered by one or more of these
exemptions shall require a use permit if the proposed expansion or other change
would remove the project, viewed as a whole, from the scope of these
exemptions.
   (d)   Activities Not Covered. The following activities do not constitute
covered habitat mitigation projects and are not subject to regulation under
this Chapter so long as they are undertaken in the usual and customary manner
prevailing in the County at the time this Chapter was adopted:
   (i)   All activities undertaken in connection with, and in furtherance of,
the agricultural use of land. This includes, but is not limited to, the
construction and maintenance of stock ponds and small reservoirs, tail-water
ponds, irrigation canals and sloughs, rice fields, and similar activities.
   (ii)   Projects undertaken for the primary purpose of flood control, flood
protection, or related matters of flood safety and the protection of life and
property.
   (iii)   The winter flooding of agricultural fields for the primary purpose
of providing temporary habitat for migratory waterfowl, provided such flooding
does not occur in a time or manner that prevents or substantially interferes
with the reasonable agricultural use of the site or adversely affect
surrounding lands.
(§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013; as amended by §§ 3–4, Ord. 1501, eff.
August 23, 2018)
Sec. 10-10.302.   Permit Contents, Processing, and Decisions.
   (a)   Applications, generally. Applications for a use permit under this
Chapter shall be submitted to the Director, together with payment of all
application fees established by the Board of Supervisors. Except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter, all provisions of the Yolo County Code relating
generally to use permits shall apply to the review, issuance, and amendment or
revocation of permits covered hereunder.
   (b)   Application contents. An application for a use permit shall include
all of the following:
   (i)   A completed application for a permit under this Chapter, on a form
provided by the County, together with payment of the application fee
established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
   (ii)   Completed applications for any other required County approvals, such
as a grading permit or Flood Hazard Development Permit, together with payment
of the application fee(s) established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. In addition, both with the initial application and thereafter, the
applicant shall provide copies of all completed applications for other federal,
state, and local approvals associated with the proposed project to facilitate
coordination between the County and other agencies.
   (iii)   Appropriate site-specific technical reports, including but not
limited to such documents as a biological resources analysis, a hydrology
analysis, a geotechnical analysis, and an engineered excavation plan. The types
of reports that may be required should be uniform for applications that are
similar in nature, but may vary to the extent that the features of a proposed
project or the characteristics of the project site and surrounding lands are
unique. Upon request, the Director will advise an applicant of the types of
reports that should be submitted with a permit application or, in appropriate
instances, in connection with environmental review of a proposed project or at
other times as specified by the Director in his or her sole discretion. In some
instances, the applicant may be able to satisfy this requirement by providing
documents prepared in connection with applications to other federal, state, or
local agencies relating to the project.
   (iv)   A site plan showing property lines, assessor's parcel numbers, onsite
and adjoining land uses, topography, access, and existing/proposed patterns of
vegetation.
   (v)   A proposed management plan that identifies how the project will be
operated and managed over time. Among other things, the plan should explain how
the project will be actively operated and managed in perpetuity to ensure that
its environmental and other benefits are realized on a continuous basis, how
vector control issues will be addressed, if applicable, and how any
unanticipated events and impacts to surrounding land uses will be addressed.
The proposed management plan shall also include measures to address crop
depredation to the extent it is a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the
proposed project. The plan should also state whether the operation and
management of the project will be supported by an endowment or other
established source of funds.
   In addition to the foregoing, the Director may require such other and
further information relevant to the project as needed to perform appropriate
environmental analysis, to determine whether the proposal may affect public
health, safety, and welfare, and for other good cause as determined by the
Director in his or her sole discretion.
   (c)   Yolo HCP/NCCP and RCIS/LCP Consistency. In addition to referrals to
other County departments, as may be appropriate in the discretion of the
Director, all permit applications shall be promptly referred to the following:
   (i)   To the Executive Director of the Yolo Habitat Conservancy. The
referral shall include a request for comments regarding whether the application
is consistent with the Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Communities
Conservation Plan (HCP/NCCP) and the Local Conservation Plan included within
the Yolo County Regional Conservation Investment Strategy, described below.
   (ii)   To the Implementation Sponsor for the Yolo County Regional
Conservation Investment Strategy (RCIS). As with the Yolo HCP/NCCP, the
referral shall include a request for comments regarding whether the application
is consistent with the RCIS.
   Referrals shall encourage a response within thirty (30) days. Additional
referrals may also be made later in the planning and environmental review
process.
   (d)   Deciding Authority. The Deciding Authority for permit applications
shall be as follows:
   (i)   For projects of less than 40 acres, the Zoning Administrator shall be
the Deciding Authority.
   (ii)   For projects of between 40 and 159 acres, the Planning Commission
shall be the Deciding Authority. For projects that are 160 or more acres, the
Planning Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the Board of
Supervisors. Acting in such capacity, the Planning Commission shall hold at
least one noticed public hearing on the project prior to making a
recommendation to the Board of Supervisors. The recommendation of the Planning
Commission shall be in writing and shall include a detailed statement of the
grounds for the recommendation.
   (iii)   For projects that are 160 or more acres or that include a proposed
alternative approach to addressing the conversion of farmland (as set forth in
Section
10-10.303(h), below), the Board of Supervisors shall be the deciding authority.
The Board of Supervisors shall hold at least one noticed public hearing on the
project prior to making a final decision on the application.
   (e)   Decision. After considering the application materials and, if
applicable, the recommendations of County staff and the Planning Commission,
the Deciding Authority shall issue, conditionally issue, or deny the
application by a written decision supported by findings that address the
criteria set forth in Section
10-10.303, below. Due to the unique nature of projects covered by this Chapter,
the general conditions that typically apply to the review and approval or
denial of a use permit, set forth in Yolo County Code Section
8-2.217, shall not apply.
   (f)   Costs and expenses. The applicant shall reimburse all costs and
expenses reasonably incurred by the County in reviewing applications under this
Chapter, including but not limited to staff time and costs and expenses
associated with environmental review. At the discretion of the Director, the
applicant may be required to provide a reasonable deposit for such costs, enter
into a reimbursement agreement with the County, or both.
(§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1501, eff.
August 23, 2018)
Sec. 10-10.303.   Decisionmaking Criteria.
   A permit applied for under this Chapter shall be approved if, taking all
feasible mitigation measures, conditions of approval, and other relevant facts
into account, the Deciding Authority makes all of the following determinations
based on substantial evidence in the record:
   (a)   That the project applicant has substantially complied with the
requirements of this Chapter, including but not limited to provisions
addressing the submission and contents of a management plan;
   (b)   That the project would not significantly conflict with surrounding
land uses;
   (c)   That the project would not have a significant adverse effect on
biological resources, is not reasonably expected to significantly conflict with
the Yolo Natural Heritage Program (HCP/NCCP), and will advance one or more
goals and objectives of the HCP/NCCP or otherwise contribute to its
implementation
   (d)   That the project would not significantly compromise flood safety and
the protection of life and property;
   (e)   That the project would not have a significant adverse economic
effect—either by itself or cumulatively—within the County or region. This
factor shall only be considered for projects that convert 40 or more acres of
farmland;
   (f)   That the project, if undertaken in furtherance of the "co-equal goals"
and the habitat restoration objectives of the Delta Reform Act, will proceed in
a manner that is faithful to the Act in its entirety, including its basic
policy direction that the coequal goals of "providing a more reliable water
supply for California and protecting, restoring, and enhancing the Delta
ecosystem" are to be achieved in a manner "that protects and enhances the
unique cultural, recreational, natural resource, and agricultural values of the
Delta as an evolving place";
   (g)   If the project site is subject to a Williamson Act contract, that the
project is an "open space use" under Government Code Section 51201(o) or that
it would not otherwise cause a material breach of the contract. Any project
that is an "open space" use under Section 51201(o) shall also require approval
of an amended Williamson Act contract or other appropriate action to authorize
the open space use;
   (h)   That any conversion of farmland to habitat or other non-agricultural
uses will be mitigated in accordance with Yolo County Code Sections
8-2.301 et seq. (notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth therein
regarding its application to habitat projects) or, subject to the approval of
the Board of Supervisors, that the applicant will implement an alternative
approach to addressing the conversion of farmland that provides an equal or
greater level of mitigation; and
   (i)   That the project would not significantly conflict with other relevant
considerations of public health, safety, or welfare, sufficient to require
preparation of a statement of overriding considerations pursuant to the
California Environmental Quality Act.
   Written findings addressing each of these matters shall be prepared in
connection with a decision on a permit application.
   If the Deciding Authority (other than the Board of Supervisors) finds that a
project cannot be approved because one or more of these determinations cannot
be made, the permit shall be referred to the Board of Supervisors for
consideration at a noticed public hearing. The Board of Supervisors may approve
a permit even if it finds that one or more of these determinations cannot be
made, provided it finds that issuance of the permit is consistent with the
purposes of this Chapter and all applicable provisions of local, state, and
federal law. Any decision of the Board of Supervisors following its
deliberation of these issues shall include written findings based on
substantial evidence that address all of the criteria and other matters set
forth above, together with an explanation of any decision to approve or deny a
permit.
(§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013; as amended by § 6, Ord. 1501, eff.
August 23, 2018)
Sec. 10-10.304.   Permit Term; Amendments.
   (a)   Term. The use authorized by a permit issued under this Chapter shall
commence within one to five years, as may be appropriate taking all
circumstances relating to the project into account. In particular, covered
habitat mitigation projects that require numerous federal, state, and local
agency approvals that can take a long time to acquire may warrant an initial
permit term of up to five years, in the sole discretion of the Deciding
Authority. Once the authorized use commences, a permit shall be perpetual in
term unless otherwise indicated at the time of its original approval.
   (b)   Amendments, generally. An amendment to an existing permit issued under
this Chapter shall be required for any significant change to an approved
covered habitat mitigation project. This shall include, but is not limited to,
any change in the size or operation of an approved project that could have a
significant effect on the environment. The Director shall have the discretion
to determine whether an amendment to an existing permit is required.
   (c)   Applications for amendments; processing. Applications for amendments
to previously issued permits shall be submitted to the Director on forms
provided by the County. An application to amend a previously issued permit
shall also be accompanied by the appropriate fee, as established by resolution
of the Board of Directors. In addition, the Director may require any or all of
the additional information and documents described in Section
10-10.302(b), above, that may be reasonably necessary for consideration of the
application. An application for an amendment shall be handled in the same
manner as an original permit application, as described in Section
10-10.302(b) - (e), above. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Article 4. Appeals
Sec. 10-10.401.   Appeal Procedure.
   Any decision made pursuant to this Chapter may be appealed pursuant to Yolo
County Code Section 8-2.3301, which shall apply to all appeals arising under
this Chapter. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Article 5. Violations
Sec. 10-10.501.   Generally.
   Any violation of this Chapter shall be subject to the administrative code
enforcement ordinance of the County, set forth in
Chapter 5 of Title 1 of the Yolo County Code. Any administrative enforcement
action undertaken in response to a violation of this chapter, in the sole
discretion of the Enforcement Officer or other responsible staff person, need
not utilize the Courtesy Notice or Notice of Violation provisions of
Chapter 5 of Title 1, and may instead immediately issue an administrative
citation. Fines imposed by an administrative citation for a continuing
violation shall apply for each day that the violation is ongoing until it is
fully abated in the manner specified in the administrative citation. In the
event of any conflict between the provisions of this Section and
Chapter 5 of Title 1, this Section shall govern.
(§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013; as amended by § 7, Ord. 1501, eff.
August 23, 2018)
Sec. 10-10.502.   Public Nuisance.
   Any activity in violation of this Chapter or any permit issued hereunder
shall be considered a public nuisance. In his or her sole discretion, the
Director may take any action authorized by law to address the public nuisance,
including but not limited to referral of the matter to the District attorney
for civil or criminal action. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Article 6. Periodic Reviews; Mapping
Sec. 10-10.601.   Initial Review.
   Five years after this Chapter becomes effective, the Board of Supervisors
shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of considering its effectiveness at
achieving the purposes set forth in Article 1 hereof. During such hearing, the
Board of Supervisors may identify matters that require further consideration
and provide appropriate direction to staff. In addition, the Board of
Supervisors may direct staff to prepare an ordinance amending, superseding, or
deleting this Chapter, and it may take such other actions as may be necessary
and appropriate. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.602.   Future Reviews.
   Every five years after the initial review under Section
10-10.601, above, the Board of Supervisors shall review this Chapter at a
public hearing for the reasons described in that Section, particularly to
ensure its continued effectiveness in achieving the purposes described in
Article 1. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.603.   Failure to Conduct Reviews.
   The failure to conduct a review in the time or manner required by this
Article shall not affect the continuing validity of this Chapter, not shall it
have any affect on the status of a permit issued hereunder. (§ 5, Ord. 1426,
eff. February 28, 2013)
Sec. 10-10.604.   Project Mapping.
   The Director shall maintain a map reflecting the location of each project
approved pursuant to this Chapter. Other relevant information may also be
included on the map, such as the location of preexisting mitigation banks,
conservation easements, and other matters. The map shall be provided to the
Deciding Authority in conjunction with each permit application presented for
consideration. It shall also be provided to the Board of Supervisors as part of
each periodic review. (§ 5, Ord. 1426, eff. February 28, 2013)
Chapter 11
GRAVEL MINING FEE ORDINANCE
Sections:
10-11.01   Establishment of fees.
10-11.02   Purpose and use of fees.
10-11.03   Determination of reasonable relationship.
10-11.04   Applicability of ordinance.
10-11.05   Calculation and verification of fees.
10-11.06   Payment.
10-11.07   Deleted.
10-11.08   Minimum annual fee payment.
10-11.09   Credits for in-lieu work.
10-11.10   Late charge (penalties).
10-11.11   Accounting procedures.
10-11.12   Reimbursement.
10-11.13   Update.
10-11.14   Exemptions.
Section 10-11.01.   Establishment of fees.  
   (a)   There are hereby adopted and established the following five Yolo
County aggregate mining fees which shall be imposed and administered in
accordance with this chapter:
      (1)   The CCRMP Implementation (Creek Stabilization) Fee of $0.25 per ton
of aggregate material sold.
      (2)   The Maintenance and Remediation Fee of $0.02 per ton of aggregate
material sold.
      (3)   The OCMP Administration Fee of $0.08 per ton of aggregate material
sold.
      (4)   The Cache Creek Conservancy Contribution (Habitat Restoration) Fee
of $0.10 per ton of aggregate material sold.
      (5)   The Twenty Percent Production Exception Surcharge of $0.20 per ton
of aggregate material sold in excess of the approved annual permitted
production.
   (b)   The fees identified in items (1) through (4) above are mandatory fees
totaling $0.45 per ton that apply as described herein to all aggregate
materials sold after January 1, 2007 in the unincorporated areas of Yolo County
along Cache Creek. These fees shall collectively be known as the Gravel Mining
Fees. The fee identified in item (5) is also mandatory but only applies to
mining over a specified limit as described in Section 10-11.02(e).
   (c)   The fees described in items (1) through (4) above shall be adjusted
annually on January 1 as follows, distributed proportionally among the four
fees based on the 2007 ratio. The fee described in item (5) shall remain a flat
fee.
      January 1, 2007   $0.450 cents per ton (beginning April 1 for 2007 only)
      January 1, 2008   $0.468 cents per ton
      January 1, 2009   $0.487 cents per ton
      January 1, 2010   $0.506 cents per ton
      January 1, 2011   $0.526 cents per ton
      January 1, 2012   No adjustment (fees remain at $0.526 cents per ton)
      January 1, 2013   $0.470 cents per ton
Commencing on January 1, 2014, and each year thereafter through and including a
final adjustment on January 1, 2026, the fees applicable to gravel sold during
that calendar year shall increase at a rate of four percent. For example, this
means that the fees shall rise on January 1, 2014 by four percent to $0.489
cents per ton for gravel sold during the calendar year, and an additional four
percent to $0.508 cents per ton on January 1, 2015 for gravel sold during the
2015 calendar year.
      January 1, 2014   $0.489 per ton
      January 1, 2015   $0.508 per ton
      January 1, 2016   $0.529 per ton
      January 1, 2017   $0.550 per ton
      January 1, 2018   $0.572 per ton
      January 1, 2019   $0.595 per ton
      January 1, 2020   $0.618 per ton
      January 1, 2021   $0.643 per ton
      January 1, 2022   $0.669 per ton
      January 1, 2023   $0.696 per ton
      January 1, 2024   $0.724 per ton
      January 1, 2025   $0.752 per ton
      January 1, 2026   $0.783 per ton
(§ 1, Ord. 1196, eff. January 1, 1997, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1430, eff. July
4, 2013, § 2, Ord. 1437, eff. January 2, 2014, § 2, Ord. 1445, eff. August 14,
2014, Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020, and § 2, Ord. 1527, eff. November 5,
2020)
Sec. 10-11.02.   Purpose and use of fees.
   (a)   The purpose of the CCRMP Implementation Fee is to fund implementation
of the CCRMP and CCIP, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Design and construction of projects for channel stabilization and
bridge protection.
      (2)   Design and construction/ implementation of channel maintenance
projects and activities.
      (3)   Monitoring, modeling, and flood watch as described in the CCIP.
      (4)   Compensation of the Technical Advisory Committee.
   (b)   The purpose of the Maintenance and Remediation Fee is to fund a long-
term, interest-bearing account for the following future activities (as
identified in Section
10-4.803 [Mining Ordinance] of the County Code ):
      (1)   Remediation of problems related to mercury bioaccumulation in
wildlife, should they occur.
      (2)   Remediation of hazardous materials contamination, should it occur.
      (3)   Environmental monitoring including data gathering and groundwater
modeling beyond, or as an extension of, that required by the operators under
the CCAP and permits issued or extended under the CCAP, should it be necessary.
      (4)   Ongoing site maintenance of publicly held reclaimed lakes including
but not limited to fencing, berms, drainage, and levees.
      No expenditures may be drawn from the Maintenance and Remediation fund
for thirty (30) years. Starting in January 2027, the fund shall be made
available for the activities identified above under
10-11.02(b). In January 2047, the County shall determine whether the fund is
still merited. If it is determined that supplemental monitoring, maintenance,
and/or remediation is no longer required or merited, then the entire fund shall
be made available for implementation of the goals of the CCAP, such as the
creation of long-term habitat restoration, the creation of open space and
passive recreation opportunities, and restoration and stabilization of Cache
Creek.
      Any disbursement of money from the maintenance and remediation fund shall
require approval by the Board of Supervisors. Use of this fund for any purpose
other than those specified herein is expressly prohibited.
   (c)   The purpose of the OCMP Administration Fee is to:
      (1)   Implement the OCMP.
      (2)   Administer long-term mining permits.
      (3)   Administer development agreements.
   (4)   Inspect mining and reclamation operations. This applies to inspections
required of all permitted operations, up to a set maximum value, beyond which
operators will be billed directly at cost. Inspections specific to individual
operations shall be billed directly at cost.
   (d)   The purpose of the Cache Creek Conservancy Contribution (Habitat
Restoration) Fee is to fund activities that promote and facilitate the
restoration, enhancement, conservation, and wise management of natural
vegetation and wildlife habitat within the lower Cache Creek watershed (between
Capay Dam and the Town of Yolo), consistent with the CCRMP and the
Conservancy’s mission to preserve, restore, and enhance the Cache Creek
watershed.
   (e)   The purpose of the Twenty Percent Production Exception Surcharge fee
is to offset additional costs anticipated with mining allowed in excess of
approved annual permitted production, pursuant to Action 2.4-12 of the OCMP and
Section
10-4.405 of the Off-Channel Mining Ordinance, to meet temporary increases in
market demand. The revenue is to be directed as follows:
      (1)   Fifty (50) percent to the CCRMP Implementation fund.
      (2)   Fifty (50) percent to the Maintenance and Remediation Fund.
   (f)   The County shall review fee revenue and expenditures no less
frequently than biennially, to verify that program activities and expenditures
fall within the scope of this section, and to verify deposits into appropriate
funds, as described herein. (§ 1, Ord. 1196, eff. January 1, 1999; as amended
by § 2, Ord. 1357, eff. April 26, 2007; § 2, Ord. 1397, eff. April 15, 2010;§
2, Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014; and Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-11.03.   Determination of reasonable relationship.
   In the course of adopting the various components that comprise the CCAP, the
County has determined that there is a reasonable relationship between the fees
identified herein, the use to which they are to be put, and the applicability
of charging said fees of permit holders. These relationships can be generally
summarized as follows:
   (a)   CCRMP Implementation Fee and Cache Creek Conservancy Contribution. The
Streamway Influence Boundary (page 21 of Final OCMP; page 10 of Final CCRMP)
defines the area which has historically been occupied by Cache Creek, and where
land uses continue to have an effect on streamflow. Left to natural forces, the
channel would attempt to reclaim the entire area shown within the Streamway
Influence Boundary. The Streamway Influence Boundary, therefore, is that area
adjoining the creek within which the active creek channel may have an
influence, and within which land uses adjoining the creek may have an influence
on the creek. There is a spatial, hydrologic, and geologic connection between
these areas. The area designated for off-channel mining is located within or in
relevant proximity to the Streamway Influence Boundary, thereby establishing
the nexus for funding of programs by Permit Holders, to offset the potential
for influence between the two.
   (b)   Maintenance and remediation fee. This “contingency” fund offsets the
risk of encountering costs after reclamation, associated with remediation,
monitoring, and/or maintenance of permanent lakes resulting from deep mining,
thereby establishing the nexus for funding by Permit Holders mining within the
groundwater table.
   (c)   OCMP administration fee. The OCMP is a mining plan prepared and
adopted for the purpose of regulating off-channel aggregate resources. This fee
reimburses the County for administrative costs of implementing the Plan, from
which Permit Holders receive direct benefits, thereby establishing the nexus
for funding by Permit Holders.
   (d)   Twenty percent production exception surcharge fee. Extraction within
or adjacent to the Streamway Influence Boundary, in excess of approved annual
permitted production, increases the potential for influence between off-channel
mining and Cache Creek. This fund offsets that potential and therefore fifty
(50%) percent would be used primarily to supplement the CCRMP Implementation
fund. The increased extraction addressed by this fee also increases the
potential risk of encountering costs after reclamation, associated with
remediation, monitoring, and/or maintenance of permanent lakes resulting from
deep mining. This fund offsets that potential and therefore the remaining fifty
(50%) percent would be used to supplement the Maintenance and Remediation Fund.
(§ 1, Ord. 1196, eff. January 1, 1997; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1357, eff. April
26, 2007,§ 2, Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014, and Ord. 1518, eff. February 13,
2020)
Sec. 10-11.04.   Applicability of Ordinance.
   This Ordinance and the fees established herein shall apply to all aggregate
materials sold or transferred to affiliates or subsidiaries after December 31,
1996, pursuant to any permit granted, modified, or extended by the County for
the commercial extraction or processing of aggregate materials within the
planning boundaries established in the (§ 1, Ord. 1196, eff. January 1, 1997;
as amended by § 2, Ord. 1357, eff. April 26, 2007,§ 2, Ord. 1445, eff. August
14, 2014, and Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-11.05.   Calculation and Verification of Fees.
   (a)   Fees shall be calculated based on sales in the previous calendar year
as reported annually to the County Assessor by April 1. If an operator fails to
report its sales to the County Assessor by April 1, the County may make a
reasonable estimate of the sales of that company, which estimate shall be
binding for the purposes of this Ordinance, unless it is later demonstrated
that sales were underreported. In such case, fees shall be recalculated and the
under-reported amount due and payable immediately with penalties of ten (10%)
percent.
   (b)   The County shall audit the tonnage claims and revenue deposits no less
frequently than biennially, to verify that the amount of revenue correctly
reflects actual tonnages sold, and to verify deposits into appropriate funds,
as described herein. (§ 1, Ord. 1196, eff. January 1, 1997; as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1357, eff. April 26, 2007,§ 2, Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014, and Ord.
1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-11.06.   Payment.
   (a)   Fee payments are due and payable quarterly on the following dates:
March 30, June 30, September 30, and December 30. The County shall send a
statement of the amount owed under this agreement to each holder of a permit
(Permit Holder) granted or extended by the County after November 1, 1996 for
the commercial extraction of aggregate materials within the planning boundaries
of the CCAP, at least thirty (30) days prior to the payment due dates.
   (b)   Fee payments for the CCRMP Implementation Fee, the Maintenance and
Remediation Fee, the OCMP Administration Fee, and the Exception Surcharge shall
be made directly to the County Administrative Office for distribution as
follows:
      (1)   The CCRMP Implementation Fee, the OCMP Administration Fee, and
fifty (50%) percent of the Exception Surcharge may be deposited into the same
account for use as described in Section
10-11.02.
      (2)   The Maintenance and Remediation Fee and the remaining fifty (50%)
percent of the Exception Surcharge shall be deposited into a separate, long-
term interest-bearing account, with restrictions on access and use that are
consistent with the purpose of the fund as described in Section
10-11.02(b).
      (3)   The Cache Creek Conservancy Fee shall be paid directly to the
Conservancy. If the Conservancy is not operating, the fee shall be paid to the
County for expenditure by the County for the purposes identified in Section
10-11.02(d) of this Ordinance. (§ 1, Ord. 1196, eff. January 1, 1997; as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1357, eff. April 26, 2007,§ 2, Ord. 1445, eff. August 14,
2014, and Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-11.07.   Deleted.
(deleted by Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-11.08.   Minimum annual fee payment.
   Notwithstanding the actual tonnage sold in any one year by a permit holder,
or any of the provisions of this Ordinance, a minimum annual base fee amount of
Fifty Thousand and no/100ths ($50,000.00) Dollars per permitted operation that
is authorized at the time to mine, is required by the County by June 30 of each
year, in order to minimally administer the CCAP. This requirement applies
whether a site is active or idle. Sites that are not being mined and are under
active reclamation would not be subject to this minimum fee. The payment of
this amount shall be invoiced to each permit holder based on approved annual
permitted production. Each permit holder shall receive credit for this amount
against their December payment.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the first Fifty
Thousand and no/100ths ($50,000.00) Dollars in either the OCMP Administration
Fund, the CCRMP Implementation Fund, or a combination of both funds, in a given
calendar year, shall be counted as meeting this minimum annual base fee amount,
and shall be available to the County for administrative purposes. (§ 1, Ord.
1196, eff. January 1, 1997;as amended by § 2, Ord. 1357, eff. April 26, 2007,§
2, Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014, and Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-11.09.   Credits for in-lieu work.
   (a)   The Director is authorized to grant credits against the CCRMP
Implementation Fee of up to thirty-five (35%) percent of the amount that would
otherwise be due from a Permit Holder, for contributions of labor, equipment or
materials used to implement the CCRMP. The contributed labor, equipment, or
materials must be beyond those required by conditions of approval associated
with any permit, or those required by the CCAP, of Permit Holders.
   (b)   Prior to any contribution of equipment, labor or materials for which
credits may be taken, the Director and the permit holder must first agree on
the amount of the credit, the method used to calculate it, and the period in
which it may be credited.
   (c)   The Director's determination regarding the use and amount of credits
is appealable directly to the Board of Supervisors. (§ 1, Ord. 1196, eff.
January 1, 1997; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1357, eff. April 26, 2007,§ 2, Ord.
1445, eff. August 14, 2014, and Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-11.10.   Late charge (penalties).
   (a)   Fees are required to be paid in a timely manner. Fees shall be
considered to be paid in a timely manner if the payment is received no later
than thirty (30) days from the day on which it was due.
   (b)   A late charge or penalty equal to ten (10%) percent of the amount due
shall be assessed and payable for any fee payments received after the thirty
(30) day grace period described above. The late charge shall increase to
fifteen (15%) percent after sixty (60) days and twenty (20%) percent after
ninety (90) days late. Late charges assessed hereunder are to be due and
payable immediately.
   (c)   Notwithstanding item
10-11.10(b) above, if the payment of any fee is later than one hundred eighty
(180) days from the date due, this shall be a violation of the permit and
revocation proceedings shall be commenced in compliance with Sections
10-4.1105 through
10-4.1110 of the County Code (Off-Channel Surface Mining Ordinance,
Violations).
(§ 1, Ord. 1196, eff. January 1, 1997; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1357, eff. April
26, 2007,§ 2, Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014, and Ord. 1518, eff. February 13,
2020)
Sec. 10-11.11.   Accounting procedures.
   The County Administrative Officer shall establish procedures by which permit
holders will report and account for the sale and/or transfer of all aggregate
materials for which fees are payable under this Ordinance. (§ 1, Ord. 1196,
eff. January 1, 1997; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1357, eff. April 26, 2007,§ 2,
Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014, and Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-11.12.   Reimbursement.
   (a)   Each holder of a permit issued under the CCAP, prior to January 1,
1997 shall be responsible for reimbursement to the County on a proportional
basis all outstanding actual costs incurred during development, environmental
review, adoption, and early implementation of the CCAP and related ordinances
and regulations, through December 31, 1996. The Permit Holder shall be fully
responsible for reimbursement to the County all costs incurred during
processing of the permit, through December 31, 1996. The County will invoice
the Permit Holder for these reimbursements no later than January 1, 1997. The
reimbursements shall be paid in four (4) equal installments due February 28,
March 29, April 30, and May 30 of 1997.
   (b)   In addition to regular application fees as may be charged by the
County, subsequent applicants for new, extended, or modified mining and
reclamation permits shall at the time of filing of application, pay their
proportionate share of the costs of development, environmental review, and
adoption of the CCAP as calculated and documented by the County, starting with
the cost of the report entitled “Technical Studies and Recommendations for the
Lower Cache Creek Resource Management Plan” issued October 1995 and including
all related costs through December 31, 1996.
   (c)   The proportional share of the reimbursement costs to be paid by a
subsequent applicant shall be a percentage based on the requested total annual
permitted production plus an imputed interest charge of seven (7%) percent per
annum from January 1997, and an administrative fee of Five Hundred and no/
100ths ($500.00) Dollars to cover the costs of processing the reimbursement.
The percentage owed shall be obtained by dividing the applicant's requested
total annual permitted production by the total of all annual tonnage
allocations in effect under the CCAP at the time.
   (d)   Reimbursements costs and imputed interest collected by the County
under subsection (b) above shall be refunded to each holder of a permit issued
under the CCAP prior to January 1, 1997 based on the unreimbursed costs
incurred by that permit holder under the terms of the “Gravel Management and
Oversight Costs Funding Agreement” dated December 6, 1994 and the “Agreement to
Provide Funds for Environmental Studies, Cache Creek Resources Management Plan
and Long-Term Off-Channel Ordinance Formulation” dated December 1995, as
evidenced by County records. Refund payments shall be made by the County within
sixty (60) days of receipt of a reimbursement from any subsequent applicant.
   (e)   The proportional share obligation for subsequent applicants shall
terminate upon collection by the County of fifty (50%) percent, excluding
imputed interest and the administrative fee, of the total costs of preparation
of the CCAP as calculated pursuant to(b) above, or December 31, 2006, whichever
occurs first. (§ 1, Ord. 1196, eff. January 1, 1997; as amended by § 2, Ord.
1357, eff. April 26, 2007,§ 2, Ord. 1445, eff. August 14, 2014, and Ord. 1518,
eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-11.13.   Update.
   A minimum of every ten (10) years, the County shall review the fees to
ensure that they appropriately cover the intended costs and are otherwise
reasonably set and structured for fulfilling their purpose, as described in
Section
10-11.02. Pursuant to this review, a recommendation for appropriate
modification shall be promptly brought forward for public hearing before the
Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors and shall be referenced for the
purposes of satisfying Section
10-4.605 of the Off-Channel Surface Mining Ordinance. (§ 1, Ord. 1196, eff.
January 1, 1997, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1357, eff. April 26, 2007,§ 2, Ord.
1445, eff. August 14, 2014, and Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Sec. 10-11.14.   Exemptions.
   Sales of recycled materials and sales of materials removed from the channel
pursuant to the implementation of the CCAP, shall not be subject to this
Ordinance. Records of such sales shall be submitted to the County by permit
holders, and shall be included as a component of the audit referred to in
Section
10-11.05(b) of this Ordinance. (§ 1, Ord. 1196, eff. January 1, 1997, as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1357, eff. April 26, 2007,§ 2, Ord. 1445, eff. August 14,
2014, and Ord. 1518, eff. February 13, 2020)
Chapter 12
OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE USE AND OPERATION
Sections:
10-12.101.   Definitions.
10-12.102.   Applicability.
10-12.103.   Activities on the banks and bed of Cache Creek.
10-12.104.   Prohibition of operation on county property.
10-12.105.   Restriction on operation on private property.
10-12.106.   Safety.
10-12.107.   Penalties.
Sec. 10-12.101.   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the definitions and meanings set forth below (whether the term is capitalized
or not):
   (a)   "Highway" shall have the meaning set forth in section 360 of the
California Highway Code, and shall include any road, street, way, or place,
including the entire width of the right-of-way of any County road, upon which
vehicular travel by the public is permitted.
   (b)   "Off-Highway Vehicle" shall have the meaning set forth in section
38006 of the California Vehicle Code, and shall include motorcycles designed
for off-road use, sand buggies, dune buggies, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs),
jeeps, go-carts, and other similar vehicles.
   (c)   "Motor Vehicle" shall have the meaning set forth in section 415 of the
California Vehicle Code.
   (d)   "Cache Creek" shall refer to the bed and banks of the waterway from
the Lake/Yolo County line to the Creek's terminus in the Cache Creek Settling
Basin.
   (e)   "Public Land" shall refer to areas, other than a highway, that are
open and accessible to the public, except private lands under the immediate
control of the owner or his or her agent where permission is required and has
been granted to operate a motor vehicle.
(§ 2, Ord. 1465, eff. February 25, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1537, eff.
August 26, 2021, and by § 2, Ord. 1548, eff. March 24, 2022)
Sec. 10-12.102.   Applicability.
   This chapter shall not apply to the proper and legal operation of an off-
highway vehicle on a highway or within any area, trail, or route specifically
designated or authorized by a state or federal government agency for use by
off-highway vehicles.
(§ 2, Ord. 1465, eff. February 25, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1537, eff.
August 26, 2021, and by § 2, Ord. 1548, eff. March 24, 2022)
Sec. 10-12.103.   Activities on the banks and bed of Cache Creek.
   (a)   Except as may be authorized pursuant to sections
10-12.104(b), no person shall operate a motor vehicle or off-highway vehicle on
the banks or bed of Cache Creek. Notice of this prohibition shall be posted at
legal public access points to Cache Creek.
   (b)   The prohibition of subsection (a) shall not apply to the operation of
a motor vehicle for the purpose of launching watercraft in appropriately
designated areas, to the reasonable use of motor vehicles or off-highway
vehicles by rafting concessionaires authorized by the County to operate along
Cache Creek, or to ingress and egress in response to emergency medical, fire,
riparian restoration conducted with a valid permit from the California
Department of Fish and Wildlife under the direction of the County, or other law
enforcement, health, and safety situations that require the use of motor
vehicles or off-highway vehicles.
   (c)   No person may possess or consume alcoholic beverages on the banks or
bed of Cache Creek.
(§ 2, Ord. 1465, eff. February 25, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1537, eff.
August 26, 2021, and by § 2, Ord. 1548, eff. March 24, 2022)
Sec. 10-12.104.   Prohibition of operation on County property.
   (a)   Subjection to the exceptions in subsection (b), no motor vehicle or
off-highway vehicle shall be operated on any non-highway property owned by the
County, unless otherwise posted or authorized in writing by the County.
   (b)   The prohibition of subsection (a) shall not apply to the operation of
a motor vehicle for the purpose of launching watercraft in appropriately
designated areas, to the reasonable use of motor vehicles or off-highway
vehicles by rafting concessionaires authorized by the County to operate along
Cache Creek, or to ingress and egress in response to emergency medical, fire,
riparian restoration conducted with a valid permit from the California
Department of Fish and Wildlife under the direction of the County, or other law
enforcement, health and safety situations that require the use of motor
vehicles or off-highway vehicles.
(§ 2, Ord. 1465, eff. February 25, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1548, eff.
March 24, 2022)
Sec. 10-12.105.   Restriction on operation on private property.
   No person shall drive an off-highway vehicle upon the private property of
another without the prior written permission of the person or entity that owns
the property. The operator shall maintain any such written permission on his or
her person at all times while on such property, except that if the same
document grants permission to two or more persons, a person named in the
document need not have such document in his or her possession while with
another person named in the document, riding not more than 300 feet away, who
has such document in his or her possession.
(§ 2, Ord. 1465, eff. February 25, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1548, eff.
March 24, 2022)
Sec. 10-12.106.   Safety.
   (a)   Helmets. A person shall not operate, ride, or be otherwise propelled
on an off-highway vehicle on any highway or public land unless the person wears
a safety helmet meeting requirements established for motorcycles and motorized
bicycles, pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 27802.
   (b)   Whip and flag. Any off-highway vehicle operating on any highway or
public land shall have a whip and flag securely attached to it. Each whip shall
extend at least eight feet from the surface of the ground and have at least one
safety flag attached to it. This safety flag shall be a solid red or orange
color and be attached within ten inches of the top of the whip. The safety flag
shall be a minimum size of six inches by twelve inches and may be a pennant,
triangle, square, or rectangular shape. Any additional flags may be attached to
the whip but must be mounted below the safety flag. (
§ 2, Ord. 1537, eff. August 26, 2021, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1548, eff. March
24, 2022)
Sec. 10-12.107.   Penalties.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsections (b), (c), and (d), below, a
violation of this chapter is an infraction punishable by a fine of not more
than $100.00.
   (b)   A second violation of this chapter that is committed within one year
of a prior violation is an infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than
$200.00.
   (c)   A third violation of this chapter that is committed within one year
after two violations is an infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than
$500.00.
   (d)   A fourth or subsequent violation of this chapter that is committed
within three years after three or more violations is a misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the County jail for
not more than ninety (90) days, or by both fine and imprisonment.
(§ 2, Ord. 1465, eff. February 25, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1537, eff.
August 26, 2021, and by § 2, Ord. 1548, eff. March 24, 2022)
Chapter 13
YOLO HCP/NCCP
Sections:
10-13.1.   Purpose.
10-13.2.   Incorporation by reference.
10-13.3.   Definitions.
10-13.4.   Application to covered activities.
10-13.5.   Mitigation fees.
10-13.6.   Service fees.
10-13.7.   Authorized take coverage.
10-13.8.   Guidelines.
10-13.9.   Interpretation.
10-13.10.   Operative date.
Sec. 10-13.1.   Purpose.
   The Yolo Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Communities Conservation Plan
(“Yolo HCP/ NCCP”) has been developed to provide for the conservation of twelve
(12) sensitive species and the natural communities and agricultural land on
which they depend, and to provide a streamlined permitting process to address
the effects a range of future anticipated activities on those species. The Yolo
HCP/NCCP was developed by the County of Yolo and the cities of Davis, Woodland,
Winters, and West Sacramento (with the University of California, Davis, in an
ex officio capacity) through the Yolo County Habitat/Natural Community
Conservation Plan Joint Powers Agency, known and referred to informally as the
Yolo Habitat Conservancy (“Conservancy”).
   The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for implementation of the Yolo
HCP/NCCP in a manner that achieves, among other things, the following
objectives: (a) To protect, enhance, and restore natural communities and
cultivated lands, including rare and endangered species habitat, and provide
for the conservation of covered species within Yolo County; (b) To replace the
current system of separately permitting and mitigating individual projects with
a conservation and mitigation program, set forth in the Yolo HCP/ NCCP, that
comprehensively coordinates the implementation of permit requirements through
the development of a countywide conservation strategy, including identification
of priority acquisition areas in riparian zones or other locations with
important species habitat; (c) To provide for additional habitat conservation
that is otherwise unlikely to take place in Yolo County and benefit both listed
species and project proponents by ensuring a more efficient, effective approach
to mitigation; and (d) To ensure that the Conservancy, in its capacity as the
implementing entity for the Yolo HCP/NCCP, collects the local development
mitigation fees necessary to assist with plan implementation and all of the
related objectives set forth above. (§ 2, Ord. 1499, eff. July 5, 2018)
Sec. 10-13.2.   Incorporation by reference.
   The Yolo HCP/NCCP is incorporated by reference as though fully set forth
herein. Complete copies of the Yolo HCP/NCCP and related documents are
available at the offices of the Conservancy (as of the adoption of this
ordinance, 611 North Street, Woodland, CA 95695), and online at
www.yolohabitatconservancy.org. In addition, copies are available at the
Offices of the Yolo County Department of Community Services (as of the adoption
of this ordinance, 292 West Beamer Street, Woodland, CA 95695) and online at
www.yolocounty.org. (§ 2, Ord. 1499, eff. July 5, 2018)
Sec. 10-13.3.   Definitions.
   The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the application and
interpretation of this chapter. Words and phrases not defined in this section
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
   A.   “Building Permit” includes, in connection with a covered activity only,
a full structural building permit as well as a partial permit, such as a
foundation-only permit, grading permit, or any other permit or approval
authorizing a ground-disturbing activity in furtherance of a covered activity.
   B.   “Conservancy” refers to the Yolo Habitat Conservancy, a joint powers
agency consisting of the County of Yolo and the cities of Davis, Woodland,
Winters, and West Sacramento (with the University of California, Davis, in an
ex officio capacity). The formal, legal name of the joint powers agency is the
Yolo County Habitat/Natural Community Conservation Plan Joint Powers Agency.
   C.   “Covered Activity” and “Covered Activities” mean the activities and
projects described in Chapter 3 of the Yolo HCP/NCCP proposed for
implementation within the plan area and not otherwise exempted from the
requirements of the Yolo HCP/NCCP.
   D.   “Covered Species” means the species, listed and non-listed, which are
identified in Chapter 1 of the Yolo HCP/NCCP and described in Appendix A to the
Yolo HCP/NCCP. Covered species are those at-risk species that are covered by
the take permits issued by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the
California Department of Fish and Wildlife.
   E.   “Implementing Agreement” means that agreement made and entered into by
and between the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the California Department of
Fish and Wildlife, the Conservancy, the County of Yolo, and the cities of
Davis, West Sacramento, Winters, and Woodland, that defines the parties’
respective roles and responsibilities and provides a common understanding of
the actions that will be undertaken to implement the HCP/ NCCP.
   F.   “Mitigation Fees” means any fees adopted by the Conservancy, and any
amendments thereto, that apply (unless exempted) to covered activities within
the plan area in accordance with Chapter 8 of the Yolo HCP/NCCP and documents
cited or relied on therein.
   G.   “Plan Area” means the geographic area covered by the Yolo HCP/NCCP, as
described in Chapter 1 (Introduction) and depicted in Figure 1-1 thereof. The
plan area includes the County of Yolo in its entirety, consisting of
approximately six hundred fifty-three thousand five hundred forty-nine
(653,549) acres and also includes one thousand one hundred seventy-four (1,174)
acres along the south bank of Putah Creek in Solano County designated as the
“Extended Plan Area for Riparian Restoration” in Figure 1-1. This area is
included in the plan area only for the purpose of providing additional sites
for riparian restoration to support the covered species.
   H.   “Planning Permit(s)” means any discretionary permit that authorizes a
ground-disturbing activity for a covered activity, including but not limited to
tentative map, parcel map, conditional use permit, development agreement, or
any other discretionary permit, excluding actions of general application such
as general plan amendments, zoning and rezoning, annexation, specific plans,
and other area or regional land use actions.
   I.   “Project Applicant(s)” means a person or entity applying for a planning
permit for a project authorizing a ground-disturbing activity for a covered
activity, including any person or entity that is a “third party participant”
within the meaning of Section 3.32 of the implementing agreement.
   J.   “Take” has the meaning set forth in the federal Endangered Species Act
and its implementing regulations, as well as impacts to plants identified as
covered species. “Take” shall also have the meaning set forth in California
Fish & Game Code Section 86 (i.e., to hunt, pursue, catch, capture, or kill or
attempt to hunt, pursue, catch, capture, or kill).
   K.   “Take Permits” means the federal incidental take permit issued by the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to the Conservancy, the County, and each of the
four (4) cities based on the Yolo HCP/NCCP pursuant to Section 10(a)(1)(B) of
the federal Endangered Species Act, and shall also include related state
permits and approvals provided for in Section 86 of the California Fish & Game
Code with regard to activities subject to the California Endangered Species Act
(Fish & Game Code § 2050 et seq.) and the California Natural Community
Conservation Planning Act (Fish & Game Code §§ 2800-2835).
   L.   “Yolo HCP/NCCP” shall mean the Yolo Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural
Communities Conservation Plan. (§ 2, Ord. 1499, eff. July 5, 2018)
Sec. 10-13.4.   Application to covered activities.
   As set forth in Section 8.1 of the implementing agreement, all project
applicants for covered activities within the plan area shall comply with the
conditions set forth in Chapter 4 of the Yolo HCP/NCCP to avoid, minimize, and
mitigate the take of covered species resulting from covered activities. Each
planning permit application for a covered activity within the plan area shall
include details on the manner and timing for project compliance with the Yolo
HCP/NCCP in the form and manner required by the Director of Community Services.
Applicable conditions of approval on covered activities from Chapter 4 of the
Yolo HCP/NCCP as well as other measures required to implement the Yolo HCP/NCCP
conservation strategy shall be included in each planning permit approval for a
covered activity. (§ 2, Ord. 1499, eff. July 5, 2018)
Sec. 10-13.5.   Mitigation fees.
   A.   As a condition of each approval for a covered activity, the mitigation
fees shall be paid in full by the project applicant to Yolo County no later
than the date of issuance by Yolo County of a building permit. The mitigation
fees paid by project applicants shall be transferred (along with mitigation fee
payments provided for public agency projects) to the Conservancy on a quarterly
basis, or more frequently if requested by the Conservancy. Mitigation fees
shall be paid to Yolo County at the time of issuance of the first building
permit if more than one (1) building permit is required for the project.
   B.   If the Conservancy, pursuant to the terms of the Yolo HCP/NCCP,
authorizes another manner of compensation in lieu of the mitigation fees (such
as a conveyance of land in lieu of mitigation fees pursuant to the implementing
agreement and the Yolo HCP/NCCP), the project applicant shall provide Yolo
County with written documentation from the Conservancy of compliance with such
alternative manner of payment and the dollar equivalent amount of such
alternative manner of compensation.
   C.   In the event Yolo County determines a project requiring a planning
permit is exempt from payment of the mitigation fees, whether because it is not
a covered activity or because it is expressly exempt from mitigation fees
pursuant to Chapter 8 (Section 8.4.1.1) of the Yolo HCP/NCCP, no mitigation
fees shall be required for the project. Notwithstanding the applicability of an
exemption, if appropriate based on facts and circumstances relevant to the
project, Yolo County shall advise the applicant of the potential need for any
federal, state, or other permits or approvals relating to rare species or
associated habitats.
   D.   Any appeals relating fee determinations shall be heard by Yolo County
pursuant to the process established for hearing appeals of the planning permit
associated with the fee determination (Section
8-2.225).
   E.   On at least a quarterly basis through and including December of each
calendar year, Yolo County shall provide the Conservancy with information
regarding applications and approvals for take authorization under the Yolo HCP/
NCCP, including take associated with projects that are exempt from the fees
and/or conditions of the Yolo HCP/NCCP. The quarterly reporting shall also
include the same information regarding public agency projects and associated
take. (§ 2, Ord. 1499, eff. July 5, 2018)
Sec. 10-13.6.   Service fees.
   Yolo County may collect duly adopted service fees from project applicants to
compensate for Yolo County’s direct and indirect costs associated with its
administration and implementation of the Yolo HCP/NCCP and related permitting
process. The amount and method of calculation of the service fees shall be
consistent with any planning fees adopted by the Board of Supervisors. Any such
fees shall be in addition to, and not a deduction from, the mitigation fees
adopted by the Conservancy. (§ 2, Ord. 1499, eff. July 5, 2018)
Sec. 10-13.7.   Authorized take coverage.
   Upon payment in full of the mitigation fees and approval of planning permits
incorporating all applicable Yolo HCP/NCCP conditions of approval, the project
applicant shall receive authorized take coverage for the covered activity in
accordance with the terms of the take permits, the Yolo HCP/NCCP, and the
implementing agreement. (§ 2, Ord. 1499, eff. July 5, 2018)
Sec. 10-13.8.   Guidelines.
   The Director of Community Services may adopt guidelines to assist with the
implementation and administration of all aspects of this chapter. (§ 2, Ord.
1499, eff. July 5, 2018)
Sec. 10-13.9.   Interpretation.
   In the event of a conflict between any term or requirement of this chapter,
the take permits, the Yolo HCP/NCCP, and the implementing agreement, the term
or requirement of the take permits shall govern. (§ 2, Ord. 1499, eff. July 5,
2018)
Sec. 10-13.10.    Operative date.
   This chapter shall be operative upon the occurrence of all of the following:
amendment of the Conservancy’s joint powers agreement relating to plan
implementation (including mitigation fees); the Conservancy’s adoption of the
mitigation fees; the full execution of the implementing agreement; the adoption
of the Yolo HCP/NCCP and implementing ordinances by each of the cities and the
county; and the issuance of the take permits by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service and the California Department of Fish and Wildlife. Any discretionary
action by a body of the County of Yolo approving a covered activity after the
operative date shall be subject to compliance with this chapter. (§ 2, Ord.
1499, eff. July 5, 2018)
Chapter 14
INDUSTRIAL HEMP CULTIVATION, MANUFACTURING, PROCESSING, AND STORAGE
Sections:
10-14.01.   Findings.
10-14.02.   Definitions.
10-14.03.   Prohibition; exemptions.
10-14.04.   Enforcement.
10-14.05.   Severability.
10-14.06.   Conflicting enactments.
Sec. 10-14.01.   Findings.
   (a)   This chapter generally bans all industrial hemp cultivation and
related activities, including manufacturing, processing, storage and associated
activities, except for limited exemptions provided herein.
   (b)   In adopting ordinances that comprise this chapter, the Board of
Supervisors has expressly recognized that commercial markets for industrial
hemp and hemp products are developing rapidly, with the potential for
significant growth over time. As the hemp industry develops, and as more
information regarding conflicts with licensed cannabis cultivation sites, the
potential for nuisance odors, and related issues becomes known, the Board may
reconsider and modify the restrictions on industrial hemp cultivation set forth
in this chapter to facilitate more widespread cultivation and production of
industrial hemp and hemp products within the County. The Board of Supervisors
determines that these regulations provide needed clarity and direction, and
that such regulations are reasonably necessary to protect public health, safety
and welfare.
(§ 1, Ord. 1519, eff. April 9, 2020, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1532, eff. January
14, 2021)
Sec. 10-14.02.   Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter:
   (a)   "Cultivation" shall mean the tilling, growing, raising, harvesting,
and other cultivation practices of industrial hemp for uses authorized by this
chapter.
   (b)   "Greenhouse" means a structure or thermally isolated area of a
building that maintains a specialized sunlit environment used for and essential
to the cultivation, protection, or maintenance of plants. For the purposes of
this chapter, cultivation in a greenhouse (including mixed-light) is considered
an indoor use.
   (c)   "lndoor(s)" means within a fully enclosed and secure structure that
complies with the California Building Code, as adopted by the County of Yolo,
that has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from
the ground to the roof, and a foundation, slab, or equivalent base to which the
floor is securely attached. The structure must be secure against unauthorized
entry, accessible only through one or more lockable doors, and constructed of
solid materials that cannot easily be broken through, such as 2" x 4" or
thicker studs overlain with 3/8" or thicker plywood or equivalent materials.
Plastic sheeting, regardless of gauge, or similar products do not satisfy this
requirement. For the purposes of this chapter, cultivation in greenhouses and
enclosed nurseries are considered indoor operations, and buffers do not apply.
   (d)   "Industrial hemp" shall have the meaning set forth in Food and
Agricultural Code § 81000 and Health & Safety Code § 11018.5, as may be amended
from time to time. As of the date of adoption of this chapter, those
authorities define industrial hemp as "a crop that is limited to types of the
plant Cannabis sativa L. having no more than three-tenths of 1 percent
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) contained in the dried flowering tops, whether
growing or not; the seeds of the plant: the resin extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin produced therefrom."
   (e)   "Manufacturing" shall mean to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or
otherwise make or prepare an industrial hemp product.
   (f)   "Nursery stock" shall have the meaning outlined in Food and
Agricultural Code Section 5005.
   (g)   "Processing" shall mean drying, curing, grading, or trimming of
industrial hemp, as well as any similar post-harvest activities that involve
readying harvested industrial hemp for manufacturing activities or other work
to prepare a commercial product.
   (h)   "Registration" shall mean the industrial hemp registration process
pursuant to the California Food and Agricultural Code sections 81000 through
81011 with the Agricultural Commissioner and, in addition, registration in
connection with all other uses permitted by this chapter.
   (i)   "Seed breeder" means an individual or public or private institution or
organization that is registered with the Yolo County Agricultural Commissioner
to develop seed cultivars intended for sale or research.
   (j)   "Storage" shall mean the act of maintaining harvested industrial hemp
in a fully enclosed and secure structure that complies with the California
Building Code, as adopted by the County of Yolo, on a temporary basis until it
can be lawfully transferred to an authorized distributor or other non-retail
purchaser.
   (k)   "Transplant" is a cultivated hemp plant grown from seed or cutting in
soil or individual containers for less than 8 weeks that does not exceed a
height of eight (8) inches.
(§ 1, Ord. 1519, eff. April 9, 2020, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1532, eff. January
14, 2021)
Sec. 10-14.03.   Prohibition; exemptions.
   No person or entity shall engage in industrial hemp cultivation,
manufacturing, processing, or storage within the unincorporated area of the
County, and no County permit, registration, or approval of any type shall be
issued therefor. This prohibition is subject to the following exceptions, which
shall be narrowly interpreted:
   (a)   The indoor cultivation of hemp in a structure dedicated solely to the
cultivation of hemp for purposes of nursery stock, transplants, research or
seed breeding. Effective pollen control methods to minimize pollen escape and
offsite migration shall be utilized. All other indoor cultivation of industrial
hemp is prohibited.
   (b)   The Agricultural Commissioner is authorized to monitor, inspect, and
take all other appropriate actions to determine whether indoor hemp cultivation
complies with this exemption and other applicable legal requirements, and to
take enforcement action (including but not limited to abatement) or refer
violations to other departments or agencies with authority to abate or
otherwise address a violation.
   (c)   Manufacturing, processing, and storage activities that are incidental
to the lawful cultivation of industrial hemp conducted in full compliance with
the exemptions set forth herein for nursery stock, transplants, research or
seed breeding within the County.
   (d)   Storage of harvested industrial hemp at a facility used for such
purpose as February 25, 2020. To utilize this exemption, prior to April 9,
2020, the owner or an authorized lessee of the storage facility must complete a
registration form provided by the Agricultural Commissioner to establish a
record of the existing use. The form shall be accompanied by certified
laboratory test results relating to THC content and any other information
reasonably required by the Agricultural Commissioner to implement this
exemption. Stored hemp shall be subject to inspection and retesting at the sole
cost and expense of the responsible party upon request by the Agricultural
Commissioner or Sheriff. If the storage of industrial hemp at said facility
thereafter ceases, it may not be renewed.
(§ 1, Ord. 1519, eff. April 9, 2020, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1532, eff. January
14, 2021)
Sec. 10-14.04.   Enforcement.
   The violation of this chapter constitutes a public nuisance and may be
abated in accordance with the abatement procedures set forth in Chapter 20 of
Title 5 (Marijuana Cultivation) of the Yolo County Code, as may be amended from
time to time, and by any other means available by law. As authorized by
Government Code § 25132, and except as otherwise provided by state law, any
person or entity violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(§ 1, Ord. 1519, eff. April 9, 2020, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1532, eff. January
14, 2021)
Sec. 10-14.05.   Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is
held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall
not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance. The Board of Supervisors
hereby declares that it would have adopted this ordinance and each section,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that one or more
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid.
(§ 1, Ord. 1519, eff. April 9, 2020, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1532, eff. January
14, 2021)
Sec. 10-14.06.   Conflicting enactments.
   To the extent that there is any conflict between the provisions of this
ordinance and the provisions of any other County Code, ordinance, resolution or
policy, all such conflicting provisions shall be suspended. This ordinance
expressly supersedes uncodified ordinances 1505, 1508, and 1516, each of which
shall be of no further force or effect upon its effective date.
(§ 1, Ord. 1519, eff. April 9, 2020, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1532, eff. January
14, 2021)
Title 11
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Chapters:
1.   Franchise Enabling Law
2.   Cable Television Licenses
Chapter 1
FRANCHISE ENABLING LAW
Sections:
Article 1. Title
   
11-1.101   Title.
Article 2. Purpose and Operation of Chapter
   
11-1.201   Purposes.
   
11-1.202   Operation.
   
11-1.203   East Yolo Franchise Area.
Article 3. Definitions
   
11-1.301   Scope.
   
11-1.302   Applicant.
   
11-1.302.1   Act.
   
11-1.302.2   Broad Categories of video programming and other services.
   
11-1.303   Basic cable service.
   
11-1.304   Cable communications system, CATV system, or cable system.
   
11-1.305   Channel or cable channel.
   
11-1.306   Community use, community use programming, and community use
channels.
   
11-1.307   Converter.
   
11-1.308   County or Yolo County.
   
11-1.309   County Administrator.
   
11-1.310   Board.
   
11-1.311   Dwelling unit.
   
11-1.312   Educational channel.
   
11-1.313   Entertainment services.
   
11-1.314   Federal Communications Commission.
   
11-1.315   Franchise or franchise agreement.
   
11-1.316   Franchise documents.
   
11-1.317   Franchise property.
   
11-1.318   Government channel.
   
11-1.319   Grantee.
   
11-1.320   Grantor.
   
11-1.321   Gross revenue.
   
11-1.322   Institutional network or institutional user network.
   
11-1.323   Institutional services.
   
11-1.324   Institutional user.
   
11-1.325   Interactive services.
   
11-1.326   Leased access.
   
11-1.327   Local origination channel.
   
11-1.328   Monitoring.
   
11-1.329   Non-basic service.
   
11-1.330   Pay channel or premium channel.
   
11-1.331   Premium service.
   
11-1.332   Public access channel.
   
11-1.332.1   Public, educational, or governmental access funding or PEG
funding.
   
11-1.332.2   Public, educational, or governmental access funding or PEG
funding.
   
11-1.332.3   Public, educational, or governmental access programming or PEG
programming
   
11-1.333   Street.
   
11-1.334   Subscriber.
   
11-1.335   Subscriber network.
   
11-1.336   Tapping.
   
11-1.337   Tier of service.
   
11-1.338   User.
   
11-1.339   Yolo County community or community.
Article 4. Franchise Grant
   
11-1.401   Authority to grant franchises or cable television.
   
11-1.402   Incorporation by reference.
   
11-1.403   General characteristics of franchises issued.
   
11-1.404   Franchises as contracts.
   
11-1.405   Utility poles.
   
11-1.406   Notices.
   
11-1.407   Leases.
   
11-1.408   Authority.
   
11-1.409   Ordinances: Police powers.
   
11-1.410   Amendments.
   
11-1.411   Rights reserved to the County.
   
11-1.412   Limitations of actions.
   
11-1.413   Illegal tapping.
   
11-1.414   Severability.
   
11-1.415   Inclusion in municipalities.
   
11-1.416   Annexations. (Repealed).
Article 5. Advisory Boards
   
11-1.501   Policy.
   
11-1.502   Ad hoc cable communications advisory committees.
   
11-1.503   Cable Communications area advisory commissions: Establishment.
   
11-1.504   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Membership.
   
11-1.505   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Membership: Terms.
   
11-1.506   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Meetings: Quorum.
   
11-1.507   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Membership:
Termination.
   
11-1.508   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Meetings: Minutes.
   
11-1.509   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Officers.
   
11-1.510   Cable communications area advisory commissions: County liaison.
   
11-1.511   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Duties.
   
11-1.512   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Rules and
procedures.
Article 6. Franchise Procedures
   
11-1.601   Initiation.
   
11-1.602   Applications for franchises.
   
11-1.603   Privacy of proposals.
   
11-1.604   Environmental analyses.
   
11-1.605   Franchise acceptance.
   
11-1.606   Duration of grant.
   
11-1.607   Replacement franchises.
Article 7. Purchases of Systems
   
11-1.701   Authority to purchase systems.
   
11-1.702   Scope of purchases.
   
11-1.703   Assignments.
   
11-1.704   Valuation definitions.
   
11-1.705   Valuation limits.
   
11-1.706   Date of valuation.
   
11-1.707   Requests for inventories.
   
11-1.708   Inventories.
   
11-1.709   Demands for arbitration.
   
11-1.710   Arbitration of value.
   
11-1.711   Subsequent valuations.
   
11-1.712   Judicial relief.
   
11-1.713   Sales: Transfers of title.
   
11-1.714   Negotiated acquisitions.
   
11-1.715   Policy for financing purchases.
Article 8. Operation and Service
   
11-1.801   Service area.
   
11-1.802   Establishment of service.
   
11-1.803   General capabilities.
   
11-1.804   Other capabilities.
   
11-1.805   Standby power.
   
11-1.806   Override capability.
   
11-1.807   Interconnections.
   
11-1.808   Plans and specifications.
   
11-1.809   Technical standards.
   
11-1.810   Installation procedures.
   
11-1.811   Overall system.
   
11-1.812   Forward portion.
   
11-1.813   Combined forward trunk and distribution system.
   
11-1.814   Reverse portion.
   
11-1.815   Compatibility for signal exchanges.
   
11-1.816   Preventive maintenance.
   
11-1.817   Testing.
   
11-1.818   Testing procedures.
   
11-1.819   Antenna structures.
   
11-1.820   Rf leakage.
   
11-1.821   Cable installations.
   
11-1.822   Underground cable.
   
11-1.823   Drop cables.
   
11-1.824   Jacketed cable.
   
11-1.825   Corrective measures.
   
11-1.826   Safety requirements.
Article 9. Community Use Programming
   
11-1.901   Community use proposals.
   
11-1.902   Application contents.
   
11-1.903   Community use programming.
   
11-1.904   PEG facilities, PEG programming, and PEG funding.
   
11-1.905   Compliance with proposals.
   
11-1.906   Resources for public agencies.
   
11-1.907   Resources for others.
Article 10. Street Work, Permits, and Construction
   
11-1.1001   Permits.
   
11-1.1002   General construction.
   
11-1.1003   Erection of poles.
   
11-1.1004   Underground facilities.
   
11-1.1005   System extensions.
   
11-1.1006   Use of streets: Interference.
   
11-1.1007   Restoration of streets and private property.
   
11-1.1008   Street work.
   
11-1.1009   Relocation.
   
11-1.1010   Tree trimming.
   
11-1.1011   Movement of buildings.
   
11-1.1012   Removal.
   
11-1.1013   Abandonment of franchise property.
   
11-1.1014   System maintenance.
Article 11. Completion
   
11-1.1101   Completion.
   
11-1.1102   Hearings and determinations.
   
11-1.1103   Requests for arbitration.
   
11-1.1104   Complaints.
   
11-1.1105   Excuses for violations.
   
11-1.1106   Examples of excuses for violations.
   
11-1.1107   Enforcement proceedings.
   
11-1.1108   Commencement of enforcement proceedings.
   
11-1.1109   Conduct of hearings.
   
11-1.1110   Arbitration of enforcement proceedings.
Article 12. Remedies
   
11-1.1201   Crimes.
   
11-1.1202   Impracticability of ascertaining damages.
   
11-1.1203   Liquidated damages: Amount.
   
11-1.1204   Reduction in term.
   
11-1.1205   Collection of damages.
   
11-1.1206   Liquidated damage arbitration proceedings.
   
11-1.1207   Alternative remedies.
   
11-1.1208   Termination of franchises.
   
11-1.1209   Commencement of termination proceedings.
   
11-1.1210   Conduct of hearings.
   
11-1.1211   Appeals to arbitration.
   
11-1.1212   Acquisition of property.
   
11-1.1213   County’s right to operate systems.
   
11-1.1214   Arbitration proceedings.
   
11-1.1215   Arbitration panel.
   
11-1.1216   Arbitration hearings.
   
11-1.1217   Costs of arbitration.
   
11-1.1218   Arbitration awards.
   
11-1.1219   Limitations of powers.
   
11-1.1220   Alternative remedies.
Article 13. Franchise Services
   
11-1.1301   Purposes.
   
11-1.1302   System ownership.
   
11-1.1303   Services.
   
11-1.1304   Non-entertainment service rights and duties.
   
11-1.1305   Regulation of non-entertainment services.
   
11-1.1306   Educational and entertainment services.
   
11-1.1307   Regulation of educational and entertainment services.
   
11-1.1308   Subscriber antennas.
   
11-1.1309   Anti-competitive practices.
   
11-1.1310   Post franchise services.
   
11-1.1311   Continuity of quality.
   
11-1.1312   Maintenance and repair.
   
11-1.1313   Subscriber services.
   
11-1.1314   Privacy.
   
11-1.1315   Records.
   
11-1.1316   Reports.
   
11-1.1317   Discrimination in services prohibited.
   
11-1.1318   Grantees’ rules.
   
11-1.1319   Complaints.
   
11-1.1320   System and services reviews.
   
11-1.1321   Rules and regulations.
   
11-1.1322   Hearings.
   
11-1.1323   Standards.
   
11-1.1324   No discrimination.
   
11-1.1325   Affirmative action.
   
11-1.1326   Posting nondiscrimination notices.
   
11-1.1327   Solicitations.
   
11-1.1328   Incorporation of nondiscrimination provisions in contracts.
   
11-1.1329   Community use programming. (Repealed).
Article 14. Rates and Charges
   
11-1.1401   Applicability.
   
11-1.1402   Board approval. (Repealed).
   
11-1.1403   Petitions. (Repealed).
   
11-1.1404   Board determinations. (Repealed).
   
11-1.1405   Hearings: Representatives. (Repealed).
   
11-1.1406   Hearings: Recommendations. (Repealed).
   
11-1.1407   Separate rates.
   
11-1.1408   Termination of services.
Article 15. Compensation and Guarantees to the County
   
11-1.1501   Franchise fees.
   
11-1.1502   Amount and payment of franchise fees.
   
11-1.1503   Future laws.
   
11-1.1504   Auditing and financial records.
   
11-1.1505   Delinquent fees: Limitations: Damages.
   
11-1.1506   Delinquent fees: Arbitration.
   
11-1.1507   Increases in franchise fees: Arbitration.
   
11-1.1508   Performance bonds.
   
11-1.1509   Security deposits.
   
11-1.1510   Indemnification by grantees.
   
11-1.1511   Public liability and property damage insurance.
   
11-1.1512   Workers’ compensation insurance.
   
11-1.1513   Waivers of subrogation.
Article 16. Assignments and Transfers
   
11-1.1601   Transfers prohibited.
   
11-1.1602   Encumbrances for financing purposes.
   
11-1.1603   Transfers of systems or franchises.
   
11-1.1604   Transfers of control.
   
11-1.1605   Determinations of proposed transfers.
   
11-1.1606   Purchases of grantees’ property. (Repealed).
   
11-1.1607   Receiverships.
   
11-1.1608   Recording and filing.
   
11-1.1609   No recourse against agencies.
   
11-1.1610   Nonenforcement.
Article 1.
Title
Sec. 11-1.101.   Title.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Yolo County Cable
Communications Law”. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Article 2.
Purpose and Operation of Chapter
Sec. 11-1.201.   Purposes.
   The purposes of this chapter include, but are not limited to, the promotion
of the general welfare of the citizens of the Yolo County community by:
   (a)   Establishing a master plan for the franchising of cable communication
services within the Yolo County community;
   (b)   Establishing a regulatory framework for the administration of
franchises in order to insure that the potential recreational, educational,
social, economic, and other advantages of cable communications will in fact
inure to the benefit of the community and the citizens thereof;
   (c)   Regulating the operations of grantees for the purpose of protecting
and promoting the public health, peace, safety, and welfare; and
   (d)   Encouraging the adoption of goals for systems of cable communications
within the County which recognize the advantages of cable services and the
benefits of resources of the University of California, the California State
University, and neighboring cable communications systems which may be made
available to inhabitants of the Yolo County community.
   The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to confer any right upon
a grantee which is not otherwise conferred by another express provision of this
chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.202.   Operation.
   Territory in the County shall not fall within the operation of this chapter
unless the Board by ordinance shall declare this chapter operative within said
territory. Such territory shall be known as the “Franchise Area”. Any such
ordinance shall describe the territory in which this chapter shall become
operative. The ordinance may specify any modifications to the provisions of
this chapter which shall apply only to the territory described in the
ordinance. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.203.   East Yolo Franchise Area.
   (a)   The East Yolo Area shall fall within the operation of this chapter,
and the Board declares this chapter operative within said territory on and
after October 27, 1983. The territory shall be known as the East Yolo Franchise
Area.
   (b)   The East Yolo Area consists of all the unincorporated territory in the
County more particularly described as follows:
East Yolo Area. Beginning at the intersection of the center line of the
Sacramento River and at a point 45 feet northerly of the center line of County
Road 126; thence westerly along a line parallel to the center line of County
Road 126 and the extension thereof to the center line of the east levee of the
East Yolo Bypass; thence southerly and westerly along the center line of the
east levee of the East Yolo Bypass to the extension of the center line of
Thorpe Road; thence easterly along the extension of the center line of Thorpe
Road to the center line of the Sacramento River Deep Water Ship Channel; thence
southerly along the center line of the Sacramento River Deep Water Ship Channel
to the extension of the center line of the north levee of Lisbon Slough; thence
easterly along the westerly extension of the center line of the north levee of
Lisbon Slough and along the center line of the north levee of Lisbon Slough and
the easterly extension of the center line of Lisbon Slough to the center line
of the Sacramento River; thence along the center line of the Sacramento River
to the point of beginning.
   (c)   The East Yolo Franchise Area includes an Imposed Service Area.
   (d)   The Imposed Service Area consists of all territory within the East
Yolo Franchise Area so designated in any request for proposals issued pursuant
to Article 4 of this chapter, Any grantee shall provide a system of such design
and construction that service can be made available, and such service shall be
made available to all residential units as provided in Section
11-1.801 of Article 8 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Article 3.
Definitions
Sec. 11-1.301.   Scope.
   Unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used
in this chapter are defined as set forth in this article. Words not defined in
this article shall be given their common and ordinary meanings, consistent with
the context in which such words are used and the purpose of this chapter. (§ 1,
Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.302.   Applicant.
   “Applicant” shall mean any person or corporation submitting an application
for a cable communications franchise. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.302.1.   Act.
   “Act” shall mean the Cable Franchise Policy and Communications Act of 1984
(Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934). (§ 1, Ord. 999, eff. March 7,
1985)
Sec. 11-1.302.2.   Broad categories of video programming and other services.
   “Broad categories of video programming and other services” shall mean broad
categories of video programming (for example, children’s programming; local
origination programming; community use programming; programming in a particular
foreign language; programming which is of primary interest to a particular
minority group; news and public affairs programming; and sports programming and
related categories) and other services offered by the grantee in its
application and incorporated in the franchise ordinance as a commitment of the
grantee. “Broad categories of video programming and other services” shall not
include any purported commitment to provide specific programming (for example,
a particular news service or particular program) or any item of value not
utilized in the operation of the cable system. (§ 1, Ord. 999, eff. March 7,
1985)
Sec. 11-1.303.   Basic cable service.
   “Basic cable service” shall be defined as provided in subsection (2) of
Section 602 of the Act. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by §
2, Ord. 999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.304.   Cable communications system, CATV system, or cable system.
   “Cable communications system”, “CATV system”, or “cable system” shall be
defined as provided in subsection (6) of Section 602 of the Act. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.305.   Channel or cable channel.
   “Channel” or “cable channel” shall be defined as provided in subsection (3)
of Section 602 of the Act. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by
§ 3, Ord. 999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.306.   Community use, community use programming, and community use
channels.
   ‘Community use”, “community use programming”, and “community use channels”
shall mean broad categories of video programming and other services provided by
the grantee (other than PEG facilities, PEG funding, and PEG programming) for
the purposes of noncommercial cablecasts presented by or on behalf of a
grantee, the County, individuals, and local community nonprofit organizations,
which programming and services consist of topics of special interest to the
Yolo County community or elements thereof, including matters of a political,
governmental, sociological, religious, educational, cultural, artistic, health-
oriented, ethnic, economic, recreational, charitable, and philanthropic nature,
a significant part of such programming having been locally produced. For the
purposes of this subsection, “noncommercial” shall mean:
   (a)   That the contents of such programming shall not be for the purpose of
directly selling any product or service for private gain; and
   (b)   That the programming shall not be associated with or interrupted
during presentation by commercial advertising or announcements specifically
presented for the purpose of selling products or services for private gain. (§
1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 3, Ord. 999, eff. March 7,
1985)
Sec. 11-1.307.   Converter.
   “Converter” shall mean an electronic device which converts signals to a
frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a
subscriber and, by an appropriate channel selector, also permits a subscriber
to view all signals authorized to be received at a designated location. (§ 1,
Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.308.   County or    Yolo County .
   “County” or “Yolo County” shall mean the County of Yolo, a political
subdivision of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.309. County Administrator .
   “County Administrator” shall mean the County Administrative Officer of Yolo
County. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.310.   Board.
   “Board” shall mean the Board of Supervisors of the County of Yolo. (§ 1,
Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.311.   Dwelling unit.
   “Dwelling unit” shall mean a residential living unit as distinguished from
temporary lodging facilities, such as hotel and motel rooms and dormitories,
and shall include single-family residential units and individual apartments,
condominium units, mobile homes within mobile home parks, and other multiple-
family residential units. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.312.   Educational channel.
   “Educational channel” shall mean any channel or portion of a channel on
which school, library, or governmental educational institutions are the only
designated programmers. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.313.   Entertainment services.
   “Entertainment services” shall mean “cable service” as defined by subsection
(5) of Section 602 of the Act. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as
amended by § 4, Ord. 999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.314.   Federal Communications Commission.
   “Federal Communications Commission” or “FCC” shall mean the present Federal
agency of that name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, or any
successor agency created by the United States Congress, and any legally
appointed, designated, or elected agent or successor thereof. (§ 1, Ord. 961,
eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.315.   Franchise or franchise agreement.
   “Franchise” or “franchise agreement” shall mean any authorization granted
under this chapter in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, or license to
construct, operate, and maintain a cable communications system within the
unincorporated area of the County. Any such authorization, in whatever form
granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the
privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the County as
required by other laws of the County. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.316.   Franchise documents.
   “Franchise documents”, with respect to a franchise for a cable
communications system issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall
mean the provisions of this chapter, the map defining any Imposed Service Area
for the franchise as adopted, the provisions of any request for proposals
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in connection with such
franchise, the provisions of the application for the franchise submitted by the
grantee, the provisions of the ordinance offering the franchise, and the
provisions of the certificate of acceptance by the grantee of the franchise. (§
1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.317.   Franchise property.
   “Franchise property” shall mean all property retained by the grantee in,
along, and across streets under the authority of a franchise or business
license. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.318.   Government channel.
   “Government channel” shall mean any channel or portion thereof dedicated to
the use of the County or public agencies designated by the County. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.319.   Grantee.
   “Grantee” shall mean a person or corporation to whom or which a franchise is
granted pursuant to this chapter or any person or corporation to whom or which
such franchise thereafter may be lawfully transferred. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.320.   Grantor.
   “Grantor” shall mean the County. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.321.   Gross revenue.
   (a)   “Gross revenue” shall mean all cash, credits, property of any kind or
nature, or other consideration derived directly or indirectly by a grantee, and
its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent, and any other person or entity in which
the grantee has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in the
grantee, arising from or attributable to the operation of the cable
communications system, including, but not limited to:
   (1)   Revenue from all charges for those services provided on the subscriber
network and institutional network (including leased access fees);
   (2)   Revenue from all charges for the insertion of commercial
advertisements upon the system;
   (3)   Revenue from all charges for the leased use of studios;
   (4)   Revenue from all charges for the installation, connection, and
reinstatement of the equipment necessary for the utilization of the system and
the provision of subscriber and other services; and
   (5)   The sale, exchange, or cablecast of any programming developed for
community use or institutional users.
   “Gross revenue” shall include, valued at retail price levels, the value of
any goods, services, or other remuneration in non-monetary form received by the
grantee or others described in this subsection in consideration for the
performance by a grantee or others described in this subsection of any
advertising or other service in connection with the cable communications
system.
   (b)   “Gross revenue” shall not include:
   (1)   Any taxes on services furnished by the grantee which taxes are imposed
directly upon any subscriber or user by the United States, the State, or a
local agency and collected by the grantee on behalf of the government;
   (2)   Revenue received directly from the grantee by an affiliate,
subsidiary, or parent, or any other person or entity in which the grantee has a
financial interest or which has a financial interest in the grantee, when the
revenue received has already been included in reported gross revenue as
received by the grantee; and
   (3)   Revenue received by such an affiliate, subsidiary, parent, person, or
entity when the revenue received is from the sale of national advertising shown
on programs distributed on a national basis by the affiliate, subsidiary,
parent, person, or entity and, but for this exception, that portion of the
revenue attributable to broadcasts through the cable communications system
would be treated as gross revenue. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.322.   Institutional network or institutional user network.
   “Institutional network” or “institutional user network” shall mean a cable
communications network or a specified number of channels on a subscriber
network used exclusively for the provision of services to businesses, schools,
public agencies, or other nonprofit agencies in connection with the ongoing
operations of such enterprises. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.323.   Institutional services.
   “Institutional services” shall mean services delivered on the institutional
network. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.324.   Institutional user.
   “Institutional user” shall mean a business, public agency, school, or
nonprofit corporation receiving the institutional services on the institutional
user network. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.325.   Interactive services.
   “Interactive services” shall mean services provided to subscribers or users
where the subscriber either:
   (a)   Both receives information consisting of either television or other
signals and transmits signals generated by the subscriber or user on equipment
under his control for the purpose of selecting what information shall be
transmitted to the subscriber or user for any other purpose; or
   (b)   Transmits signals to any other location For any purpose. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.326.   Leased access.
   “Leased access” shall mean use on a fee-for-service basis of the subscriber
network or institutional network by business enterprises (whether profit,
nonprofit, or governmental) unaffiliated with the grantee to render services or
deliver programming within the Yolo County community. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.327.   Local origination channel.
   “Local origination channel” shall mean any channel or portion of a channel
where the grantee is the only designated programmer and which channel is
utilized to provide television programs to subscribers. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.328.   Monitoring.
   “Monitoring” shall mean observing a communications signal, or the absence of
a signal, where the observer is not the subscriber, whether the signal is
observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever; provided,
however, “monitoring” shall not include system- wide, non-individually
addressed sweeps of the cable communications system for the purposes of
verifying system integrity, controlling return path transmissions, or billing
for pay services. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.329.   Non-basic service.
   “Non-basic service” shall mean any communications service in addition to the
basic service. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.330.   Pay channel or premium channel.
   “Pay channel” or “premium channel” shall mean a channel on which television
signals are delivered to subscribers for a special fee or charge to subscribers
over and above the regular charges for subscriber service, on a per program,
per channel, or other subscription basis. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983)
Sec. 11-1.331.   Premium service.
   “Premium service” shall mean a pay-per-program, pay-per-channel, or
subscription service, that is, delivered to the subscribers for a fee or charge
over and above the regular charges for basic service other than those services
provided as a part of a tier of service. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.332.   Public access channel.
   “Public access channel” shall mean any channel or portion of a channel where
any member of the general public may be a programmer on a first-come, first-
served basis, subject to the appropriate rules formulated by the grantee or its
delegate, subject to approval by the grantor. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983)
Sec. 11-1.332.1.   Public, educational, or governmental access facilities or
PEG facilities.
   “Public, educational, or governmental access facilities or PEG facilities”
shall mean:
   (a)   The channel capacity designated for public, educational, or
governmental use; and
   (b)   The facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. (§
5, Ord. 999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.332.2.   Public, educational, or governmental access funding or PEG
funding.
   “Public, educational, or governmental access funding or PEG funding” shall
mean payments, other than payments for capital costs, which are required by
this chapter to be made by the grantee during the term of the franchise for, or
in support of the use of, public, educational, or governmental access
facilities. (§ 5, Ord. 999, eff. March 7,1985)
Sec. 11-1.332.3.   Public, educational, or governmental access programming or
PEG programming.
   “Public, educational, or governmental access programming or PEG programming”
shall mean public, educational, or governmental programming specifically
identified in this chapter as being produced by the use of public, educational,
or governmental access facilities or public, educational, or governmental
access funding. (§ 5, Ord. 999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.333.   Street.
   “Street” shall mean the surface of and the space above and below any street,
road, highway, freeway, utility right-of-way, or any other easement which now
or hereafter exists for the provision of public and quasi-public services to
residential or other properties and in which the County is expressly or
impliedly authorized or empowered to permit use for the installation and
operation of a cable communications system. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983)
Sec. 11-1.334.   Subscriber.
   “Subscriber” shall mean a lawful recipient of service from a cable
communications system. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.335.   Subscriber network.
   “Subscriber network” shall mean a cable communications network which carries
television entertainment channels and community use channels (including basic
service) and which may carry channels providing commercial or other non-
entertainment services and leased access channels. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October
27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.336.   Tapping.
   “Tapping” shall mean the observing of a communications signal exchange where
the observer is neither of the communicating parties, whether the exchange is
observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.337.   Tier of service.
   “Tier of service” shall mean a grouping of two (2) or more channels of
program services on the subscriber network which is marketed by a grantee to
subscribers for a single monthly or other charge. “Basic service”, as defined
by subsection (a)of Section
11-1.303 of this article, shall constitute a single tier of service. “Basic
service”, as authorized under subsection (b)of said Section
11-1.303, shall constitute a separate and distinct tier of service. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.338.   User.
   “User” shall mean a party utilizing a cable communications system channel
for the purposes of production or the transmission of material to subscribers,
as contrasted with the receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.339. Yolo County community or community.
   “Yolo County community” or “community” shall mean the entire geographical
territory within the unincorporated area of the County or the inhabitants
therein. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Article 4.
Franchise Grant
Sec. 11-1.401.   Authority to grant franchises for cable television.
   It shall be unlawful to commence or engage in the construction, operation,
or maintenance of a cable communications system without a franchise issued
under this chapter. The Board, by ordinance, may award a franchise to
construct, operate, and maintain a cable communications system within all or
any portion of the unincorporated area of the County to any person, whether
operating under an existing franchise or not, who makes an application for
authority to furnish a cable communications system which complies with the
terms and conditions of this chapter; provided, however, this section shall not
be deemed to require the grant of a franchise to any particular person or to
prohibit the Board from restricting the number of grantees should the Board
determine such a restriction would be in the public interests. Any franchise
for the construction, maintenance, and operation of cable communications
systems using the public streets, utility easements, other public rights-of-
way, or places shall conform to the provisions of this chapter, (§ 1, Ord. 961,
eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.402.   Incorporation by reference.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall be incorporated by reference in
any franchise agreement or license approved pursuant to this chapter.
   (b)   The provisions of any proposal submitted and accepted by the County
shall be incorporated by reference in any applicable franchise or license. (§
1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.403.   General characteristics of franchises issued.
   Any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to:
   (a)   Authorize utilization of the streets for the public or quasi-public
purpose of installing cables, wires, lines, and other facilities, in order to
operate a cable communications system; and
   (b)   Be nonexclusive and neither expressly nor impliedly be deemed to
preclude the issuance of subsequent franchises to operate cable communications
systems within the Yolo County community.
   Such a franchise shall not be deemed to authorize or either expressly or
impliedly permit the grantee, except with the consent of the owners, or as
otherwise provided by law, to provide cable communications system service to,
or install antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides, other
conductors, converters, or any other equipment or facilities upon, private
property, including, but not limited to, apartment complexes, condominiums,
mobile home parks, and residential subdivision developments with private roads.
The purpose of this paragraph is to require consent by the owner or as
otherwise provided by law for the provision of service. This paragraph shall
not be construed to prohibit a grantee from entering or utilizing private
property as an incident to its use of the streets to the extent entry or use is
expressly or impliedly authorized by the right conferred by this section to
occupy the streets. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.404.   Franchises as contracts.
   A franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to constitute a contract between the grantee and the County. Each
grantee shall be deemed to have contractually committed itself to comply with
the terms, conditions, and provisions of the franchise documents, and with all
rules, orders, regulations, and determinations applicable to the franchise
which are issued, promulgated, or made pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. The regulatory authority conferred by the provisions of this chapter,
including the power to amend the provisions of this chapter, as reserved under
Section
11-1.404 of this article, shall constitute as reserved authority under the
contract.
   All terms, conditions, and provisions of the contract shall be deemed to be
embodied in the franchise documents, and conflicts in the terms, conditions, or
provisions of the franchise documents shall be resolved as follows:
   (a)   The express terms of this chapter shall prevail over conflicting or
inconsistent provisions in any other franchise document.
   (b)   The express terms of the ordinance offering the franchise shall
prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in any other franchise
document, except the express terms of this chapter.
   (c)   The express terms of the request for proposals shall prevail over
conflicting or inconsistent provisions in either the application for the
franchise or the certificate of acceptance of the franchise.
   (d)   The express terms of the application for the franchise shall prevail
over the inconsistent or conflicting provisions in the certificate of
acceptance of the franchise.
   The provisions of the franchise documents shall be liberally construed in
order to effectuate the purposes and objects thereof. Prior to the initial
enactment of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter were developed
pursuant to public hearings conducted for the purpose of receiving comments
from the citizenry, operators interested in applying for a franchise in
meetings with staff and through the submission by the operators of public oral
and written comments, and the submission of independent staff recommendations.
Operators interested in applying for a franchise have either directly or
indirectly made it clear that any ordinance must contain minimum terms
satisfactory to the operators in order to induce their interest in applying for
a franchise. The franchise documents shall not be construed to constitute a
contract of adhesion. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.405.   Utility poles.
   No provision of this chapter or any franchise issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to expressly or impliedly authorize
the grantee to utilize poles owned by the Pacific Gas and Electric Company,
Pacific Telephone, or any other public or private utility which is located
within streets without the express consent of the utility. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.406.   Notices.
   All notices and other writings authorized or prescribed by this chapter to
be “mailed” shall be deemed to have been given and served when deposited in the
United States mail, postage prepaid, and addressed, with respect to a grantee,
to any office maintained by the grantee within the Yolo County community and,
with respect to other parties, to the last known address of such party.
   Any notice or other writing authorized or required by this chapter to be
“filed” shall be deemed “filed” when received in the business office of the
party with whom such notice of writing is authorized or required to be “filed”.
   Whenever a provision of this chapter requires a public hearing to be
conducted by the Board, notice of the time, date, place, and purpose of the
hearing shall be published at least once not later than ten (10) calendar days
in advance of the date of the commencement of the hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation which is published within the Yolo County community. (§ 1,
Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.407.   Leases.
   Any grantee, or parent, subsidiary, or affiliated company or agent thereof,
who leases either real property situated within the Yolo County community or
personal property to be located within the Yolo County community for use in
connection with the provision of services under a franchise issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter shall insure that each such lease contains a
clause which either:
   (a)   Authorizes such lessee to assign the lease to the County or its
assignee without the consent of the lessor or the payment of additional
compensation by virtue of the assignment; or
   (b)   Authorizes such lessee to so assign such lease without the payment of
additional compensation by virtue of the assignment and prohibits the lessor
from unreasonably withholding consent to such assignment. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.408.   Authority.
   It is declared that this chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority
conferred by Sections 53066, et seq. of the Government Code of the State. It is
also enacted pursuant to the police powers conferred by Section 7 of Article XI
of the Constitution of the State for the promotion and protection of the peace,
heath, safety, and general welfare. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.409.   Ordinances: Police powers.
   All zoning and other land use laws, building, electrical, plumbing, and
mechanical Codes, business license laws, and all other laws of general
application now in existence or hereafter enacted by the County shall be fully
applicable to the exercise of any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, and the grantee shall comply therewith. In the event of a
conflict between the provisions of this chapter and those of such a law of
general application, the provisions of such law of general application shall
prevail. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.410.   Amendments.
   The County hereby expressly reserves the right to amend any section or part
of this chapter so as to require additional or greater standards of
construction, operation, maintenance, or otherwise on the part of a grantee for
any reason determined to be desirable or necessary by the Board, including, but
not limited to, new developments in the state of the technology of the cable
communications industry and changes in Federal or State laws, rules, or
regulations. The provisions of 47 CFR Part 76 shall be deemed to be
incorporated by this chapter by reference, and any amendments thereto or
revisions thereof shall be deemed to be incorporated into this chapter by
operation of law. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.411.   Rights reserved to the County.
   There is hereby provided and reserved to the County every right and power
which is required to be by this chapter reserved or provided by any provision
of any law of the County in its exercise of any such right or power.
   (a)   Neither the granting of a franchise nor any provision of this chapter
shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or
power of the County, including the regulation of subscription rates as
permitted by law.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter and/or in the franchise shall be deemed or
construed to impair or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the
County to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through
the exercise of the right to eminent domain, at a fair and just value, which
shall not include any amount for the franchise itself or for any of the rights
or privileges granted thereby, and nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, whether for a term or in
perpetuity, the County’s right of eminent domain.
   (c)   There shall be reserved to the County every right and power which is
required to be reserved or provided by law, and the grantee, by its acceptance
of the franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or
agreement of the County in its exercise of such rights or powers theretofore or
thereafter enacted or established.
   (d)   The County hereby reserves to itself the right to intervene in any
suit, action, or proceeding involving any provision of this chapter and/or the
grantee’s franchise. The Board may do all things which are necessary and
convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and/or the
grantee’s franchise and may determine any question of fact which may arise
during the existence of any franchise granted. The County Administrator and the
County Counsel, with the approval of the Board, are hereby authorized and
empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or charge arising
from the operations of any grantee under a franchise, either on behalf of the
County, the grantee, or any subscriber, in the best interests of the public.
   (e)   The County, at its option, when for sufficient cause as deemed by the
County Administrator, may require that the annual proof-of-performance test,
addressed in Article 8 of this chapter, be conducted or observed by a qualified
member of the County’s staff or its designated representatives, associated with
County-observed performance tests, conducted at County selected test points,
and to a greater number of test points than the minimum required by Section
76.601 of the FCC Rules.
   (f)   Any delegable right, power, or duty of the Board, the County, or any
official of the County may be transferred or delegated to an appropriate
officer, employee, department, or body designated by the County.
   (g)   The County reserves the right to negotiate other reasonable technical
and operational performance standards for system franchises granted pursuant to
this chapter. The grantee shall have the duty to negotiate in good faith with
the County.
   (h)   The County reserves the right to enact reasonable regulations
pertaining to franchises granted pursuant to this chapter which may include,
but are not limited to:
   (1)   The construction and use of poles;
   (2)   The use of poles and conduits by the County;
   (3)   Common users;
   (4)   Filing of pole user agreements;
   (5)   The reservation of street rights;
   (6)   The restoration of streets;
   (7)   The movement of facilities; and
   (8)   The trimming of trees.
   (i)   The County reserves the right to further regulate the conduct of the
grantee in regard to the privacy and property rights of private citizens. Such
regulations may include, but are not limited to, the security of all records by
the grantee containing privacy sensitive information, personnel practices
relating to such records, and any other matters related to privacy and
individual rights.
   (j)   The County reserves the right to establish a cable communications
advisory committee and cable communications area advisory commissions to assist
the Board in regulating cable activity in the County. The members and duties of
any such committee or commissions, if any, shall be established by the Board.
   (k)   Should the State, or any agency thereof, or the Federal government, or
agency thereof, subsequently require the grantee to act in a manner which is
inconsistent with any provision of this chapter, the franchise ordinance, or
associated resolutions and orders, the grantee shall so notify the County. Upon
the receipt of such notification, the County shall determine if a material
provision of the franchise is affected. Upon such determination, the County
shall have the right to modify or amend any of the sections of the franchise to
such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and
purpose of this chapter or the franchise ordinance. In the event the original
proposed terms of the franchise have been frustrated by such State or Federal
requirement, the grantee shall renegotiate in good faith with the County a new
franchise agreement. The County may terminate the franchise in the event it
determines that no satisfactory new franchise agreement can be reached.
   (l)   No grantee nor any major stockholder of the grantee shall directly or
indirectly with the County use the position as cable grantee to gain a
competitive advantage in the business of selling, leasing, renting, servicing,
or repairing radio or television sets, or other receivers or parts thereof, or
data access and transfer equipment which make use of entertainment and
information signals; provided, however, nothing set forth in this subsection
shall prevent the grantee from making modifications to the tuner input circuit
of the subscribers’ communications transmitters and/or receivers, and the fine
tuning of the customers’ operating controls only, to ensure proper operation
under conditions of cable connection at the time of installation, or in
repairing receivers and other equipment belonging to other cable system
operators for use in the conduct of their businesses.
   (m)   The County shall have the right, free of charge, of installing,
maintaining, and operating upon antenna towers and poles, or in underground
ducts of the grantee, the antennas, amplifiers, coaxial cable, wire, fixtures,
and appurtenances necessary for a County communications system provided such
equipment is installed, maintained, and operated so as not to interfere with
the property or operations of the grantee, and that the grantee shall not be
responsible for any damage without his fault resulting to the signs, wires,
cables, or property of the County from such use by the County.
   (n)   The grantee shall manage all of its operations in accordance with a
policy of totally open books and records. The County shall have the right to
inspect at any time during normal business hours, at the local parent
corporation offices of the grantee, all books, records, maps, plans, income tax
returns, financial statements, service complaint logs, performance test
results, and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the operation
of the grantee. Access to such records shall not be denied by the grantee on
the basis that such records contain “proprietary” information.
   (o)   Copies of all petitions, applications, communications, and reports
submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities
and Exchange Commission, or any other Federal or State regulatory commission or
agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting cable
communications operations authorized pursuant to the franchise shall also be
submitted simultaneously to the grantor. Copies of responses or any other
communications from the regulatory agencies to the grantee shall likewise be
furnished simultaneously to the grantor.
   (p)   Any intrastate intercommunication of interactive services between the
system operated by the grantee and any other system shall be subject to the
regulatory authority of the County.
   (q)   The reservation of any particular right shall not be construed to
limit the promulgation of other reasonable rules and regulations. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.412.   Limitations of actions.
   (a)   Except as otherwise expressly provided by this chapter, any judicial
proceeding, whether for the recovery of damages or otherwise, brought for the
purpose of adjudicating the validity of any provision of this chapter or
amendment thereof or any provision of the other franchise documents shall be
commenced not later than thirty (30) calendar days following the latter of: (1)
the effective date of the provisions; or (2) the accrual of the cause of
action. Any such judicial proceeding brought for the purpose of adjudicating
the validity of any rule, order, regulation, determination, or arbitration
award which purports to have been made pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter or of any of the other franchise documents shall be commenced not later
than thirty (30) calendar days following the date of the adoption, issuance, or
making of such rule, order, regulation, determination, or arbitration award or,
as to the franchisee, not later than thirty (30) calendar days following the
giving and serving of notice of such adoption, issuance, or making of such
rule, regulation, determination, or arbitration award pursuant to the
provisions of Section
11-1.406 of this article. No judicial proceeding shall be commenced in
violation of the limitations prescribed by this section.
   (b)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any judicial
proceeding, whether for the recovery of damages or otherwise, commenced by the
County for breach or enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any
regulation, determination, or arbitration award purporting to have been issued
thereunder. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.413.   Illegal tapping.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or use any unauthorized
connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or
otherwise, with any part of a cable communications system for which a franchise
has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of
taking or receiving or enabling himself or others to receive or use any
television signal, radio signal, picture, program, or sound without payment to
the owner of such system.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner,
to willfully tamper with, remove, injure, or vandalize any part of such a cable
communications system, including any cable, wire, or equipment used for the
distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, or
sound. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.414.   Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is
for any reason held illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by the decision of
any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Board hereby declares
that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter, irrespective of the fact any one
or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared
illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional. The invalidity of any portion of this
chapter shall not abate, reduce, or otherwise affect any consideration or other
obligation required of the grantee of any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.415.   Inclusion in municipalities.
   The inclusion within a municipality by reason of incorporation, annexation,
or other proceedings of territory lying within a cable communications franchise
shall not operate to divest the grantee of its authority to install or provide
services through its cable communications system within the newly included
territory. The terms and conditions of the franchise agreement shall inure to
the benefit of and bind the municipality as to any such newly included
territory. The terms and conditions of the franchise shall continue to inure to
the benefit of and bind the County as to any remaining unincorporated
territory. The County and any such municipality may act independently in the
exercise of any authority granted or in the claim of any benefits derived from
the franchise. Franchise fees based upon subscriber revenues shall be
apportioned between the County and the municipality in accordance with the
derivation of the subscriber revenue from either incorporated or unincorporated
territory. Fees based on other revenues shall be allocated between the County
and the municipality in the same proportion as fees based upon subscriber
revenue are allocated. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by §
2, Ord. 1011, eff. August 8, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.416.   Annexations.
   Repealed*. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, * § 1, Ord. 1011, eff.
August 8, 1985)
Article 5.
Advisory Boards
Sec. 11-1.501.   Policy.
   It is the policy of the County to create:
   (a)   An ad hoc cable communications advisory committee to advise the Board
as to the granting of any cable communications franchise; and
   (b)   Cable communications area advisory commissions for each franchise area
to advise the Board as to the operation, renewal, and replacement of any cable
communications franchise. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.502.   Ad hoc cable communications advisory committees.
   The Board may create an ad hoc cable communications advisory committee of
such composition as it may choose to serve at its pleasure to advise it on such
matters as it may prescribe. The Board may prescribe advice as to the
following:
   (a)   Whether to grant a franchise;
   (b)   Whether to grant or deny an application for a franchise;
   (c)   Whether to issue a request for proposals and as to the contents of a
request for proposals;
   (d)   The evaluation of responses to a request for proposals;
   (e)   Matters related to the negotiation of franchise documents; and
   (f)   Amendments to this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.503.   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Establishment.
   The Board shall establish a cable communications area advisory commission
for each franchise area in which the Board grants a cable communications
franchise. The Board may designate an appropriate existing advisory board,
commission, or committee to serve as the cable communications area advisory
commission for a particular franchise area; otherwise the Board shall establish
a commission as set forth in this article. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983)
Sec. 11-1.504.   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Membership.
   The membership of each cable communications area advisory commission shall
consist of five (5) rotating members who reside within the franchise area
appointed by the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.505.   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Membership:
Terms.
   Initially, the Board shall appoint three (3) rotating members to each cable
communications advisory commission, each for a four (4) year term, and two (2)
rotating members, each for a two (2) year term, and the duration of the term
shall be measured from February 1 following the initial appointment.
Thereafter, all appointments shall be made for a term of four (4) years and
shall commence on February 1 and end on January 31. A vacancy shall exist on
each cable communications area advisory commission upon the death, resignation,
or termination of residence within the franchise area. Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term by the Board. Each member shall serve until the
appointment and qualification of a successor; provided, however, no member
shall serve more than two (2) consecutive four (4) year terms, plus any partial
term. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.506.   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Meetings:
Quorum.
   Regular meetings of each cable communications area advisory commission shall
be held monthly or at such other time as may be set by the commission. Special
meetings shall be held on the call of the chairperson or on a written request
by any two (2) members. A quorum shall consist of three (3) members, and the
vote of three (3) members shall be required for any motion, resolution, or
other action. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.507.   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Membership:
Termination.
   The term of office of a rotating member who has three (3) consecutive
unexcused absences from meetings of a cable communications area advisory
commission may be terminated by the Board after notification to the member and
the commission. The vacancy created thereby shall be filled by appointment by
the Board for the remainder of the unexpired term of the member being replaced.
(§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.508.   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Meetings:
Minutes.
   A copy of the minutes of each meeting of a cable communications area
advisory commission shall be filed with the Clerk of the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 961,
eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.509.   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Officers.
   The officers of a cable communications area advisory commission shall be a
chairperson and vice-chairperson who shall be members of the commission and who
shall serve a term of one year. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.510.   Cable communications area advisory commissions: County
liaison.
   A department designated by the Board shall have the responsibility for
providing coordination and liaison between any cable communications advisory
commission and the County, and the director or director’s designee of such
department shall serve as secretary of each commission. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.511.   Cable communications area advisory commissions: Duties.
   The duties and responsibilities of each cable communications area advisory
commission shall be to make recommendations to the Board concerning the
following:
   (a)   The renewal of a franchise pursuant to Section
11-1.607 of Article 6 of this chapter;
   (b)   Exercise of the authority pursuant to Section
11-1.701 of Article 7 of this chapter to purchase a system;
   (c)   Orders for repairs or other matters pursuant to Section
11-1.817 of Article 8 of this chapter;
   (d)   The operation of any independent body established to administer
community use programming as provided in Section
11-1.902 of Article 9 of this chapter;
   (e)   The issuance of the final order of completion community except
pursuant to a request for proposals and pursuant to Section
11-1.1101 of Article 11 of this chapter;
   (f)   Complaints and excuses for violations made pursuant to Sections
11-1.1104 and
11-1.1105 of Article 11 of this chapter;
   (g)   The regulation of non-entertainment services pursuant to Section
11-1.1305 of Article 13 of this chapter;
   (h)   The production or elimination of educational and entertainment
services pursuant to Section
11-1.1306 of Article 13 of this chapter;
   (i)   The regulation of educational and entertainment services pursuant to
Section 11-1. 1307 of Article 13 of this chapter;
   (j)   Evaluations conducted pursuant to Section
11-1.1320 of Article 13 of this chapter;
   (k)   Regulations pursuant to Section
11-1.1321 of Article 13 of this chapter;
   (l)   The provision of community service programming pursuant to Section
11-1.1329 of Article 13 of this chapter or any independent body established
pursuant to said section;
   (m)   Any action taken by the Board as to rates pursuant to Article 14 of
this chapter;
   (n)   The assignments and transfers pursuant to Article 16 of this chapter;
and
   (o)   Any matter upon which a recommendation is sought by the Board. (§ 1,
Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.512.   Cable Communication area advisory commissions: Rules and
procedures.
   The cable communications area advisory commission may adopt rules and
procedures for carrying out its duties and responsibilities; however, such
rules shall not become effective until filed with the Clerk of the Board and
approved by the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Article 6.
Franchise Procedures
Sec. 11-1.601.   Initiation.
   (a)   This chapter itself grants no authority to operate a cable
communications system to any person. Such grants are only made by the adoption
of a separate ordinance awarding a specific franchise to an applicant who has
complied with the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Except with respect to the renewal of a preexisting franchise, no
franchise to operate a cable communications system shall be issued within the
Yolo County community except pursuant to a request for proposals and the
selection of the grantee on the basis of any proposals submitted in response to
the request.
   (c)   Upon the receipt of any unsolicited application containing the
information required by Section
11-1.602 of this article, the Board, within ninety (90) days, shall determine
whether or not to issue a request for proposals pursuant to this section. The
issuance of such a request for proposals shall not require the grant of a
franchise pursuant to this chapter. The determination whether or not to issue
such a request for proposals shall be made following a noticed public hearing.
(§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 1, Ord. 965, eff.
November 3, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.602.   Applications for franchises.
   (a)   The Board, by advertisement or otherwise, may solicit for any other
applications for cable communications system franchises, and may determine and
fix the date upon or after which the applications shall be received by the
County or the date before which the applications shall not be received, and may
make any other determinations and specify any other times, terms, conditions,
or limitations respecting the soliciting, calling for, making, and receiving of
such applications.
   (b)   Each application for a franchise to construct, operate, or maintain
any cable communications system in the County shall be filed with the Clerk of
the Board and shall contain or be accompanied by the following minimum
information:
   (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
   (2)   A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity
organization of the applicant, including, but not limited to, the following and
to whatever extent required by the County:
   (i)   The names and residence and business addresses of all officers,
directors, and associates of the applicant;
   (ii)   The names and residence and business addresses of all officers,
persons, and entities having control of one percent or more of the ownership of
the applicant and the respective ownership share of each such person or entity;
   (iii)   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the
applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling the
applicant in whole or in part and controlled in whole or in part by the
applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or
subsidiary business entity, including, but not limited to, cable communications
systems owned or controlled by the applicant and its parent and subsidiary and
the areas served thereby;
   (iv)   A detailed description of all previous experience of the applicant in
providing cable communications system services in related or similar fields;
   (v)   A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant; and
   (vi)   A statement identifying, by place and date, any and all cable
communication franchises awarded to the applicant, or its parent or subsidiary;
the status of such franchises with respect to the completion thereof; the total
cost of completion of such systems; and the amount of the applicant’s, and its
parent’s or subsidiary’s, resources committed to the completion thereof;
   (3)   A thorough, detailed description of the proposed cable communications
system and a plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
   (i)   A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served and a
proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to
become operational throughout the entire area to be served;
   (ii)   A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the
actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant. In no
event shall such operational and performance standards be less than those
adopted by the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission
(contained in Title 47, Subpart K, Sections 76.601, et seq.), and as augmented
by this chapter and modified by the franchise awarded;
   (iii)   A detailed estimate of the cost of constructing the applicant’s
proposed system;
   (iv)   A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument
proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber;
   (v)   A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all
agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or
implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person,
firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the
application and the granting of the franchise; and
   (vi)   A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications of
rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as
to each of such classifications, including installation charges and service
charges;
   (4)   A copy of any agreement existing between the applicant and any public
utility subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the State
providing for the use of any facilities of the public utility, including, but
not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits, within the County’s unincorporated
area and/or adjacent area;
   (5)   Any other details, statements, information, or references pertinent to
the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by
the Board or by any provision of any other law of the County; and
   (6)   An application fee in a sum to be set by the County, which shall be in
the form of cash, certified or cashier’s check, or money order, to pay the
costs of studying, investigating, and otherwise processing such application,
and which shall be in consideration thereof and not returnable or refundable in
whole or in part, except to the extent such fee exceeds the actual costs
incurred by the County in studying, investigating, and otherwise processing the
application; provided, however, any applicant who shall deliver to the Clerk of
the Board a written withdrawal or cancellation of any application within ten
(10) days following the day such application is received by the Clerk of the
Board shall be entitled to have returned and refunded the sum of fifty (50%)
percent of the fee, less any actual costs or expenses incurred by the County by
reason of such application.
   (c)   Upon the receipt of any application for a franchise, the Board shall
refer the application to the County Administrator or expert or cable
communications advisory committee, if such exists, who shall prepare a report
and make recommendations respecting such application and cause such report and
recommendations to be completed and filed with the Board within 120 days.
   (d)   In making the determinations hereunder as to any application, the
Board shall give due consideration to the character and quality of the service
proposed, rates to subscribers, income to the County, experience, character,
background, and financial responsibility of any applicant and its management
and owners, technical and performance quality of equipment, willingness and
ability to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by policy
conditions, franchise limitations, and requirements, and any other
considerations deemed pertinent by the Board for safeguarding the interests of
the County and the public. The Board, in its sole discretion, shall determine
the award of any franchise on the basis of such considerations and without
competitive bidding.
   (e)   If the Board, after public hearings, shall determine to reject an
application, such determination shall be final and conclusive, and the
application shall be deemed rejected.
   (f)   If the Board shall determine to further consider an application, the
following shall be done:
   (1)   The Board shall identify a tentative grantee and decide and specify
the terms and conditions of any franchise to be granted pursuant to this
chapter and as provided in this chapter.
   (2)   The Board shall give notice of its intention to consider the granting
of such a franchise, stating the name of the tentative grantee, that copies of
the proposed franchise may be obtained at the office of the Clerk of the Board,
fixing and setting forth a time and public place certain when and where
interested parties may inspect all the bona fide applications, fixing and
setting forth a day, hour, and place certain when and where any persons having
any interest therein or objection to the granting thereof may file written
protests and appear before the Board and be heard, and directing the Clerk of
the Board to publish notice of the resolution’s adoption at least once within
ten (10) days after the passage thereof in a newspaper of general circulation
within the County.
   (g)   At the time set for the hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the
Board shall proceed to hear all written protests. Thereafter the Board shall
make one of the following determinations:
   (1)   That such franchise be denied; or
   (2)   That such franchise be granted upon such conditions as the Board deems
appropriate, which conditions may include, on a not-to-exceed basis, where in
accordance with the Act, applicable FCC regulations, and State laws:
   (i)   Charges for installations;
   (ii)   Subscriber rates; and
   (iii)   Service rates for separate classifications of service, such as
additional connections.
   (h)   If the Board shall determine that a franchise be denied, such
determination shall be expressed by resolution; if the Board shall determine
that a franchise be granted, such determination shall be expressed by ordinance
granting a franchise to the applicant. The action of the Board shall be final
and conclusive.
   (i)   The grantee shall pay to the County a sum of money sufficient to
reimburse it for all expenses incurred by the provisions of this chapter beyond
those defrayed by application fees. Such payment shall be made within thirty
(30) days after the County furnishes the grantee with a written statement of
such expenses. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 6, Ord.
999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.603.   Privacy of proposals.
   Applications for a franchise submitted in response to a request for
proposals shall be sealed at the time of submission by an applicant. Prior to
the deadline for the submission of an application, it shall be unlawful for any
applicant, and any officer, agent, or employee thereof, whether directly or
indirectly, to exchange information concerning proposals, enter into any
agreement or understanding, or take any other action for the purpose of
reducing or eliminating competition among applicants in the selection process.
(§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.604.   Environmental analyses.
   For each franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, one or
more environmental analyses shall be undertaken pursuant to the provisions of
the California Environmental Quality Act commencing at Section 21000 of the
Public Resources Code of the State. The provisions of this chapter, requests
for proposals, and an ordinance offering the franchise shall be subject to
amendment for the purpose of implementing any change dictated by the
environmental analyses. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.605.   Franchise acceptance.
   (a)   Each franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be issued by the Board and in the name of the County as the issuing authority.
A franchise shall be offered to the successful applicant by ordinance duly
adopted by the Board. The ordinance may prescribe terms, conditions, or
requirements respecting the franchise which are in addition to those set forth
in this chapter but which are not inconsistent with the express terms of this
chapter. The ordinance may also prescribe terms, conditions, or requirements
respecting the franchise which are in addition to or in conflict with the
provisions of the request for proposals and application by the party to whom
the resolution offers the franchise.
   (b)   The ordinance offering the franchise shall be deemed repealed thirty
(30) calendar days after its adoption, unless not later than the thirtieth
(30th) day following the adoption of the ordinance the party to whom the
franchise is offered files a certificate in writing which expressly and
unconditionally accepts the franchise in compliance with the terms, conditions,
and requirements of such ordinance, the application, the request for proposals,
and this chapter. The certification shall be signed by a person duly authorized
to act in behalf of the franchise, shall be acknowledged, shall have attached
thereto a certified copy of an order by the board of directors of the grantee
directing the execution and filing of the certification, and shall be
accompanied by any fee required by the request for proposals, the performance
bond, the security deposit, and the policy or policies of insurance prescribed
by Sections
11-1.1508,
11-1.1509, and
11-1.1511 of Article 15 of this chapter, respectively. A certification which
constitutes a qualified acceptance, or places other limits or conditions
thereon, shall be deemed to be repealed. The thirty (30) day period for
acceptance prescribed by this section may be extended either prior or
subsequent to its expiration by the Board through express action which
prescribes the period of extension. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.606.   Duration of grant.
   (a)   A franchise shall be effective on the 31st day after the offer of the
franchise agreement provided the grantee has filed, within thirty (30) days
after such effective date, a written instrument, in accordance with subsection
(b)of Section
11-1.605 of this article, addressed to the Board accepting the franchise and
agreeing to comply with all of the provisions thereof. If an extension is
granted as set forth in subsection (b)of said Section
11-1.605, the franchise will be effective the first day after the date of
acceptance.
   (b)   A franchise or license shall expire twenty (20) years after the
acceptance thereof, unless sooner terminated by ordinance. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.607.   Replacement franchises.
   (a)   The service provided by the grantee under a franchise may be required
to continue uninterrupted beyond the expiration or cancellation of a franchise.
The procedures for the renewal of a franchise shall be those provided in
Section 626 of the Act as supplemented by the provisions of this Section
11-1.607.
   (b)   Any franchise may be renewed for a term not to exceed twenty (20)
years at any time prior to the expiration of the franchise. An application
therefor shall be submitted to the County Administrator containing such
material as the Board may require, including, but not limited to, proposals for
an upgrade of the cable communications system.
   (c)   In the event the Board decides to offer renewal to the grantee, the
Board shall adopt an ordinance offering the renewal of the franchise to the
grantee. The franchise agreement may prescribe terms, conditions, or
requirements respecting the franchise which are in addition to those set forth
in this chapter, the request for renewal, or the original franchise agreement.
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the request for renewal
and the provisions of the franchise agreement adopted pursuant to this section,
the provisions of the franchise agreement shall prevail. In the event of a
conflict between the provisions of the original franchise agreement and the
franchise renewal agreement adopted pursuant to this section, the provisions of
the latter shall prevail.
   (d)   The ordinance offering renewal shall be deemed repealed and the
request for renewal rejected thirty (30) calendar days after its adoption
unless, not later than the thirtieth (30th) day following the adoption, the
grantee files a certification in writing which expressly and unconditionally
accepts the renewal of the franchise in compliance with the terms, conditions,
and requirements of such ordinance, the request for renewal, and this chapter.
The certification shall be signed by a person duly authorized to act in behalf
of the grantee, shall be notarized, shall have attached thereto a certified
copy of an order by the board of directors of the grantee directing the
execution of and filing of the certification, and shall be accompanied by the
performance bond, the security deposit, and the policy or policies of insurance
prescribed by Sections
11-1.1508,
11-1.1509, and
11-1.1511 of Article 15 of this chapter, respectively. The certification and
accompaniments shall be filed with the Clerk of the Board. A certification
which constitutes a qualified acceptance, or places other limits or conditions
thereon, shall be deemed to be a nullity, and the franchise agreement shall be
deemed to be repealed and the request for renewal denied. The thirty (30) day
period for acceptance prescribed by this section may be extended either prior
or subsequent to its expiration by the Board by resolution which prescribes the
period of extension.
   The filing of the certification in the manner and within the time prescribed
in this section shall renew the franchise. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983, as amended by § 7, Ord. 999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Article 7.
Purchases of Systems
Sec. 11-1.701.   Authority to purchase systems.
   The County, or its designee, shall have the right to purchase real and
personal property as described by Section
11-1.702 of this article which property is owned or in which an interest is
held by the grantee, any parent company of the grantee, any subsidiary of the
grantee, or any other entity in which the grantee, or its parent company or its
subsidiary, has a financial interest and which is utilized to provide service
under the franchise. Such right shall not arise except, and shall be
exercisable under, the following circumstances:
   (a)   In the event of the termination of a franchise in advance of the
expiration of its terms pursuant to the provisions of Sections
11-1.1208 through
11-1.1212 of Article 12 of this chapter; or
   (b)   At the expiration of the term of a franchise, if the franchise is not
renewed to the grantee by the County pursuant to the provisions of Section
11-1.607 of Article 6 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983,
as amended by § 2, Ord. 965, eff. November 3, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.702.   Scope of purchases.
   (a)   The property which is subject to purchase by the County shall consist
of the following:
   (1)   The cable communications system;
   (2)   Land, buildings, and other improvements situated within the exterior
boundaries of the County (including both incorporated and unincorporated areas)
and utilized by the grantee to provide services under the franchise including
studio facilities;
   (3)   Cameras and other studio production equipment; mobile production
equipment; vehicles for services and repairs; inventories of materials,
supplies, and parts; tools; and other personal property dedicated for use
within the Yolo County community to provide services under the franchise and
which the Board determines is peculiarly designed for that purpose; and
   (4)   Books, accounts, and records relating to the grantee’s business,
including subscriber lists.
   (b)   There shall be excluded from the purchase of any parcel of land and
improvements, or leasehold, space which is utilized exclusively for business
office purposes and not, for example, repair purposes associated with the
operation of the cable communications system.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the Board, in its sole
discretion, shall have the right to exclude from the purchase any real property
(including improvements thereon) upon which no component of the cable
communications system is situated and which the Board determines is not
essential to the system or the provision of services thereunder (§ 1, Ord. 961,
eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.703.   Assignments.
   The right to purchase as prescribed by Section
11-1.701 of this article may be exercised by the County for public ownership
and use by the County in behalf of a third party, or by any party to whom the
County may assign the right to purchase to any third party at any time prior to
payment for the purchase and transfer of titles. Written notice of any such
assignment shall be mailed to the grantee. Such an assignee, subsequent to the
date of assignment, shall be vested with any and all discretion respecting the
purchase which is vested in the Board. The County may condition the grant of a
franchise upon agreement by the grantee to accept the assignment of and to
exercise a right to purchase the real and personal property of an existing
grantee. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.704   Valuation definitions.
   (a)   As used in this section and Sections
11-1.705 through
11-1.711 of this article, and to the extent consistent with Section 627 of the
Act, the following terms shall be ascribed the meanings set forth in this
section:
   (1)   “Fair market value” shall mean the price in terms of money which a
property will bring in a competitive and open market under all conditions
requisite to a fair sale, the buyer and seller each acting prudently,
knowledgeably, and assuming the price is not affected by undue stimulus.
   (2)   “Going concern value” shall mean the benefits which attach to the
business as a result of its location within the franchise area, the grantee’s
reputation among subscribers or potential subscribers for dependability and
quality of service, and any other circumstances resulting in the probable
retention of old subscribers or the acquisition of new subscribers; provided,
however, no value shall be assigned to either the franchise itself or any
right, privilege, or expectancy arising to the grantee out of the right to
transact business under the franchise, and particularly no value shall be
allowed for any increase in value arising out of any expectation of revenues
from the cable communications system beyond the termination date or expiration
date of the franchise, whichever is sooner.
   (b)   Except to the extent inconsistent with the express provisions of this
section and Sections
11-1.705 through
11-1.711 of this article, the words of this section shall be ascribed the
meanings and the appraisal and valuation standards, methodology, approaches,
and processes respecting the determination of the amount to be paid for
property which the Board or its assignee is entitled to purchase and shall
comply with and be consistent with those set forth in that 1975 publication
entitled “Real Estate and Urban Economic Studies at the University of
Connecticut”, compiled and edited by Byrl N. Boyce, Ph.D., sponsored jointly by
the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers and the Society of Real Estate
Appraisers. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 8, Ord. 999,
eff. March 7, 1985)
   (c)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the Board, in its sole
discretion, shall have the right to exclude from the purchase any real property
(including improvements thereon) upon which no component of the cable
communications system is situated and which the Board determines is not
essential to the system or the provision of services thereunder. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.705.   Valuation limits.
   The property which is purchased shall be valued at its fair market value
determined in accordance with subsection (a)of Section 627 of the Act and
Section
11-1.704 of this article. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by
§ 8, Ord. 999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.706.   Date of valuation.
   The date of valuation for purchases pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be the day immediately following the date of the expiration or
termination of the franchise. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.707.   Requests for inventories.
   Proceedings for the acquisition by the County or its assignee under this
chapter shall be commenced by a written notice mailed to the grantee of a
request by the County or its assignee for an inventory of the grantee’s
property. Such a notice shall not be mailed earlier than the following dates:
   (a)   The date a determination by the Board to terminate the franchise
becomes final under Section
11-1.1210 or
11-1.1211 of Article 12 of this chapter when the purchase is made pursuant to
the contingency prescribed by subsection (a)of Section
11-1.701 of this article; or
   (b)   The date of a determination made by the Board not to renew the
franchise, or the date renewal is deemed denied, when the purchase is made
pursuant to the contingency prescribed by Section
11-1.701 of this article. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.708.   Inventories.
   Not later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the mailing of
the notice of a request for an inventory, the grantee shall file with the Clerk
of the Board a written inventory which shall include the following:
   (a)   A complete plan, with specifications, of the entire cable
communications system installed at any time during the term of the franchise;
   (b)   An identification of all real property which is subject to the right
of acquisition by the County or its assignee, showing the address and the legal
descriptions thereof, and including a description of all buildings (including
the square footage thereof) and other improvements thereon;
   (c)   A list of all cameras and other studio production equipment; mobile
production equipment; office and other furnishings; vehicles for services and
repairs; inventories of materials, supplies, and parts; tools; and other
personal property utilized within the community to provide services under the
franchise (such lists shall show the manufacturers, model and serial numbers,
dates of manufacture, and dates of acquisition of such property); and
   (d)   Copies of all leases, chattel and other mortgages, and other
instruments evidencing an interest by any third party in any of the property
identified by this section. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.709.   Demands for arbitration.
   Not later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the grantee
files the inventory, the County or its assignee may mail to the grantee written
notice of its tentative intention to exercise its right to purchase, including
a list of all property which the County or its assignee has tentatively elected
to purchase, and a demand for arbitration. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983)
Sec. 11-1.710.   Arbitration of value.
   The arbitration panel shall be selected, the hearing scheduled within the
time prescribed, notice given, the hearing conducted, a decision made, and the
costs divided in the manner prescribed by Sections
11-1.1214 through
11-1.1219 of Article 12 of this chapter. The grantee shall make its cable
communications system, other property and books, accounts, and other records
available, upon request, for inspection by the County or its assignee or their
experts. The discovery provisions of the California Arbitration Act (Sections
1280, et seq. of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State) shall be applicable
to the arbitration proceedings under this section.
   The questions which may be submitted to the arbitration panel and the
jurisdiction of the panel shall be limited to the following:
   (a)   The amount to be paid by the County or its assignee under the
valuation limits prescribed by Section
11-1.705 of this article; and
   (b)   An interpretation of the provisions of the franchise documents solely
in relation to the issues within its jurisdiction.
   Upon a request by the County or its assignee or the grantee, or upon its own
initiative, the arbitration panel shall appoint and retain one or more
independent experts for the purpose of providing advice upon the valuation
issues to be determined.
   The arbitration award may be judicially enforced, shall be final, binding,
and conclusive upon the parties, and shall not be subject to Section 1286.2 of
the Code of Civil Procedure of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983)
Sec. 11-1.711.   Subsequent valuations.
   With respect to any proceeding in which the arbitration panel makes
valuation determinations in advance of the termination or expiration of the
franchise, the same panel shall be available to receive and determine values
for any additions to, replacements of, or other acquisitions of property
tentatively elected to be purchased which have occurred subsequent to the award
made pursuant to Section
11-1.710 of this article. Such determination shall be initiated by a written
notice mailed to the arbitration panel by the grantee and filed with the Clerk
of the Board and shall be governed by all the standards, procedures, and other
provisions of Sections
11-1.704 through
11-1.710 of this article and this section, and written recital thereof shall be
mailed to the grantee, Clerk of the Board, and the County’s assignee (if any)
not later than ninety (90) calendar days following the date of the mailing of
the notice initiating the determination. No such notice shall be mailed or
filed later than 120 calendar days prior to the date of the expiration or
termination of the franchise. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.712.   Judicial relief.
   In the event a grantee or the County or its assignee fails to comply with
any provision contained in Sections
11-1.701 through
11-1.713 of this article, the injured party shall be authorized to either seek
judicial relief or relief from the arbitrator during the arbitration
proceedings. In the event judicial relief is sought, the provisions of Sections
11-1.710 and 11-1711 of this article shall not be deemed to deprive the court
of jurisdiction to interpret the provisions of this chapter, and any such
interpretation shall be binding upon the arbitrator. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.713.   Sales: Transfers of title.
   No later than thirty (30) calendar days following the date of the expiration
or termination of a franchise, the County or its assignee shall notify the
grantee of its intention to purchase the property identified in the notice
mailed pursuant to the provisions of Section
11-1.709 of this article. The purchase price shall be the value as determined
by the arbitration panel. The election to purchase shall be evidenced by a
written notice so stating mailed to the grantee not later than thirty (30)
calendar days following the date of the expiration or termination of the
franchise. The failure to mail such notice within the time prescribed in this
section shall conclusively be presumed to constitute an election not to
purchase the property pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and the
grantee shall not be entitled to any compensation for such property or other
costs or proceedings or otherwise. If any notice, memorandum, or report
required by Section
11-1.710 or
11-1.711 of this article has not been received by the date of the expiration or
termination of the franchise, the notice of election required by this section
need not be mailed until thirty (30) calendar days following the date of the
receipt of such notice, memorandum, or report. The purchase price shall be
deposited into an escrow of a title company named by the County or its
assignee. The title company shall be authorized to pay the purchase price as
directed by the grantee when it can provide for the County or its assignee
grant deeds with respect to real property, bills of sale with respect to
personal property, or other evidences of title vesting insured title in the
County or its assignee free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, except
easements and rights-of-way respecting the real property which do not impair
its use for the purposes intended, and assignments of leases, if any, with
respect to real or personal property which is leased. The seller or sellers
shall pay all title insurance, recording, escrow, and closing fees and costs.
(§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.714.   Negotiated acquisitions.
   The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to preclude acquisition
by the County or its assignee through a negotiated agreement; provided,
however, the commencement or existence of such negotiations shall not be deemed
to waive or relieve any actions or times therefore prescribed by Sections
11-1.708 through
11-1.713 of this article. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.715.   Policy for financing purchases.
   It is the policy of the County that no territory or subscriber not served by
a franchise shall bear the financial burden of any purchase made pursuant to
this article. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Article 8.
Operation and Service
Sec. 11-1.801.   Service area.
   The grantee’s system design and construction shall be such that service
shall be made available for the normal installation fee to all residential
units within the grantee’s service area, as defined in the franchise and this
chapter, including the system extensions required by Section
11-1.1005 of Article 10 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.802.   Establishment of service.
   Subject to such regulations as may be adopted by the Board, the grantee
shall install cable television service to all persons making a timely and bona
fide request for such service at any location within the service area.
   After the grantee shall have established service pursuant to a franchise in
any area of the County, such service shall not be suspended or abandoned,
unless such suspension or abandonment has been authorized or ordered by the
Board. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.803.   General capabilities.
   A cable communications system, to be installed and operated pursuant to this
chapter, and a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, unless otherwise
provided, shall:
   (a)   Be capable of relaying to subscriber terminals video and audio signals
the grantee is now or hereafter authorized to carry by the Federal
Communications Commission or the County;
   (b)   Distribute in color television signals which it receives in color;
   (c)   Provide, as a minimum, channel capacity and basic equipment for
program production in cablecasting for educational, public, and governmental
access uses;
   (d)   If the system is to serve an aggregate of 5,000 or more dwellings,
have a minimum capacity of fifty (50) downstream video channels;
   (e)   If the system is to serve an aggregate of 5,000 or more dwellings,
have a two-way (bi-directional) capacity upon the initial activation of the
system or at such time as may be extended by the Board;
   (f)   Make available, upon a request by any subscribers receiving channels
showing premium services and pay per view events, a lockout device which
prevents the unauthorized viewing of such channels; and
   (g)   Make available to subscribers, upon request, an RF switch permitting
conversions between cable and direct off-air reception. (§ 1 Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1007, eff. June 13, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.804.   Other capabilities.
   The cable communications system permitted to be installed and operated
pursuant to this chapter may also engage in the business of:
   (a)   Transmitting original cablecast programming not received through
television broadcast signals;
   (b)   Transmitting any additional broadcast signals permitted by the Federal
Communications Commission;
   (c)   Transmitting television pictures, films, and videotape programs not
received through broadcast television signals, whether or not encoded or
processed to permit reception by only selected receivers or subscribers;
   (d)   Transmitting and receiving all other signals, digital, voice, audio-
visual, and the like; and
   (e)   Transmitting on a nondiscriminatory basis, and for a reasonable rate,
burglar, fire, and other non-broadcast services which customers request from
persons supplying such services. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.805.   Standby power.
   Each cable communications system shall include equipment capable of
providing standby power for headend facilities and trunk amplifiers for a
minimum of two (2) hours. The equipment shall be so constructed as to
automatically notify the cable office when it is in operation and to
automatically revert to the standby mode when the AC power returns. The system
shall incorporate all safeguards necessary to prevent injury to a lineman
resulting from a standby generator powering a “dead” utility line. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1007, eff. June 13, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.806.   Override capability.
   Each cable communications system shall include an “emergency alert
capability” which will permit the County, in times of emergency, to override by
remote control alternatively the audio and visual of all channels
simultaneously. Each cable communications system shall include the capability
to broadcast from the County’s headquarters for civil defense, disaster, and
emergency services. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.807.   Interconnections.
   The grantee will be required to provide interconnections to other nearby
cable communications systems, at the time and to the extent and in the manner
specified by the Board, as set forth in any request for franchise proposals
issued by the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.808.   Plans and specifications.
   Each application for a franchise shall include plans and detailed
specifications for the cable communications system which is proposed by the
applicant. The system shall be constructed and installed by a grantee in
compliance with the plans and specifications contained in the application,
except as modified by other franchise documents. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October
27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.809.   Technical standards.
   Each grantee shall construct, install, and maintain its cable communications
system in a manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable laws,
ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical
standards, and detailed standards set forth in the franchise documents. Each
grantee shall provide to the County, upon request, written reports of the
grantee’s annual proof-of-performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC standards
and requirements. Standards of cable communications system construction,
safety, and operation shall meet, but not be limited to, the following
referenced specifications, unless exceptions are agreed upon between the County
and the grantee. Each grantee shall at all times comply with the:
   (a)   National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards);
   (b)   National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters);
   (c)   California Public Utility Commission General Orders 95, 112-d, and
128;
   (d)   Applicable FCC and other Federal, State, and local regulations; and
   (e)   The Codes and other laws of the County. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October
27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.810 Installation procedures.
   The construction, installation, and maintenance of the cable communications
system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner and in close
coordination with the public and private utilities serving the Yolo County
community following accepted construction procedures and practices and working
through existing committees and organizations. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983)
Sec. 11-1.811.   Overall system.
   The overall system shall be designed and constructed to meet all FCC
technical performance specifications and standards over a temperature range of
±50ºF from the mean temperature of the County area and to function throughout
all environmental extremes expected. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.812.   Forward portion.
   The forward portion of any cable communications system to serve an aggregate
of 5,000 or more dwellings shall be capable of an initial activation of a
minimum carriage of fifty (50) Class I television channels, the full FM
broadcast band, and pilot carriers or other such auxiliary signals as required
for system control. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.813.   Combined forward trunk and distribution system.
   The combined forward trunk and distribution system shall deliver signals to
each and every subscriber’s receiver which will meet or exceed the franchise
ordinance specifications at the mean system temperature of ±50ºF, unless
otherwise indicated. This shall include the effects of drop cable, interior
splits, and any terminal equipment, such as descramblers and set top
converters. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.814.   Reverse portion.
   The reverse portion of the cable communications system shall be capable of
initial activation of a minimum of twenty-five (25) MHz band width, with return
signals from each subscriber and institutional (including all schools) signal
source to the extreme end of any area in compliance with the specifications set
forth in the franchise ordinance.
   (a)   Where applicable, the end of the system specifications shall include
the effects of any signal reprocessing equipment necessary to achieve forward
transmission.
   (b)   Any signal at the subscriber’s television receiver, after being
transmitted to the headend, processed, and retransmitted down a forward
channel, shall meet the specifications of the franchise ordinance. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1007, eff. June 13, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.815.   Compatibility for signal exchanges.
   All cable communications systems authorized to be constructed and operated
pursuant to this chapter shall be compatible with respect to signal exchanges
between the systems, insofar as financially and technically feasible. One
interconnection point shall be specified by the grantees for signal exchanges
between any two (2) systems. The interconnection point shall be selected on the
most reasonable direct path between the party providing the signal and the
party receiving the signal. Signals delivered to an interconnection point by
each party shall utilize such electronic parameters as required to be usable by
the receiving party. The technical standards set forth in any request for a
proposal issued pursuant to Section
11-1.601 of Article 6 of this chapter shall apply to all signals delivered by
any party to such interconnection point. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983,
as amended by § 4, Ord. 1007, eff. June 13, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.816.   Preventive maintenance.
   A comprehensive routine preventive maintenance program shall be developed,
effected, and maintained for each system by the respective grantees to ensure
continued top quality cable communications operating standards in consonance
with FCC Part 76 and the technical specifications stipulated in the franchise
ordinance. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.817.   Testing.
   (a)   No newly constructed system services shall be offered for sale prior
to proof-of-performance testing in accordance with FCC Part 76.601 and the
technical specifications and standards listed in the franchise agreement. Such
initial proof-of-performance testing, and annual proof-of-performance testing,
may be conducted by the County, or its designated representative, at the
County’s option, when for sufficient cause as deemed by the Board or its
designated representative. The County reserves the right to have the
measurements conducted at County selected test points and to a greater number
of test points than the minimum required by Section 76.601 of the FCC Rules.
Additionally, the grantee shall reimburse the County for all expenses by it in
connection with the County conducting or observing the annual performance tests
when the results of such tests are deemed by the County to fall below a ninety
(90%) percent level of compliance with the technical standards as set forth in
FCC Part 76 and in the franchise agreement.
   (b)   If, after a public hearing, notice of which has been given in the
manner prescribed by Section
11-1.406 of Article 4 of this chapter, the Board finds that a grantee has
failed to comply with or maintain the technical standards or quality of service
set forth in the franchise documents for such franchise, the Board may order
the grantee to make specifically enumerated repairs or improvements in the
system or changes in the maintenance, repair, or operation of the system. The
grantee shall complete such repairs or improvements within a reasonable time
and, in any event, not later than six (6) months following the date on which
the order requiring repairs or improvements is mailed to the grantee. (§ 1,
Ord. 961, eff. October 27,1983, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1007, eff. June 13,
1985)
Sec. 11-1.818.   Testing procedures.
   The grantee’s proof-of-performance testing procedures shall be approved by
the County for implementation prior to the initial proof-of-performance testing
addressed in Section
11-1.817 of this article. The results of the proof-of- performance tests shall
be retained for at least five (5) years and shall be available for inspection
by the County. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.819.   Antenna structures.
   Any antenna structure used in the cable communications system shall comply
with the construction, marking, and lighting of antenna structures required by
the United States Department of Transportation. All system antennas and mounts
shall be designed, installed, and constructed to withstand 100 mile per hour
winds. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.820.   Rf leakage.
   RF leakage shall be measured adjacent to any proposed or existing
aeronautical navigation or communications radio site to prove no interference
to such services. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 6,
Ord. 1007, eff. June 13, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.821.   Cable installations.
   All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with
electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be
arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering
consideration. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.822.   Underground cable.
   All underground cable should be flooded and armor-clad cable and/or
installed in conduit, unless specifically exempted by the Director of Public
Works, on a case-by-case basis. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.823.   Drop cables.
   Residential and institutional drop cables should be a double shielded type
and fitted with sealed hex crimp ring high integrity connectors. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.824.   Jacketed cable.
   Jacketed cable should be used in any and all areas of the plant where
airborne heavy chemical particles can be expected. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October
27, 1983, as amended by § 7, Ord. 1007, eff. June 13, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.825.   Corrective measures.
   A grantee’s corrective maintenance program shall render efficient corrective
service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and
for the shortest time possible. Such interruption shall be preceded by notice
and shall occur during a period of minimum use of the system. A written log
shall reflect the date, time, duration, and reason for each service
interruption. The record of the log shall be kept on file for a minimum of
three (3) years. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.826.   Safety requirements.
   A grantee, at all times, shall:
   (a)   Install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment
in accordance with the requirements of the Building Codes and in such manner
that such equipment will not interfere with any installation of the County;
   (b)   Keep and maintain in a safe, suitable, and substantial condition, and
in good order and repair, all its structures, lines, equipment, and connections
in, over, under, and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public ways or
places of the County wherever situated or located; and
   (c)   All working facilities, conditions, and procedures used or occurring
during the construction of the cable communications system shall comply with
the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Article 9.
Community Use Programming
Sec. 11-1.901.   Community use proposals.
   (a)   The purpose of this section and Sections
11-1.902 through
11-1.905 of this article is to permit applicants for each cable communications
franchise to propose plans and resources for community use programming in order
to permit the community to design, produce, and present programming of local
interest and to promote the educational, recreational, and character-building
opportunities of the viewing public.
   (b)   An applicant who chooses not to make such a proposal shall not be
disqualified from applying for consideration in the selection of the grantee.
It is expressly declared that the factors upon which selection will be based
are so numerous and subjective as to make it impossible to know in advance the
relative importance of a determination by an applicant to either make or not to
make such a proposal in relation to other factors upon which an award of the
cable communications franchise will be based. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983)
Sec. 11-1.902.   Application contents.
   (a)   Applicants for each franchise shall be authorized, alternatively, to
propose in their applications:
   (1)   No community use programming, by making no reference to community use
programming therein; or
   (2)   To propose community use programming in the form of and in accordance
with that as described by Section
11-1.903 of this article.
   (b)   An applicant who proposes community use programming in its application
shall include in the application the following:
   (1)   Any standard of criteria which will be utilized in connection with the
following matters:
   (i)   The time made available for and community use programming covering
candidates for public elective offices during election campaigns;
   (ii)   Program quality control;
   (iii)   The legality of program content and the violation of the legal
rights of others; and
   (iv)   Any and all pre-conditions of whatever kind or nature relating to use
by third parties of studio facilities or production equipment and the broadcast
of programming presented thereby; and
   (2)   The establishment of an independent body proposed by the applicant to
administer PEG programming and community use programming other than PEG
programming produced by a public agency. Such a body shall not include any
officer or employee of the County or a cable communications area advisory
committee; nor shall such body include the appointment of officers, employees,
governing bodies, or boards or committees of the County. Once formed or
created, the body also shall not include any grantee nor any appointee by a
grantee or representative of a grantee. Any such proposal shall specifically
identify the following representing such a body:
   (i)   The legal form of existence;
   (ii)   How the body will be established and who will be responsible for the
establishment;
   (iii)   The size, composition, and method of selection and appointment of
the members;
   (iv)   The terms of the members and the grounds and procedures for the
removal of members, if any;
   (v)   The specific powers of the body in relation to the administration of
community use programming and the means by which such will be exercised and
enforced; and
   (vi)   The sources and amounts of funding for the support and operation of
the body. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 9, Ord. 999,
eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.903.   Community use programming.
   (a)   Community use programming constitutes a form of access opportunity to
members of the general public to produce programming in separate studio
facilities with minimal instructional assistance, direction, and control by a
grantee.
   (b)   Applicants desiring to propose community use programming shall include
the following within their applications:
   (1)   The number of hours per week that one or more (specifying the number)
channels on the subscriber network will be made available exclusively for the
type of access use programming prescribed by this section;
   (2)   If two (2) or more channels are to be made available for such use, a
specification of the tier or tiers of service in which all channels, except the
one included in the basic services, will be placed;
   (3)   A description of the location, nature, and extent of the separate and
independent studio facilities, production equipment, personnel resources, and
other resources to be provided in connection with such access use and community
use programming, designed in such a manner as to permit operation by members of
the public with minimal training and supervision;
   (4)   A commitment to make the studio facilities, production equipment,
personnel resources, other resources, and channels available for use, program
production, and broadcasts a specified number of hours per day during the term
of the franchise; the actual number of days per week and hours per day such
resources will be available for use, program production and broadcasts being
subject to regulation from time to time by the independent authority created
pursuant to subsection (2) of subsection (b)of Section
11-1.902 of this article;
   (5)   A commitment to operate and provide the studio facilities, production
equipment, personnel resources, other resources, channel broadcast time, and
programming opportunity at the sole cost of the applicant without any charge
whatsoever;
   (6)   A statement of the nature and extent of all training to be offered by
the applicant respecting the equipment, operation, and training required as a
condition of facility and equipment use and operation by members of the public;
and
   (7)   A commitment to allow the use of the studio facilities, production
equipment, personnel resources, other resources, and channels for the
production and broadcast of community use programming by members of the general
public, including individuals and local nonprofit community organizations, on a
first-come first-served basis during the term of the franchise. (§ 1, Ord. 961,
eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.904.   PEG facilities, PEG programming, and PEG funding.
   An applicant may, but shall not be required to, propose, in its application,
PEG facilities, PEG programming, or PEG funding. With respect to any such
proposal, the application shall contain:
   (a)   A description of the location, nature, and extent of the PEG
facilities, PEG programming, PEG funding, and other PEG resources proposed to
be made available by the applicant; and
   (b)   A statement identifying the parties to whom PEG facilities and PEG
funding will be made available by the grantee and whether the apportionment of
such facilities and funding will be vested within the sole discretion of the
applicant or determined in accordance with standards or criteria and, if so, a
statement of all criteria, standards, and requirements proposed to be utilized
by the applicant in apportioning the PEG facilities and PEG programming should
the demand therefor exceed the facilities and funding proposed by the grantee.
(§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 10, Ord. 999, eff. March
7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.905.   Compliance with proposals.
   A grantee who has included within its application for the franchise a
proposal for community use programming or PEG facilities, PEG programming, or
PEG funding pursuant to Sections
11-1.901 through
11-1.904 of this article shall comply during the entire term of the franchise
with all such commitments contained in its application and the ordinance
offering the franchise, including, but not limited to, provision of the
specified number of hours of community use programming and/or PEG programming
pursuant to the terms and conditions stated, and provision of all studio
facilities, production equipment, personnel resources, and other resources
identified for the uses specified pursuant to the terms and conditions stated.
During such term, the grantee shall keep and maintain all such facilities,
equipment, and resources in good condition and repair and replace any and all
such facilities, equipment, and resources as necessary to fulfill the
obligation that the foregoing be provided and maintained during the entire term
of the franchise. The failure to comply with the commitments and obligations
identified by this section shall be deemed to constitute a material violation
and breach of the franchise documents. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983,
as amended by § 10, Ord. 999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.906.   Resources for public agencies.
   (a)   Applicants for a franchise shall be authorized, but not required, to
include within their applications proposals for services, resources, or
benefits to the County, including, but not limited to, free or discounted rates
for subscriptions to services on the subscriber network or institutional
network, channels or time thereon on the subscriber network or institutional
network, electronic or other equipment, the use of the institutional network,
staffing resources or other services, and resources or benefits for improvement
in the delivery of governmental services or efficiency of governmental
operations. A grantee who has proposed such commitments in its application
shall comply during the entire term of the franchise with all such commitments
contained in its application and the ordinance offering the franchise pursuant
to the terms and conditions stated therein, and the failure to provide such
services, resources, or benefits pursuant to the terms and conditions stated
shall be deemed to constitute a material violation and breach of the franchise
documents.
   (b)   An applicant who chooses not to make such a proposal shall not be
disqualified from bidding or consideration in selection of the grantee. It is
expressly declared that the factors upon which selection will be based are so
numerous and subjective as to make it impossible to know in advance the
relative importance of a determination by an applicant to either make or not to
make such a proposal in relation to other factors upon which an award of a
franchise will be based. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.907.   Resources for others.
   (a)   Applicants for a franchise, for the purpose of promoting improvements
in cable services to the community and influencing the motivation of the County
to select the particular applicant as the grantee, may include within their
applications the commitment of services, resources, or other benefits
(including, but not limited to, on-going financial support, channels or
broadcast time thereon, personnel resources, or facilities or equipment) to
specifically identified parties other than the County. The application shall
contain an identification of any such commitments, including a specific
description of the nature and extent of all services, resources, or benefits
committed, the names and addresses of all parties to whom the commitments are
made, all terms and conditions of the commitments, and copies of the legal
instruments, such as contracts, leases, memoranda of understanding, or other
documents, by which the commitments, when accepted, and the documents executed
by the recipients would be evidenced. Each such legal instrument shall contain
provisions requiring that such services, resources, or benefits be utilized
exclusively for cultural, educational, scientific, character-building,
recreational, or public service purposes and prohibiting the utilization
thereof for commercial purposes.
   (b)   During the hearing conducted pursuant to the provisions of subsection
(e)of Section
11-1.602 of Article 6 of this chapter, the Board shall:
   (1)   Order such changes in the legal instruments by which the commitment of
such services, resources, or benefits are to be evidenced as are found
necessary in order to fulfill the objectives and purposes of the application
submitted by the tentative selectee without altering the nature or scope of the
commitments made, or direct the proposed recipients and tentative selectees to
meet separately for the purpose of developing mutually acceptable changes in
the legal instruments for later review and approval by the Board;
   (2)   Approve as to form all legal instruments determined to be sufficient
to adequately express the commitments and terms and conditions thereof; and
   (3)   Determine which, if any, of such legal instruments are to be
incorporated into the franchise documents made a part of the terms and
conditions of the franchise and order such incorporation by reference to the
instrument in the ordinance offering the franchise.
   (c)   With respect to any legal instrument which is made a part of the
franchise documents by reference in the ordinance offering the franchise, the
violation and breach by the grantee of the obligations therein shall be deemed
to constitute a material violation and breach of the franchise documents. The
obligations and prohibitions assumed by the recipient under such legal
instruments by either the execution of the instruments or the acceptance of the
services, resources, or benefits committed shall be enforceable either by the
grantee or the County. A violation and breach of the franchise documents by
reference in the ordinance offering the franchise shall not be deemed to
constitute a violation or breach of the franchise documents. The incorporation
of such a legal instrument into the franchise of any legal instrument which is
made a part of the franchise documents by reference in the ordinance offering
the franchise shall not be deemed to obligate the County to fulfill any promise
contained therein. Services, resources, or benefits committed to specifically
identified parties, other than the County, which are not evidenced by separate
legal instruments included with the application shall not be considered in the
selection process.
   (d)   An applicant who chooses not to commit services, resources, or
benefits as authorized by this section shall not be disqualified from bidding
or consideration in the selection of the grantee. It is expressly declared that
the factors upon which selection will be based are so numerous and subjective
as to make it impossible to know in advance the relative importance of a
determination by an applicant to either make or not to make such proposals in
relation to other factors upon which an award of a franchise will be based. (§
1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Article 10.
Street Work, Permits, and Construction
Sec. 11-1.1001.   Permits.
   (a)   Within thirty (30) days after the acceptance of a franchise, the
grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and
authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including,
but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, encroachment
permits, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses, and
authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the operation of cable television/communications systems or
associated microwave transmission facilities.
   (b)   In connection with subsection (a)of this section, copies of all
petitions, applications, and communications submitted by the grantee to the
Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any
other Federal or State regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in
respect to any matters affecting the grantee’s cable communications operations,
and any and all actions taken thereon by each such commission or agency, shall
also be submitted simultaneously to the County Administrator. Upon determining
that the grantee has obtained all necessary permits, licenses, and
authorizations, including rights of access to poles and conduits, the
’’’’County’ ’’Administrator’’ shall issue the notice to proceed.
   (c)   The County shall be authorized to establish special fees payable by a
grantee to defray the costs incurred by the Department of Public Works in
supervising and regulating the installation of a cable communications system
within the streets of the respective agencies. The Director of Public Works
shall be authorized to formulate reasonable schedules for the installation of a
cable communications system within the streets of the County for the purpose of
promoting safety, reducing inconvenience to the public, and insuring adequate
restoration and repair of the streets, and a grantee, and its officers, agents,
contractors, and subcontractors, shall comply with any and all such schedules.
(§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1002.   General construction.
   (a)   Within thirty (30) days after the issuance of a notice to proceed the
grantee shall commence the construction and installation of the cable
communications system.
   (b)   Within 180 days after the commencement of the construction and
installation of the system, the grantee shall proceed to render service to
subscribers, and the completion of the installation and construction shall be
pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter so that service to all of the
areas designated and scheduled on the map and plan of construction made a part
of the franchise shall be provided as set forth in this chapter.
   (c)   The construction and installation of the cable communications system
shall be complete and ready for the issuance of a final order of completion in
accordance with Section
11-1.1001 of this article at the time set forth in the ordinance offering a
franchise.
   (d)   Failure on the part of the grantee to commence and diligently pursue
each of the requirements of this section and to complete each of the matters
set forth in this section shall be grounds for the termination of such
franchise. By resolution, the Board, in its discretion, may extend the time for
the commencement and completion of the installation and construction for
additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences
delays by reason of circumstances beyond his control.
   (e)   The County shall have the right, free of charge, to make additional
use for any public or municipal purpose, whether governmental or proprietary,
of any poles, conduits, or other similar facilities erected, controlled, or
maintained exclusively by or for the grantee in any street provided such use by
the County does not interfere with the use by the grantee. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1003.   Erection of poles.
   No franchise shall be deemed to expressly or impliedly authorize the grantee
to construct or install poles or wire-holding structures within streets for the
purpose of placing cables, wires, lines, or otherwise without the written
consent of the County within which the street is situated. Such consent shall
be given or withheld in the sole discretion of the County and may be given upon
such terms and conditions as the County, in its sole discretion, may prescribe,
which shall include a requirement that the grantee perform, at its sole
expense, all tree trimming required to maintain the poles clear of
obstructions.
   With respect to any poles or wire-holding structures which a grantee is
authorized to construct and install within streets, the County reserves the
privilege of utilizing such poles or wire-holding structures, if such use would
enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the
grantee’s operations, with the condition that the County, public utility, or
public utility district pay to the grantee any or all actual and necessary
costs incurred by the grantee in permitting such use. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1004.   Underground facilities.
   (a)   Unless otherwise authorized by the Board, in those areas and portions
of the County where transmission and/or distribution facilities of the public
utility providing telephone service, and those of the utility providing
electric service, are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, or
are to be placed underground by a builder, developer, or subdivider as a part
of a development or subdivision, then the grantee shall likewise construct,
operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities
underground to the maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits
the grantee to do so.
   (b)   In new developments or subdivisions, the builder, developer, or
subdivider shall be responsible for the performance of all necessary trenching
and backfilling of main line and service trenches, including the furnishing of
any imported backfill material required. The grantee shall be responsible for
the conduct of the engineering and labor to put the cable conduit in the
trench. Pre-wiring of new dwellings to franchise specifications while under
construction shall be mandatory. The grantee shall be responsible for pulling
in the cable and providing the plant electronics and drops to individual homes
after occupancy.
   (c)   In those areas and portions of the County where utility service
facilities are currently located underground, the grantee shall be responsible
for the undergrounding of cable facilities, including the performance of all
necessary trenching, and the furnishing of any imported backfill material
required.
   (d)   Previously installed aerial cable shall be undergrounded in concert,
and on a cost-sharing basis, with other utilities pursuant to the general laws
of the County or applicable State laws or in the event such action shall be
taken by all other utilities on a voluntary basis.
   (e)   Subject to approval by the Board, incidental appurtenances, such as
amplifier boxes and pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, may be placed aboveground
but shall be of such size and design and shall be so located as not to be
unsightly or hazardous to the public. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1005.   System extensions.
   (a)   The grantee shall be required to extend the subscriber network and,
upon an order by the County, the institutional network to any new developments
or general areas within the imposed service area and is authorized to do so
within the remainder of the Franchise Area pursuant to the following
requirements:
   (1)   The grantee shall extend and make cable communications service
available to every dwelling unit within any area reaching the minimum density
of at least forty (40) dwelling units per street mile, or five (5) dwelling
units within 660 feet, as measured from existing feeder cable.
   (2)   The grantee shall extend and make cable communications service
available to every dwelling unit in all unserved, developing areas having at
least forty (40) dwelling units planned per street mile, as measured from the
existing system, and shall extend its system simultaneously with the
installation of utility lines.
   (3)   The grantee shall extend and make cable communications service
available to any isolated resident requesting a connection at the standard
connection charge if the connection to the isolated resident would require no
more than a standard 150 foot aerial drop line.
   (4)   With respect to requests for connections requiring an aerial drop line
in excess of 150 feet, the grantee shall extend and make available cable
television service to such residents at a connection charge not to exceed the
actual installation costs incurred by the grantee for the distance exceeding
150 feet.
   (5)   Whenever the grantee shall have received written requests for services
from at least fifteen (15) assured subscribers within 1,300 cable feet of its
aerial trunk cable, the grantee shall extend its system to such subscribers
solely for the usual connection and service fees for all subscribers provided
such extension is technically and economically feasible. The 1,300 cable feet
shall be measured in extension length of the grantee’s cable required for
service located within a public way or easement and shall not include the
length of necessary drop to the subscriber’s house or premises.
   (b)   Nothing set forth in this section shall be construed to prevent the
grantee from serving areas not covered by this section upon an agreement with
developers, property owners, or residents.
   (c)   Any violation of this section shall be considered a breach of the
terms of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1006.   Use of streets: Interference.
   (a)   Each cable communications system, including wires and appurtenances,
shall be located and installed and maintained so that none of the facilities
endanger or interfere with the lives or safety of persons, or interfere with
any improvements the County or State may deem proper to make, or unnecessarily
hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets or other public property.
   (b)   All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment
erected or installed by a grantee within the Yolo County community shall be so
located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets and
other public property and to cause minimum interference with the rights and
reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets or
other public property. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1007.   Restoration of streets and private property.
   (a)   All disturbances by the grantee of pavement, sidewalks, driveways,
landscaping, or other surfacing of streets shall be restored, repaired, or
replaced by the grantee at its sole cost in a manner approved by the Director
of Public Works, and in compliance with generally applicable standards of the
agency vested with jurisdiction thereover, and in as good condition as before
the disturbance occurred.
   (b)   To the extent practicable and reasonable, each grantee shall
accommodate the desires of any property owner respecting location within
easements or rights-of-way traversing private appurtenances constituting a part
of the cable communications system. Any disturbance of landscaping, fencing, or
other improvements upon private property, including private property traversed
by easements or rights-of-way utilized by a grantee, at the sole expense of the
grantee, shall be promptly repaired or restored (including the replacement of
such valuables as shrubbery and fencing) to the reasonable satisfaction of the
property owner as soon as possible. Each grantee, through authorized
representatives, shall make a reasonable attempt to personally contact the
occupants of all private property in advance of entering such property for the
purpose of commencing any installation of elements of the system within the
easements or rights-of-way traversing such property. As used in this
subsection, the terms “easements” and “rights-of-way” shall not include
easements or rights-of-way for roadway purposes. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October
27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1008.   Street work.
   (a)   Upon any failure of the grantee to commence, pursue, or complete any
work required by it by law or by the provisions of a franchise to be done in
any street, the Board, at its option and according to law, may cause such work
to be done, and the grantee shall pay to the County the cost thereof in the
itemized amounts reported by the Board to the grantee within thirty (30) days
after the receipt of such itemized report.
   (b)   In the event that:
   (1)   Any part of such system has been installed in any street or other area
without complying with the requirements of this chapter and/or the franchise
ordinance; or
   (2)   The use of any part of the system of the grantee is discontinued for
any reason for a continuous period of thirty (30) days without prior written
notice to and approval by the County; then
   (3)   The grantee, at the option of the County, and at the expense of the
grantee and at no expense to the County, and upon the demand of the County,
shall promptly remove from any street or other area all property of the
grantee, and the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from
which such property has been removed to such condition as the Director of
Public Works shall approve. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1009.   Relocation.
   If during the term of a franchise the County, a city, a community services
district, a County service area, a reclamation district, a public drainage
district, or any other special public district elects to alter, repair,
realign, abandon, improve, vacate, reroute, or change the grade of any street
or to replace, repair, install, maintain, or otherwise alter any above-ground
to underground cable, wire, conduit, pipe, line, pole, wire-holding structure,
structure, or other facility utilized for the provision of utility or other
services or the transportation of drainage, sewage, or other liquids, the
grantee, except as otherwise provided in this section, at its sole expense,
shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes, and any other facilities which the grantee has installed.
If such removal or relocation is required within a subdivision in which all
utility lines, including those for the cable communications system, were
installed at the same time, the entities may decide among themselves who is to
bear the cost of relocation; provided, however, the County shall not be liable
to a grantee for such costs. Regardless of who bears the costs, a grantee shall
take action to remove or relocate at such time or times as are directed by the
agency or company undertaking the work. Reasonable advance written notice shall
be mailed to the grantee advising the grantee of the date or dates removal or
relocation is to be undertaken. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1010.   Tree trimming.
   The grantee shall not, and shall prohibit any officer, agent, employee,
contractor, or subcontractor which it retains, remove or trim any tree or
portion thereof (either above, at, or below ground levels) which is located
within a street, unless the removal or trimming is done in accordance with a
specific tree trimming plan or general tree trimming policy which has the prior
written approval of the Director of Public Works. Such approval may be given or
withheld upon such terms and conditions as the Director of Public Works deems
appropriate. Any such plan or policy shall set forth standards governing tree
trimming/removal and shall provide for regulating in special circumstances,
including actions taken in violation of the plan or policy. Each grantee shall
be responsible for and shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the County,
and its officers, agents, and employees, from and against any and all damages
arising out of or resulting from the removal, trimming, mutilation of, or any
injury to any tree proximately caused by the grantee, or its officers, agents,
employees, contractors, or subcontractors. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983)
Sec. 11-1.1011.   Movement of buildings.
   Each grantee, upon a request by any person holding a building moving permit,
license, or other approval issued by the County or State, shall temporarily
remove, raise, or lower its wires to permit the movement of buildings. The
expense of such removal, raising, or lowering shall be paid by the person
requesting the same, and a grantee shall be authorized to require such payment
in advance. A grantee shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours’ oral
or written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. (§ 1, Ord. 961,
eff. October 27, 1983).
Sec. 11-1.1012.   Removal.
   (a)   Upon the expiration or termination of a franchise, if the franchise is
not renewed and if neither the County nor an assignee purchases the cable
communications system, the grantee may remove any underground cable from the
streets without trenching or other opening of the streets along the extension
of cable to be removed. The grantee shall not remove any underground cable or
conduit which requires trenching or other opening of the streets along the
extension of cable to be removed, except as provided in this section. The
grantee shall remove, at its sole cost and expense, any undergrounded cable or
conduit by trenching or opening the streets along the extension thereof or
otherwise which is ordered to be removed by the Board based upon a
determination, in the sole discretion of the Board, that removal is required in
order to eliminate or prevent a hazardous condition or promote future
utilization of the streets for public purposes. Any order by the Board to
remove cable or conduit shall be mailed to the grantee not later than ninety
(90) calendar days following the date of the expiration of the franchise. A
grantee shall file written notice with the Clerk of the Board not later than
sixty (60) calendar days following the date of the expiration or termination of
the franchise of its intention to remove cable authorized by this subsection to
be removed. The notice shall specify the location of all cable intended to be
removed and a schedule for removal by location. The schedule and timing of
removal shall be subject to approval and regulation by the Director of Public
Works. Removal shall be completed not later than twelve (12) months following
the date of the expiration or termination of the franchise. Underground cable
and conduit in the streets which are not removed shall be deemed abandoned, and
title thereto shall be vested in the County.
   (b)   Upon the expiration or termination of a franchise, if the franchise is
not renewed and if neither the County nor an assignee purchases the system, the
grantee, at its sole expense, unless relieved of the obligation by the County,
shall remove from the streets all aboveground elements of the cable
communications system, including, but not limited to, amplifier boxes,
pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, and cable attached to or suspended from poles
which are not purchased by the County or its assignee.
   (c)   The grantee shall apply for and obtain such encroachment permits,
licenses, authorizations, or other approvals and pay such fees and deposit such
security as required by applicable general laws of the County, shall conduct
and complete the work of removal in compliance with all such applicable laws,
and shall restore the streets to the same condition they were in before the
work of removal commenced. The work of removal shall be completed not later
than one year following the date of the expiration of the franchise. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1013.   Abandonment of franchise Property.
   (a)   In the event the use of any franchise property is permanently
discontinued, or no franchise has been obtained therefor, upon the expiration
of or within twelve (12) months after any termination of a franchise, the
grantee shall promptly remove from the streets all property involved, other
than any the Board, at its sole option, may permit to be abandoned in place.
   (b)   A permit to abandon in place shall first be obtained from the Director
of Public Works. Nothing set forth in this section shall be deemed a taking of
the property of the grantee, and the grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge
by reason of anything set forth in this section.
   (c)   Franchise property to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such
manner as the Board shall prescribe. Upon the abandonment of any franchise
property in place, the grantee shall submit to the Board an instrument,
satisfactory to the County Counsel, transferring to the County the ownership of
such property. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1014.   System maintenance.
   Throughout the life of a grantee’s franchise, and in addition to other
service regulations adopted by the Board, and excepting circumstances beyond
the grantee’s control, such as acts of God, riots, and civil disturbances, and
in providing such services, a grantee shall:
   (a)   Maintain all parts of its system in good condition and in accordance
with standards generally observed by the cable television industry. The system
shall serve individual residents, but also serve as a broad based
communications source for County government, other public facilities, including
hospitals, public libraries, and schools, and industrial and commercial
business users;
   (b)   Retain sufficient employees to provide safe, adequate, and prompt
service for all such residential subscribers, institutional facilities, and
business users; and
   (c)   List system failures to minimum time duration by locating and
correcting malfunctioning as promptly as is reasonably possible, irrespective
of holidays or other nonbusiness hours. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Article 11.
Completion
Sec. 11-1.1101.   Completion.
   (a)   A final order of completion shall be issued by the Board when:
   (1)   The construction of the cable communications system has been completed
within the entirety of the service area in compliance with the construction
standards set forth in Article 10 of this chapter and the design and other
requirements of the franchise documents;
   (2)   Basic service and other services identified pursuant to the provisions
of Section
11-1.1303 of Article 13 of this chapter have been made available to 100 percent
of the dwelling units within the service area;
   (3)   Any and all studio facilities, equipment, channels, and other
services, resources, or benefits required by the franchise documents have been
completed and made available;
   (4)   Any community use programming which the grantee has proposed pursuant
to the provisions of Sections
11-1.901 through
11-1.905 of Article 9 of this chapter shall be ready for commencement in
compliance with the franchise documents; and
   (5)   A notice of completion has been filed by the grantee as provided in
this section.
   (b)   For the purposes of Section
11-1.1002 of Article 10 of this chapter and this section, basic service and
other services identified pursuant to the provisions of Section
11-1.1303 of Article 13 of this chapter shall be deemed to be made available
when the basic service (at rates and charges in amounts proposed within the
application for the franchise and as permissibly adjusted pursuant to Section
11-1.1403 of Article 14 of this chapter or, if none are included in the
application, at rates and charges in amounts customarily offered by the
grantee) and other services identified pursuant to the provisions of said
Section
11-1.1303 (at rates and charges in amounts customarily offered by the grantee)
are offered for immediate provision to the owner or legal representative of the
owner empowered to consent to the use of the property of such individual
dwelling units.
   (c)   For the purpose of determining completion under this section, the
total number of dwelling units within the service area shall be deemed to be
the actual number of units available for occupancy as of a date forty-five (45)
calendar days in advance of the date of the filing by the grantee of the notice
of completion provided the grantee files the notice of completion with a good
faith belief that it has in fact achieved completion as of the date of filing.
Otherwise, the total number shall be determined as of the date on which the
Board makes a final decision as to whether a final order of completion will be
adopted.
   (d)   A grantee who asserts completion shall file a written notice of
completion with the Clerk of the Board. The notice of completion shall state
the total number of dwelling units available for occupancy within the service
area forty-five (45) calendar days in advance of the filing of the notice, the
total number of dwelling units to which
basic service and other services have been made available within the service
area as of the date of filing, and shall otherwise certify completion as set
forth in subsection (a)of this section. Neither the notice of completion nor
the statements, assertions, or certifications contained therein shall be deemed
to be binding upon the Board.
   (e)   During the period of construction of the cable communications system
or during the sixty (60) day period following the filing of the notice of
completion, all elements and components thereof, and all equipment and studio
facilities required by the franchise documents, shall be subject to inspection
by the County, or employees or authorized agents or representatives thereof,
for the purpose of determining whether the system and related facilities comply
with the franchise documents. The grantee shall authorize such inspection and
provide such information and cooperation if required in order to permit an
adequate investigation to determine the existence or nonexistence of such
compliance. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1102.   Hearings and determinations.
   (a)   No later than forty-five (45) calendar days following the filing of
the notice of completion, the Board shall commence a public hearing with
respect to the notice of completion. Written notice of the time, date, and
place of the hearing shall be mailed to the concerned grantee. Notice of the
time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be publicized in the manner
prescribed by Section
11-1.406 of Article 4 of this chapter.
   During the hearing, any interested person may appear and comment upon the
question of whether completion has occurred and a final order of completion
should be issued. The public hearing may be continued from time to time. While
the hearing is pending, the Board may direct such investigations of issues or
questions raised during the hearing as it deems appropriate.
   (b)   During the public hearing, the Board, by resolution, may identify
specific deficiencies respecting completion and decline to adopt a final order
of completion pending the correction or elimination of the deficiencies so
identified. If, at the conclusion of the public hearing, a final order of
completion is not issued, the Board, by resolution, shall identify specific
deficiencies respecting completion which shall be corrected in advance of the
issuance of a final order of completion.
   (c)   The final order of completion shall certify completion in compliance
with the terms and conditions of the franchise documents. The order shall also
designate the actual date when all elements set forth in subsection (a)of
Section
11-1.1101 of this article have been completed. The issuance of such a final
order of completion shall constitute a determination of completion which shall
be conclusive for all purposes of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October
27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1103.   Requests for arbitration.
   (a)   At any time on or after 120 calendar days following the date of the
filing by a grantee of the notice of completion, the grantee, if a final order
of completion has not been adopted by the Board, may make a written request for
arbitration. If a final order of completion has been issued, and the grantee
disagrees with the actual date of completion stated therein, the grantee,
within thirty (30) calendar days following the mailing to the grantee of the
order, may make a written request for arbitration. The request shall be in
writing, shall state the grounds therefor, and shall be filed with the Clerk of
the Board.
   (b)   If arbitration is requested, the arbitration panel shall be selected,
the hearing scheduled within the time prescribed, notice given, the hearing
conducted, a decision made, and the costs divided in the manner prescribed by
Sections
11-1.1214 through
11-1.1219 of Article 12 of this chapter. The discovery provisions of the
California Arbitration Act (Sections 1280, et seq. of the Code of Civil
Procedure of the State) shall be applicable to the arbitration proceedings
under this section. The questions which may be submitted to the arbitration
panel and the jurisdiction of the arbitration panel shall be limited to the
following:
   (1)   The interpretation of the provisions of the franchise documents solely
in relation to the decision required by subsection (2) of this subsection; and
   (2)   Whether a final order of completion should be issued and, if so, the
actual date of completion, or, if an order has been issued, the actual date of
completion. The jurisdiction of the arbitration panel shall not include
questions of enforcement, breach, or remedies, and any such determination
concerning enforcement, breach, or remedies shall be inadmissible in and
without force or effect in relation to the proceedings conducted pursuant to
Sections
11-1.1107 through
11-1.1110 of this article.
   (c)   If ordered by the arbitration panel, the Board shall issue a final
order of completion not later than ten (10) calendar days following the receipt
of the arbitration award. The arbitration award may be judicially enforced,
shall be final, binding, and conclusive upon the parties, and shall not be
subject to judicial review or vacation except on the grounds set forth in
Section 1286.2 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 961,
eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1104.   Complaints.
   Any citizen who asserts there has been a violation of any of the provisions
of Sections
11-1.1002 through
11-1.1014 of Article 10 of this chapter may file a written complaint asserting
such violation with the Clerk of the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983)
Sec. 11-1.1105.   Excuses for violations.
   Except as provided in this section, the violation by a grantee of any of the
provisions set forth in Sections
11-1.1002 through
11-1.1014 of Article 10 of this chapter and Section
11-1.1101 of this article caused by circumstances beyond the control of the
grantee shall constitute good and sufficient excuse and justification for such
violations precluding the grantee from being in breach of said sections. The
following are examples of acts or omissions by a grantee or circumstances which
shall be deemed not to be beyond the control of the grantee and which shall not
constitute excuses or justifications for violations:
   (a)   The failure at any time by a grantee, or its officers, agents, or
employees, to exercise diligence in planning, organizing, arranging for, or
prosecuting the work of construction and installation or in taking any other
action necessary to permit or facilitate the work of construction and
installation;
   (b)   Unanticipated cost increases or insufficiency of capital with which to
take the actions necessary to comply or facilitate compliance with any of the
provisions of said Sections
11-1.1002 through
11-1.1014 and
11-1.1101;
   (c)   Considerations relating to economy or cost efficiency as respects acts
or omissions by a grantee;
   (d)   Delays occasioned by the failure of the grantee to diligently apply
for and prosecute any request for a required certificate, approval, or consent
from the FCC;
   (e)   Delays occasioned by seasonal changes in weather or climatic
conditions, such as rain (exclusive of catastrophic conditions in the nature of
“acts of God”) (rain delays shall not constitute an excuse or justification for
violations except with respect to measurable precipitation occurring on more
than fifty-nine (59) days during any period commencing July 1 and ending the
next following June 30; and only if such is the proximate cause of the
violation);
   (f)   Delays occasioned by failure to obtain approval to attach lines to
poles owned by private or public utilities or in the attachment of cable to the
poles provided such failure is the result of an act or omission of the grantee;
and
   (g)   Delays occasioned by the customary and usual time required to process
and secure approvals under the zoning laws of the County for the location of
components of the cable communications system and other installations
associated therewith, given the nature of the approval required and magnitude
of the project; provided, however, if a grantee submits specific sites and
plans for all headends, towers, and transmitters to the County and analyses
upon all such facilities as the lead agency, any time consumed by such
environmental analyses which is longer than 120 calendar days during a period
subsequent to the filing of the certificate of acceptance of the franchise
pursuant to Section
11-1.605 of Article 6 of this chapter shall be deemed to excuse the grantee
from any violations which are proximately caused by such delay in excess of 120
calendar days.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a)through (f)of this section,
a grantee shall not be excused from any violation of the provisions of said
Sections
11-1.1002 through
11-1.1014 and
11-1.1101, except for causes which are beyond the control of the grantee, and
except with respect to violations which have not been contributed to or
aggravated by acts or omissions by the grantee.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, violations caused exclusively
by acts or omissions by the County, or its officers, agents, or employees,
shall constitute an excuse and justification for the failure of a grantee to
comply with the provisions of said Sections
11-1.1002 through
11-1.1014 and
11-1.1101 precluding a determination that the grantee is in breach. However,
violations as a result of such exclusive causes shall not be deemed to excuse
the grantee from other violations, shield the grantee from a determination that
it is in breach for violations, or bar any relief for damages or otherwise as a
result of such breach. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1106.   Examples of excuses for violations.
   Examples of circumstances beyond the control of a grantee which excuse a
grantee from violation and being in breach of the provisions of Sections
11-1.1002 through
11-1.1014 of Article 10 of this chapter and Section
11-1.1101 of this article, when such violations are caused thereby, include the
following: strikes; acts of public enemies; orders by military authority;
insurrections; riots; epidemics; landslides; lightning; earthquakes; fires;
floods; civil disturbances; explosions; and the partial or entire failure of
utilities. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1107.   Enforcement proceedings.
   (a)   At any time and from time to time, proceedings may be commenced by the
Board.
   (b)   The purpose of such proceedings shall be, and the powers of the Board
shall include, the following:
   (1)   Determination of whether there has been a violation of any of the
terms, conditions, or requirements set forth in Sections
11-1.1002 through
11-1.1014 of Article 10 of this chapter and Section
11-1.1101 of this article or any requirements in relation thereto established
pursuant to previously conducted enforcement proceedings;
   (2)   Establishment of new or revised schedules for compliance with any of
the terms, conditions, or requirements which are determined to have been
violated;
   (3)   Determination of whether the grantee is in breach of any of the terms,
conditions, or requirements set forth in said Sections
11-1.1002 through
11-1.1014 and
11-1.1101, or of the franchise documents with respect to the violation of any
such terms, conditions, or requirements, and, if so, the nature and extent of
any such breach; and
   (4)   With respect to any finding of breach, determination of the remedy
therefor authorized by Sections
11-1.1203 and
11-1.1204 of Article 12 of this chapter.
   (c)   In connection with determinations by the Board that there has been a
violation of any time limit prescribed by said Sections
11-1.1002 through
11-1.1014 and
11-1.1101, the Board shall be authorized to establish new time schedules and
time limitations based upon the circumstances, which shall supersede those set
forth in said sections. Future enforcement proceedings pursuant to this section
and Sections
11-1.1108 and
11-1.1109 of this article may be undertaken in relation to time schedules and
time limitations established pursuant to prior enforcement proceedings. In the
event the Board finds that a grantee has breached any of the time limitations
set forth in said Sections
11-1.1002 through
11-1.1014 and
11-1.1101, or established pursuant to prior enforcement proceedings, the Board
shall determine and assess the amount of liquidated damages, if any, which the
grantee shall be required to pay as a result of such breach, and whether, and
if so, the extent to which the term of the grantee should be reduced with
respect to any such breach. Such determinations, without an appeal to
arbitration or as affirmed by arbitration, shall be self-executing.
   (d)   In the event the Board determines that the cable communications system
fails to comply with any of the requirements of the franchise documents or that
the grantee has failed to provide any of the facilities or services (including
those relating to community use) required by the franchise documents, the Board
may determine the specific deficiencies and order the correction thereof. Such
determinations, without an appeal to arbitration or as affirmed by arbitration,
shall be self-executing. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1108.   Commencement of enforcement proceedings.
   (a)   The Board shall commence enforcement proceedings by scheduling a
hearing for the purpose of inquiring into the matters specified in Section
11-1.1107 of this article. Written notice of the time, date, and place of the
hearing shall be mailed to the grantee and to the grantee’s surety on the
performance bond filed pursuant to Section
11-1.1508 of Article 15 of this chapter not later than thirty (30) calendar
days in advance of the date of the commencement of the hearing. The notice
shall state the reasons for the hearing, identify the terms, conditions, or
requirements alleged to be violated, and generally describe the areas or
subject matter with respect to which the violations are alleged to have been
committed.
   (b)   The hearing may be conducted either by the Board or, at the sole
discretion of the Board, by a hearing officer appointed by the Board to conduct
the hearing. Any such hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice
under the laws of the State who shall not be an officer or employee either of a
grantee or the County.
   (c)   The cost of providing quarters for the hearing, the compensation for
the hearing officer, if any, and the per diem cost of any reporter retained to
record the proceedings shall be borne by the County. The cost of preparing a
transcript and record of the hearing shall be borne by the grantee. All costs
incurred by the parties for attorneys’ fees, expert witness fees, or other
expenses shall be borne solely by the party incurring the costs. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1109.   Conduct of hearings.
   (a)   All witnesses testifying at the enforcement hearing shall be sworn.
Witnesses shall be subject to direct and cross examination. However, formal
rules of evidence applicable to the trial of civil or criminal proceedings in
the trial courts of the State shall not be applicable to the hearing. The
provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, commencing at Section 11500 of
the Government Code of the State, or any successor legislative enactment, shall
not be applicable to any such hearing. The burden of proving violations by the
grantee of the franchise documents shall be borne by the party presenting the
charges, and the burden of proving excuses from performance shall be borne by
the grantee. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
   (b)   If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, the officer, upon
the conclusion of the hearing, shall prepare a recommended decision which
includes findings of fact, conclusions, and all determinations authorized by
Section
11-1.1107 of this article. The recommended decision shall be filed with the
Clerk of the Board and mailed to the parties not later than thirty (30)
calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. Upon the receipt of such a
recommended decision, the Board, without a hearing except as otherwise required
as follows, may either:
   (1)   Adopt the findings of fact, conclusions, and determinations contained
in the recommended decision;
   (2)   Adopt the findings of fact and conclusions contained in the
recommended decision, modify the determinations, and adopt the recommended
decision as so revised;
   (3)   Based upon the record of the hearing, modify the findings of fact,
conclusions, or determinations and adopt the recommended decision as so
revised; or
   (4)   Reject the recommended decision and conduct a new hearing.
   (c)   If the hearing is conducted by the Board, upon the conclusion of the
hearing the Board shall adopt a decision which includes the findings of fact,
conclusions, and determinations authorized by Section
11-1.1107 of this article. Copies of the decision adopted by the Board shall be
mailed to the parties. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1110.   Arbitration of enforcement proceedings.
   (a)   Not later than thirty (30) calendar days following the date of the
mailing to the grantee of the decision by the Board, the grantee shall be
authorized to appeal the decision or any portion thereof to arbitration by
filing a written notice of appeal with the Clerk of the Board. The notice of
appeal shall specifically identify the determination or determinations from
which the appeal is taken, and the grounds therefor, and shall be accompanied
by a fee equal to the estimate by the Clerk of the Board of the cost of
preparing the transcript and record of the hearing or hearings. In the event
the grantee fails to file the notice of appeal within the time and in
compliance with the requirements prescribed in this subsection, the
determinations by the Board shall become final, binding, and conclusive and not
subject to review or reversal by any authority. Judicial enforcement of such
determinations may be sought.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the arbitration panel
shall be selected, the hearing scheduled within the time prescribed, notice
given, the hearing conducted, a decision made, and the costs divided in the
manner prescribed by Sections
11-1.1214 through
11-1.1218 of Article 12 of this chapter.
   (c)   The questions which may be submitted to the arbitration panel and the
jurisdiction of the panel shall be limited to a decision as to whether the
findings of fact by the Board are supported by substantial evidence in the
record and whether the conclusions by the Board are consistent with the
provisions of the franchise documents as interpreted by the arbitration panel.
The powers of the arbitration panel shall be limited to a conclusion as to
whether the decision by the Board from which the appeal is taken should be
affirmed, or reversed and remanded to the Board for further determination, and
interpretation of the provisions of the franchise documents solely in relation
to the review of the decision by the Board.
   (d)   The hearing by the arbitration panel shall not be a trial de novo, and
the sole function of the panel shall be to review the record of the hearing
preceding the decision by the Board to decide whether there was substantial
evidence in the light of the whole record to support the findings and to
interpret the franchise documents in relation to the decision by the Board. No
new evidence shall be introduced, received, or considered by the arbitration
panel; provided that where the panel finds there is relevant evidence which, in
the exercise of reasonable diligence, could not have been produced or which was
improperly excluded at the hearing preceding the arbitration, the panel may
remand the matter to the Board to be reconsidered in the light of such
evidence. The determination by the Board shall be sustained by the arbitration
panel if it finds that there is substantial evidence in the record to sustain
the determination and that the conclusions are consistent with the provisions
of the franchise documents. The panel shall not substitute its discretion for
that of the Board with respect to the determinations made by the Board or
reweigh or otherwise judge the credibility of the evidence presented during the
hearing preceding the Board’s decision. If the panel decides that the
determinations by the Board violate the provisions of the franchise documents,
the panel shall remand the matter to the Board for further determinations,
reserving jurisdiction to review the determinations. Objections by the grantee
to the determinations by the Board which were not presented during the hearing
preceding the Board’s decision shall be deemed to have been waived.
   (e)   The decision by the Board as affirmed by an arbitration award may be
judicially enforced and shall not be subject to judicial review or vacation,
except on the grounds set forth in Section 1286.2 of the Code of Civil
Procedure of the State to the extent such grounds are consistent with the
express terms of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Article 12.
Remedies
Sec. 11-1.1201.   Crimes.
   Violations of the provisions of Sections
11-1.413 of Article 4 of this chapter,
11-1.603 of Article 6 of this chapter, and
11-1.1314 of Article 13 of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. With
the foregoing exceptions, a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
not constitute a misdemeanor, infraction, or other crime. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1202.   Impracticality of ascertaining damages.
   At the time of the issuance of any franchise under the provisions of this
chapter, it will be impractical to reasonably ascertain the total extent of
damages which may be incurred as a result of the breach by the grantee of its
obligations under the franchise documents as prescribed by Section
11-1.1203 of this article. The provisions of said Section
11-1.1203 shall apply in the event of a breach as liquidated damages therefor.
Factors relating to the impracticality of ascertaining damages shall include,
but are not limited to, the following:
   (a)   The facts that:
   (1)   The primary damage resulting from breaches by the grantee of the
schedules for the construction and extension of the cable communications system
and provision of services prescribed by Sections
11-1.1002 through
11-1.1014 of Article 10 of this chapter and Section
11-1.1101 of Article 11 of this chapter, and of the duty prescribed pursuant to
said Section
11-1.1101, and of the duty prescribed pursuant to Section
11-1.817 of Article 8 of this chapter will be to members of the public who are
denied services or denied quality or reliable services;
   (2)   Such breaches cause inconvenience, anxiety, frustration, and
deprivation of the benefits of the franchise to individual members of the
general public in subjective ways and in varying degrees of intensity which are
incapable of measurement in precise monetary terms;
   (3)   That services might be available through the cable communications
system which are both necessary and available at a substantially lower cost
than alternative services, and the monetary loss resulting from the denial of
services or denial of quality or reliable services is impossible to calculate
in precise monetary terms; and
   (4)   The termination of a franchise for such breaches and other remedies
is, at best, a means of future correction and not a remedy which makes the
public whole for past breaches;
   (b)   The fact that the failure of a grantee to make timely reports
identifying its progress in installing its cable communications system within
service areas will make it difficult in ways which are not measureable for the
County to administer the construction schedule, delay initiation to enforcement
proceedings, and impede compliance with the periods allowed for construction;
and
   (c)   The fact that the failure of a grantee to file timely annual reports
will deny information necessary to enable the County to expeditiously,
effectively, and efficiently administer the franchise and exercise its
regulatory powers in relation thereto for the promotion and protection of the
public convenience, health, safety, and welfare.
   Without the provisions of Section
11-1.1203 of this article, the actual damages for which a grantee would be
liable could greatly exceed the specified amount of liquidated damages.
Therefore, the provisions of said Section
11-1.1203 are of benefit to a grantee. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1203.   Liquidated damages: Amount.
   (a)   The Board shall assess a grantee, and the grantee shall be liable, for
liquidated damages in the amount of One Thousand and no/100ths ($1,000.00)
Dollars for each calendar day on which a grantee is in breach and for each
breach of any of the provisions of any of the following: Sections
11-1.1002 through
11-1.1014 of Article 10 of this chapter and Section 11-1. 1101 of Article 11 of
this chapter; the time limitations prescribed pursuant to Section
11-1.1107 of Article 11 of this chapter; or Section
11-1.817 of Article 8 of this chapter. Such liquidated damage sum shall be
separately applicable to each calendar day of delay in complying with the
provisions of subsections (a)through (e)of said Section
11-1.1002 and separately applicable for each calendar day of delay in complying
with any of the provisions of said Section
11-1.1002. Such liquidated damage sum shall be separately applicable to each
calendar day of delay in complying with each approval or the conditions thereof
issued pursuant to the provisions of said Section
11-1.1005.
   (b)   The Board shall assess a grantee, and the grantee shall be liable, for
liquidated damages in the amount of Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00)
Dollars for each calendar day in excess of twenty (20) calendar days the
grantee is in breach of any of the provisions of Section
11-1.1316 of Article 13 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1204.   Reduction in term.
   In addition to the liquidated damages set forth in Section
11-1.1203 of this article, in its sole discretion, the Board may reduce the
term of any franchise one calendar month for each cumulative thirty (30)
calendar days in excess of the first thirty (30) calendar days a grantee is in
breach of any of the provisions of Section
11-1.1002 of Article 10 of this chapter. The purpose of this section is to
authorize the Board, after a grantee has been in breach of said provisions of
said section for the first thirty (30) calendar days, to reduce the term of the
franchise for subsequent delays caused by the grantee’s breach on a month-to-
month basis. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1205.   Collection of damages.
   (a)   The County Auditor-Controller shall charge and transfer from the
security fund established pursuant to Section
11-1.1509 of Article 15 of this chapter to the credit of the County such
amounts as are assessed as liquidated damages by determinations of the Board
pursuant to Section
11-1.1109 of Article 11 of this chapter which are not appealed to arbitration
and become final, or which are affirmed by an arbitration panel under the
provisions of Section
11-1.1110 of Article 11 of this chapter.
   (b)   With respect to breaches of any of the provisions of Sections
11-1.1315 of Article 13 of this chapter or
11-1.817 of Article 8 of this chapter, the Board shall determine the amount of
liquidated damages to be assessed and mail notice thereof to the grantee. Such
a notice may provide for assessments for breaches occurring in advance of the
notice and for periods of breach subsequent to the issuance of the notice
pending compliance by the grantee. The determinations by the Board shall become
final, binding, and conclusive, not subject to judicial review or reversal by
any authority, and judicially enforceable, unless, within thirty (30) calendar
days following the date of the mailing of the notice of the determination, the
grantee files with the Clerk of the Board a written notice appealing the
determination to arbitration pursuant to the provisions of Section
11-1.1206 of this article. The notice of appeal shall specifically identify the
grounds for the appeal. The County Auditor-Controller shall charge and transfer
from the special account established pursuant to said Section
11-1.1509 to the credit of the County such amounts as are assessed as
liquidated damages by determinations of the Board pursuant to this subsection
which are not appealed to arbitration and become final or which are affirmed by
an arbitration panel under said Section
11-1.1206.
   (c)   With respect to breaches of any of the provisions of Section
11-1.1502 or
11-1.1503 of Article 15 of this chapter, the County Auditor-Controller shall
charge and transfer from the special account established pursuant to said
Section
11-1.1509 to the credit of the County such amounts as are assessed as franchise
fees, interests, and liquidated damages by determinations of the Board pursuant
to Section
11-1.1506 of Article 15 of this chapter which are not appealed to arbitration
and become final or which are affirmed by an arbitration panel under said
Section
11-1.1506, or such amounts of franchise fees, interests, and liquidated damages
as are prescribed by a judgment of a court.
   (d)   The County Auditor-Controller shall mail notice to the grantee of
transfers from the special account. The notice shall identify the amount of
transfer, the balance of the account after transfer (including accumulated
interest), and the total amount, if any, which the grantee is required to pay
in order to replenish the account in accordance with the requirements of said
Section
11-1.1509.
   (e)   Any amount owing by a grantee in excess of the current balance within
the special account established pursuant to said Section
11-1.1509 may be recovered from the surety on the performance bond filed
pursuant to the provisions of Section
11-1.1508 of Article 15 of this chapter or from the grantee. (§ 1, Ord. 961,
eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1206.   Liquidated damage arbitration proceedings.
   (a)   With a request for arbitration proceedings conducted pursuant to the
provisions of subsection (b)of Section
11-1.1205 of this article, the arbitration panel should be selected, the
hearing scheduled within the time prescribed, notice given, the hearing
conducted, a decision made, and the costs divided in the manner prescribed by
Sections
11-1.1214 through
11-1.1219 of this article. The questions which may be submitted to the
arbitration panel and the jurisdiction of the arbitration panel shall be
limited to the following:
   (1)   The interpretation of the provisions of the franchise documents solely
in relation to the decision required by subsection (b)of this section; and
   (2)   The amount, if any, owing by the grantee. The grantee shall
immediately pay any amount determined to be owing by the arbitration panel.
   (b)   The arbitration award may be judicially enforced, shall be final,
binding, and conclusive upon the parties, and shall not be subject to judicial
review or vacation, except on the grounds set forth in Section 1286.2 of the
Code of Civil Procedure of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1207.   Alternative remedies.
   Neither the reduction of the term of the franchise nor liquidated damages
shall be deemed to be the exclusive remedy for the types of breaches identified
in Section
11-1.1203 of this article. Neither the right to assess liquidated damages, nor
the assessment of liquidated damages, nor the right to reduce, nor the
reduction of the term of the franchise shall be deemed to bar or otherwise
limit the right of the County to obtain judicial enforcement of the grantee’s
obligations by means of specific performance, injunctive relief, mandate, or
other remedies at law or in equity, other than monetary damages. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1208.   Termination of franchises.
   The following material breaches of the obligations of a grantee under the
franchise documents shall constitute grounds for the termination of a franchise
by the County:
   (a)   Cumulative unexcused delays in excess of 180 calendar days in
complying with the provisions of subsection (c)of Section
11-1.1002 of Article 10 of this chapter or beyond the times prescribed pursuant
to Section
11-1.1107 of Article 11 of this chapter in relation to subsection (c)of said
Section
11-1.1002;
   (b)   The failure of a grantee to make any payment to replenish the security
fund established under Section
11-1.1509 of Article 15 of this chapter within the time required by said
section;
   (c)   Any violation of Sections
11-1.1601,
11-1.1604, or
11-1.1607 of Article 16 of this chapter;
   (d)   The failure to make any disclosure of fact within the application for
the franchise which is required by this chapter, or a request for proposals, or
the misrepresentation of such a fact in the application;
   (e)   The willful failure to make any payment required by Section
11-1.1502 of Article 15 of this chapter; or
   (f)   Any other act or omission by the grantee which materially violates the
terms, conditions, or requirements of the franchise documents, or any other
directive, rule, or regulation issued thereunder, and which is not corrected or
remedied within thirty (30) calendar days following the mailing to the grantee
of written notice of the violation or within such period beyond the thirty (30)
calendar days as is reasonable. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1209.   Commencement of termination proceedings.
   (a)   The Board shall not determine that a franchise shall be terminated
either upon grounds identified by Section
11-1.1208 of this article or pursuant to subsection (k)of Section
11-1.411 of Article 4 of this chapter until a hearing has been conducted upon
the matter. Written notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing shall be
mailed to the grantee and to the grantee’s surety on the performance bond filed
pursuant to Section
11-1.1508 of Article 15 of this chapter not later than thirty (30) calendar
days in advance of the date of the commencement of the hearing. The notice
shall state the reasons for the hearing, describe the basis for termination,
and identify the terms, conditions, or requirements with respect to which the
breach has occurred, if a breach is the basis for termination.
   (b)   The hearing may be conducted either by the Board or, at the sole
discretion of the Board, by a hearing officer appointed by the Board to conduct
the hearing. Any such hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice
under the laws of the State.
   (c)   The cost of providing quarters for the hearing, the compensation for
the hearing officer, if any, and the per diem cost of any reporter retained to
record the proceedings shall be borne by the County. The cost of preparing a
transcript and record of the hearing shall be borne by the grantee. All costs
incurred by the parties for attorneys’ fees, expert witness fees, and other
expenses shall be borne solely by the party incurring the costs. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 11, Ord. 999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.1210.   Conduct of hearings.
   (a)   All witnesses testifying at the hearing concerning termination shall
be sworn. Witnesses shall be subject to direct and cross examination. However,
formal rules of evidence applicable to the trial of civil and criminal
proceedings in the trial courts of the State shall not be applicable to the
hearing. The provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, commencing at
Section 11500 of the Government Code of the State, or any successor legislative
enactment, shall not be applicable to any such hearing. The hearing may be
continued from time to time.
   (b)   If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, the officer, upon
the conclusion of the hearing, shall prepare a recommended decision which
includes findings of fact and conclusions. The recommended decision shall be
filed with the Clerk of the Board and mailed to the parties not later than
thirty (30) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. Upon the receipt
of such a recommended decision, the Board, without a hearing except as
otherwise required as follows, may either:
   (1)   Adopt the recommended decision, including findings of fact and
conclusions submitted by the hearing officer;
   (2)   Adopt the findings of fact and conclusions contained in the
recommended decision, modify the decision, and adopt the recommended decision
as so revised; or
   (3)   Based upon the record of the hearing, modify the findings of fact,
conclusions, or decision and adopt the recommended decision as so revised.
   (c)   If the hearing is conducted by the Board, upon the conclusion of the
hearing, the Board shall adopt a decision which includes findings of fact and
conclusions.
   (d)   If the decision by the Board is that there are grounds for the
termination of the franchise and that the franchise should be terminated, the
Board shall adopt a resolution which terminates the franchise and includes its
decision. The effective date of the termination shall be such date as is
prescribed by the Board, within its sole discretion, in the resolution, and the
effective date may be made variable in relation to whether an appeal to
arbitration is filed pursuant to Section
11-1.1211 of this article. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1211.   Appeals to arbitration.
   (a)   Not later than thirty (30) calendar days following the date of the
mailing to the grantee of the resolution of termination by the Board, the
grantee shall be authorized to appeal to arbitration the determination to
terminate the franchise. The appeal shall be taken by filing a written notice
thereof with the Clerk of the Board. The notice of appeal shall state the
specific reasons for the appeal and shall be accompanied by a fee equal to the
estimate by the Clerk of the Board of the cost of preparing the transcript and
record of the hearing. In the event the grantee fails to file the notice of
appeal with the accompanying fee within thirty (30) calendar days following the
date on which a copy of the resolution of termination was mailed to the
grantee, the termination of the franchise shall become final, binding, and
conclusive and not subject to review or reversal by any authority. Judicial
enforcement of the decision may be sought.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the arbitration panel
shall be selected, the hearing scheduled within the time prescribed, notice
given, the hearing conducted, a decision made, and the costs divided in the
manner prescribed by Sections
11-1.1214 through
11-1.1219 of this article.
   (c)   The questions which may be submitted to the arbitration panel and the
jurisdiction of the panel shall be limited to a decision as to whether the
evidence received during the hearing preceding the determination by the Board
established a basis for the termination of the franchise and interpretation of
the provisions of the franchise documents solely in relation to the question of
whether there was a basis for termination. Under no circumstances shall the
arbitration panel have authority to be vested with jurisdiction to review,
reverse, or otherwise nullify the exercise of discretion by the Board in
terminating the franchise if the panel determines there are grounds for
termination.
   (d)   The hearing by the arbitration panel shall not be trial de novo, and
no new evidence shall be introduced, received, or considered, and the sole
function of the panel shall be to review the record of the hearing preceding
the decision by the Board to decide whether there was substantial evidence in
the record to support the findings and to interpret the franchise documents in
relation to the decision by the Board. The Board’s determination to terminate
shall be sustained by the arbitration panel if it finds that there is
substantial evidence in the record to sustain the determination and that the
conclusions are consistent with the provisions of the franchise documents. In
determining whether there is substantial evidence in the record to support the
findings, the panel shall conduct an independent review of the evidence in the
record and determine the weight of the evidence contained in the record. The
panel shall not substitute its discretion for that of the Board with respect to
the determination to terminate. If the panel decides that the determination by
the Board to terminate violates the provisions of the franchise documents, the
panel shall remand the matter to the Board for further determination, reserving
jurisdiction to review the determination. However, such remand shall not
include a duty to receive further evidence, unless such evidence was initially
offered and excluded during the hearing preceding the Board’s decision.
Objections by the grantee which were not presented during the hearing preceding
the Board’s decision shall be deemed to have been waived.
   (e)   The decision by the Board as affirmed by the arbitration award may be
judicially enforced, shall be final, binding, and conclusive upon the parties,
and shall not be subject to judicial review or vacation, except on the grounds
set forth in Section 1286.2 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State to the
extent such grounds are consistent with the express terms of this chapter. (§
1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1212.   Acquisition of property.
   Upon the final determination to terminate the franchise pursuant to Section
11-1.1210 or
11-1.1211 of this article, the Board, in its sole discretion, shall be
authorized to purchase the property associated with the franchise as defined by
Section
11-1.702 of Article 7 of this chapter. The purchase of the property shall be
made in accordance with the standards, procedures, and provisions set forth in
Sections
11-1.701 through
11-1.714 of Article 7 of this chapter. No compensation shall be payable by the
County or its assignee in relation either to the termination of the franchise
or purchase of the property, except pursuant to and in accordance with said
Sections
11-1.701 through
11-1.714. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1213.   County’s right to operate systems.
   In the event a grantee fails to operate its cable communications system for
seven (7) consecutive days without prior approval by the Board and for reasons
which are not beyond its control, the County, through its officers, agents,
employees, or contractors, at its option, may enter upon the premises of the
grantee, occupy such premises and property constituting the cable
communications system, and operate the system until such time as the grantee
presents proof satisfactory to the Board that the grantee is ready, willing,
and able to renew the operation of the system. In operating the system, the
County or its contractor shall be authorized to contract in the name of the
grantee, incur expenses in the name of the grantee, and take any and all other
actions necessary to enable it to effectuate the purposes of this section. The
costs incurred by the Board in undertaking such operation shall be a charge
against the assets of the grantee, and the County or its contractor shall be
authorized to reimburse itself for the costs incurred from revenues received
during the period of operation. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1214.   Arbitration proceedings.
   Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, arbitration proceedings of
matters expressly made arbitrable under the provisions of this chapter shall be
conducted in compliance with the provisions of the California Arbitration Act,
commencing with Section 1280 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State. (§ 1,
Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1215.   Arbitration panel.
   (a)   Each arbitration panel shall be conducted by a panel of three (3)
arbitrators. One arbitrator shall be appointed by the grantee, one arbitrator
shall be appointed by the County, and the third arbitrator shall be the
chairperson of the panel and shall be appointed by the other two (2)
arbitrators. If the other two (2) arbitrators are unable to agree upon an
appointment, the third arbitrator shall be appointed by the presiding judge of
the Superior Court of the County. Each member of the arbitration panel shall be
an attorney licensed to practice within the courts of the State. No member of
the panel shall be an officer, employee, or attorney of any grantee, or any
affiliate thereof, or of the County.
   (b)   The grantee and the Board shall each appoint its arbitrator and mail
notice to the other of its selection not later than fifteen (15) calendar days
following the filing of a notice of appeal to arbitration or the mailing of the
initiation of arbitration. The third arbitrator shall be appointed no later
than thirty (30) calendar days following the filing of the notice of the appeal
to arbitration or the mailing of the initiation of arbitration. (§ 1, Ord. 961,
eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1216.   Arbitration hearings.
   The chairperson of the arbitration panel shall select the site of the
hearing, retain a stenographic reporter to report the hearing, and, in
consultation with the other members of the panel and the parties, schedule the
hearing. The hearing shall be scheduled to commence not later than seventy-five
(75) calendar days following the filing of the notice of appeal to arbitration
or the mailing of the initiation of arbitration. The chairperson of the panel
shall mail written notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing to the
other two (2) arbitrators, the grantee, and the grantee’s surety on the
performance bond filed pursuant to the provisions of Section
11-1.1508 of Article 15 of this chapter not later than twenty (20) calendar
days in advance of the hearing. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1217.   Costs of arbitration.
   (a)   The compensation and expenses of the arbitrator appointed by the
grantee shall be borne and paid solely by the grantee. The compensation and
expenses of the arbitrator appointed by the Board shall be borne and paid
solely by the County. The grantee and County shall each bear and solely pay
their own costs of attorneys’ fees, expert and other witness fees, and other
expenses incurred in preparing and prosecuting their respective cases. In
proceedings where the record of a public hearing of the Board is to be
considered by the arbitration panel, the costs of transcribing, typing, and
copying the record shall be borne and paid solely by the grantee.
   (b)   The compensation and expenses of the chairperson of the arbitration
panel, rental, if any, for the place of the hearing, per diem costs of the
stenographic reporter, costs of transcribing the typing of any transcripts of
the arbitration hearing, and any other costs of the arbitration proceeding not
identified in subsection (a)of this section shall be divided equally between,
borne, and paid by the grantee and the County. The arbitration panel shall not
be empowered to order a division of costs, fees, or expenses different from
that prescribed by this section. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1218.   Arbitration awards.
   The arbitration award shall be determined by a majority of the members of
the arbitration panel and shall be in writing. If it is necessary for the panel
to make determinations of fact, the panel shall include findings of fact and
conclusions with the award if requested by any party to the proceeding. The
award shall be issued and mailed to the parties not later than ninety (90)
calendar days following the close of the arbitration hearing. (§ 1, Ord. 961,
eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1219.   Limitations of powers.
   The arbitration panel shall have no authority to add to, delete, or alter
any provision of the franchise documents but shall limit its interpretation to
the express terms of the franchise documents. Under no circumstances shall an
arbitration panel be vested with authority or jurisdiction to determine or
award monetary damages (by way of setoff, counterclaim, directly, or otherwise)
or any other relief against the County, or its officers, agents, or employees,
except with respect to proceedings under Section
11-1.710 or
11-1.711 of Article 7 of this chapter to determine the value of property and,
in such instances, any of the property according to the expressed terms and
standards of the franchise documents. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1220.   Alternative remedies.
   No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to bar the right of the County
to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provision of the
franchise documents or any rule, regulation, requirement, or directive
promulgated thereunder. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in
this chapter nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit
the right of the County to recover monetary damages (except where liquidated
damages are otherwise prescribed) for such violation by the grantee, or
judicial enforcement of the grantee’s obligations by means of specific
performance, injunctive relief, or mandate, or any other judicial remedy at law
or in equity. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Article 13.
Franchise Services
Sec. 11-1.1301.   Purposes.
   (a)   Whereas cable communications services have traditionally been limited
to television programming primarily for the purposes of entertainment,
advancing technology permits the delivery of a new generation of interactive
services which invade non-entertainment commercial fields and may extend from
the provision of burglar alarm services to services which permit the subscriber
to shop or bank from his or her home and receive a vast array of professional,
technical, educational, and other information, to medical, fire protection, and
other emergency services, and to types of services which are yet unidentified.
   (b)   Such services promise significant benefit to the Yolo County
community. They also potentially generate regulatory needs, the exact nature
and scope of which are impossible to predict, and the enforceability of which
could be time consuming and expensive should a grantee refuse to comply. The
need to regulate could extend to:
   (1)   Potentially unfair and unlawful competitive practices by a grantee in
operating and utilizing the cable communications system to provide services;
   (2)   Inadequate maintenance or repair by the grantee of the cable
communications system;
   (3)   Invasion of the privacy of subscribers;
   (4)   Unethical or unfair business practices in relation to subscribers or
others; and
   (5)   A variety of other regulatory measures which are necessary to protect
the health, safety, or welfare of inhabitants of the Yolo County community.
   (c)   The provisions of this chapter address such issues by, with few
exceptions, placing no limit upon the services which a grantee may provide,
mandating few services, prescribing general duties and responsibilities in
relation to future public interest issues, and making no attempt, with few
exceptions, to limit the services which a grantee may provide to those which
may be listed in the grantee’s proposal, and reserving broad authority to amend
the provisions of this article under Section
11-1.410 of Article 4 of this chapter.
   (d)   The purposes of this chapter and this article are to:
   (1)   Reserve and vest broad regulatory authority in the County in order to
enable it to enact future regulations which are tailored to address the
problems requiring regulation and to avoid sensitive constitutional issues
which may arise in attempts to regulate the operation of a cable communications
system; and
   (2)   Establish general regulatory guidelines defining the rights, duties,
and responsibilities of a grantee and the County which may be made more
specific, expanded, or otherwise modified to meet future regulatory needs by
regulations enacted by the County or the amendment of this article. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1302.   System ownership.
   Legal and equitable title to the cable communications system, including any
and all studio facilities and production equipment provided for community use,
the institutional network, and all channels of whatever kind or nature, shall
be vested in the grantee. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1303.   Services.
   (a)   Within a service area, the services provided by the grantee through
its cable communications system upon both the subscriber and institutional
networks shall be offered uniformly upon nondiscriminatory terms to subscribers
and users and shall not differ based upon geographical location.
   (b)   Each application and renewal application for a franchise shall contain
schedules of all home educational and entertainment programming proposed to be
shown on either the subscriber network or institutional network. The
applications shall show for each service area:
   (1)   All tiers of service;
   (2)   The number of activated and the number of programmed channels within
each tier of service offered at the subscription rate applicable to the tier,
together with an identification of the tier placement of any channels allocated
pursuant to Sections
11-1.903,
11-1.904,
11-1.906, and
11-1.907 of Article 9 of this chapter;
   (3)   A description of all programming from satellite and other sources to
be offered on each such channel within each tier of service (including program
descriptions) within the times prescribed by Section
11-1.1002 of Article 10 of this chapter;
   (4)   A statement of the minimum number of hours per day and week programs
or types of programming described in subsection (3) of this section will be
shown within the times prescribed by said Section
11-1.1002;
   (5)   A statement of the minimum number of hours per day and week each
channel within each tier of service will contain home educational and
entertainment programming which has not previously been broadcast within the
Yolo County community; and
   (6)   A statement of all premium services to be offered within each tier of
service, together with program descriptions of each such service, and the
minimum number of hours per day and week each such service will be available
within each tier of service within the times prescribed by said Section
11-1.1002.
   (c)   The provisions of subsections (3), (4), (5), and (6) of subsection
(b)of this section shall not be applicable to channels described by Section
11-1.303 of Article 3 of this chapter.
   (d)   Each application for a franchise shall also contain a description of
such non-entertainment services (whether or not of an interactive nature) as
the applicant offers to provide on either the subscriber network or
institutional network throughout the term of the franchise. For each such
service, applications shall show:
   (1)   The nature, scope, and extent of each service;
   (2)   For each service, any restrictions relating to the geographical
location of delivery and the class of customer or recipient of service;
   (3)   Schedules of all rates and charges under which each service will be
offered to customers or recipients;
   (4)   The names and addresses for each service of the proposed provider of
the service. If the County expressly requests, either in the request for
proposals or during the review period, the applicant shall provide the County
with a copy of the contract or other legal instrument between the grantee and
the provider; and
   (5)   Such other information by amendment to the application as may be
required during the public hearing referred to in subsection (e)of this
section.
   (e)   During the public hearings prior to the tentative selection of a
grantee conducted pursuant to Section
11-1.602 of Article 6 of this chapter, the Board, in its sole discretion, may
determine which, if any, such non-entertainment services shown in the
application of the applicant, if selected as the grantee, would be vested with
a contractual right and duty to perform throughout the term of the franchise.
Any such identification may be accompanied by such conditions as are determined
to be appropriate, including, but not limited to, conditions relating to the
nature and extent of the service provided, the terms and conditions of the
provision, and opportunities for the use of the cable communications system by
others, including the circumstances under which leased access for such purposes
will be provided. Any services so identified, together with the conditions
thereof, shall be prescribed in the ordinance offering the franchise to the
extent they appear in the application filed by the grantee. (§ 1, Ord. 961,
eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1304.   Non-entertainment service rights and duties.
   (a)   A grantee’s rights and duties respecting the provision of non-
entertainment services (whether or not of an interactive nature) on either the
subscriber or institutional networks during the term of the franchise shall be
as follows:
   (1)   A grantee shall be authorized, but not vested with a contractual right
or duty, to provide services which either:
   (i)   Have been identified in its application but have not been prescribed
by the ordinance offering the franchise; or
   (ii)   Have not been described, specified, or identified either in the
application or ordinance offering the franchise. The authorization shall be
subject to modification through regulation or revocation (by prohibiting the
service) pursuant to Section
11-1.1305 of this article.
   (2)   A grantee shall be vested with a contractual right and duty to provide
the services prescribed by the ordinance offering the franchise during the
entire term of the 11-1.1303 franchise. Such services shall be provided in
compliance with all conditions prescribed by the ordinance. Pursuant to said
Section
11-1.305, such services may be regulated, and the conditions applicable thereto
set forth in the resolution may be modified or expanded; provided, however, no
such service shall be prohibited.
   (b)   A grantee providing a non-entertainment service or desiring to offer
or provide such a non-entertainment service which has not been identified in
the ordinance offering the franchise (whether or not the service has been
described in the grantee’s application), at any time during the term of the
franchise, may file with the Clerk of the Board a written request for the
approval of the vesting thereof. The written request shall contain such
information as is required by the Board. Not later than thirty (30) calendar
days following the date of the filing of the request for approval, the Board
shall commence a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be given in the
manner prescribed by Section
11-1.406 of Article 4 of this chapter. At the conclusion of the public hearing,
the Board, in its sole discretion, may either approve or disapprove the
proposed service. If the service is approved, the approval may be granted upon
such conditions as are described by subsection (e) of Section
11-1.1303 of this article. A grantee, from and after the date of such approval,
shall be vested with a contractual right and duty to provide such a service
subject to the following limitations. The service shall be provided in
compliance with all conditions prescribed by the approval. Pursuant to Section
11-1.1305 of this article, such service may be regulated, and the conditions
set forth in the approval may be modified or expanded, but no such service may
be prohibited. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1305.   Regulation of non-entertainment services.
   (a)   No non-entertainment service (whether or not of an interactive nature)
provided through the cable communications system shall be provided or operated
in a manner which is detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, or
welfare.
   (b)   The Board, from time to time, during the term of a franchise, after
public hearings, notice of which is given in the manner prescribed by Section
11-1.406 of Article 4 of this chapter, and subject to the Act, may exercise the
following powers:
   (1)   Prohibit or adopt rules or regulations governing the provision of the
manner of operation or the provision of a non-entertainment service which
either has been described by the application for the franchise but not
identified in the ordinance offering the franchise, or which has not been
described, identified, or specified either in the application or ordinance
offering the franchise, and which has not been approved pursuant to subsection
(b)of Section
11-1.1304 of this article; or
   (2)   Adopt rules or regulations governing or modifying or adding conditions
relating to the provision or manner of operation or provision of a non-
entertainment service which has either been identified by the franchise
agreement or approved pursuant to subsection (b)of said Section
11-1.1304.
   (c)   A grantee shall comply with any such conditions, rules, or
regulations; provided, however, with respect to any service identified by the
ordinance offering the franchise or approved pursuant to subsection (b)of said
Section
11-1.1304, a grantee shall be authorized to terminate the service in lieu of
complying with the conditions, rules, or regulations applicable thereto adopted
pursuant to this section.
   (d)   The powers of the Board under this section are coextensive with those
which are authorized by laws of the State or United States and with those
defined by the police power expressed by Section 7 of Article XI of the
Constitution of the State. A grantee shall not, in relation to this section, be
deemed to have contractually or otherwise waived any constitutional right which
would otherwise be applicable to a franchised cable communications operator. (§
1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 12, Ord. 999, eff. March 7,
1985)
Sec. 11-1.1306.   Educational and entertainment services.
   (a)   Subject to the provisions of this section and the authority reserved
by Section
11-1.1307 of this article, a grantee shall be deemed to be vested with a
contractual right and duty to provide those home educational and entertainment
services identified in its application.
   (b)   It is understood that with respect to home educational and
entertainment programming on either the subscriber or institutional networks,
the broad categories of video programming which a grantee has elected to
propose in its application are among the material factors which are considered
in selecting the grantee.
   (c)   It is also understood that changing circumstances, including marketing
strategy, program availability, and other factors, may require that particular
cable services identified in the grantee’s application pursuant to Section
11-1.1303 of this article will be rearranged, replaced, or removed from time to
time during the term of the franchise.
   (d)   Therefore, a grantee shall be authorized to alter the particular cable
services from time to time during the term of a franchise but may not, in so
doing, materially reduce or eliminate the broad categories of video programming
which have been identified in the grantee’s application and the franchise
ordinance without the prior consent of the Board obtained in accordance with
subsection (a)of Section 625 of the Act. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983,
as amended by § 12, Ord. 999. eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.1307.   Regulation of educational and entertainment services.
   (a)   No home educational or entertainment service provided through a cable
communications system shall be provided or operated in a manner which is
detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, or welfare. The provisions of
this section shall not be self-executing, shall not be deemed to authorize the
County or any other public authority to establish bans upon services in advance
of the offering thereof, and may be invoked solely pursuant to the procedure
set forth in this section.
   (b)   If the Board determines that there is reason to believe that a
particular service provided through a cable communications system is of a type
or is otherwise provided in a manner which is detrimental to the public peace,
health, safety, or welfare, the Board shall schedule a public hearing. Written
notice identifying the service or services or method or provision subject to
the determination shall be mailed to the grantee not later than thirty (30)
days in advance of the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given in the
manner prescribed by Section
11-1.406 of Article 4 of this chapter. If, at the conclusion of the public
hearing, the Board determines that a service is being provided of a type or in
a manner which is detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, or welfare,
the Board may enact regulations which prohibit the services or otherwise
regulate the manner of the provision thereof, as the case may be, and may
enforce the regulation by appropriate action in the courts of the State.
   (c)   The powers of the Board under this section shall be coextensive with
those which are authorized by laws of the State or United States and with those
defined by the police power expressed by Section 7 of Article XI of the
Constitution of the State. A grantee shall not, in relation to this section, be
deemed to have contractually or otherwise waived any constitutional right or
right provided by the Act which would otherwise be applicable to a franchised
cable communications operator. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as
amended by § 12, Ord. 999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.1308.   Subscriber antennas.
   No grantee shall remove or offer to remove any potential or existing
subscriber antenna or provide any inducement for removal as a condition
respecting the provision of service.
   It is not necessarily the County’s intention to prohibit the erection or
controlled use of individual television antennas, and no one is or will be
required to receive cable communications service or connect with a cable
communications system.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any person from
constructing or operating any private noncommercial satellite receiving station
to the extent permitted by County, State, and Federal laws. (§ 1, Ord. 961,
eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1309.   Anti-competitive practices.
   (a)   No franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed to expressly or impliedly authorize the grantee to utilize its cable
communications system to provide any service in such a manner as to unlawfully
damage any business competitor or other third party or violate any statutes or
regulations of the United States or the State; nor shall any grantee, by act or
omission, engage in any anti-competitive practice in violation of any statutes
or regulations of the United States or the State. The provisions of this
section shall be enforceable in courts of competent jurisdiction against a
grantee by any party who alleges injury as a result of an alleged violation
thereof.
   (b)   Each grantee shall hold harmless, indemnify, and defend the County,
and its officers, agents, and employees, from and against any and all suits,
claims, and liability for damages, penalties, fines, or other relief arising
out of, resulting from, or in any manner relating to any act or omission by the
grantee, the allegation of which could constitute a violation of the provisions
of this section. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1310.   Post franchise services.
   (a)   In the event the County fails to renew a franchise, a franchise is
cancelled in advance of the expiration of its terms, or a new operator succeeds
to the grantee by assignment or otherwise, the preceding grantee, without
compensation, shall cooperate with the County, new operator, or new grantee in
maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers and users. Such
cooperation shall include, but not be limited to, making records available for
inspection and review, the provision of advice, and other assistance as
requested.
   (b)   Upon written notice mailed by the County to the grantee for the
purpose of insuring the continuity of service to subscribers and users, a
grantee, without compensation or other special consideration, shall operate the
cable communications system during the period subsequent to the termination of
the franchise and shall repair and maintain the system, conduct the business
associated with the operation of the system, and provide uninterrupted services
during the post franchise period during such time as is requested by the County
pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise documents for the
franchise which has expired or terminated. During such period, the grantee
shall be entitled to revenues and profits and shall be solely responsible for
any operating losses; provided, however, the franchise fees prescribed pursuant
to Article 15 of this chapter shall be payable during such period. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1311.   Continuity of quality.
   Each grantee shall continue throughout the term of the franchise to maintain
the technical standards and quality of service set forth in the franchise
documents for such franchise. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1312.   Maintenance and repair.
   During the term of each franchise, the grantee shall maintain its cable
communications system in good condition and repair, render efficient service,
make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the
shortest time possible. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1313.   Subscriber services.
   It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive all available services
insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored.
Neither the County nor the grantee, as to rates, charges, service, service
facilities, rules, regulations, or in any other respect, shall make or grant
any preference or advantage to any person nor subject any person to prejudice
or disadvantage. Subject to such regulations as may be adopted by the Board
pursuant to this chapter, the grantee shall:
   (a)   Maintain a high standard of courtesy in customer relations at all
times;
   (b)   Maintain a log showing the date, approximate time and duration, type,
and probable cause of all headend, trunk, or distribution line service
interruptions and/or failures due to causes other than routine testing or
maintenance; such log shall be subject to review by the Board;
   (c)   Maintain a conveniently located business office and service center
within the service area with toll free telephone numbers so that subscribers
may report service outages or deficiencies at any time. The office shall
maintain an adequate staff such that subscribers may transact all necessary
business, including the payment of bills, during regular business hours;
   (d)   Keep a written record of all complaints showing at a minimum the date,
subscriber’s name and address, nature of the complaint, and the action taken by
the grantee;
   (e)   Restore any interruption in service as expeditiously as possible and
in accordance with the franchise agreement. Corrective maintenance for
institutional services shall be in accord with the contract terms between the
grantee and the subscriber;
   (f)   Before providing cable communications service to any subscriber, the
grantee shall provide a written notice to the subscriber substantially as
follows:
   Subscriber is hereby notified that in providing cable television/
communications service the grantee is making use of public rights-of-way within
Yolo County and that the continued use of such rights-of-way is in no way
guaranteed. In the event the continued use of such rights-of- way is denied to
the grantee for any reason, the grantee will make every reasonable effort to
provide service over alternate routes. By accepting cable television/
communications service, subscriber agrees he will make no claim nor undertake
any action against the County, or its officers or its employees, if the service
to be provided hereunder is interrupted or discontinued;
   (g)   There shall be no charge for service calls to subscribers’ homes,
except as provided by agreement;
   (h)   In the event the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the
system, or the County revokes or fails to renew the franchise, the grantee
shall do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive
continuous, uninterrupted service, regardless of the circumstances, during the
lifetime of the franchise. In the event of a system purchase by the County, or
change of grantee, the current grantee shall cooperate with the County to
operate the system for a temporary period in maintaining continuity of service
to all subscribers; and
   (i)   Upon the termination of service to any subscriber, a grantee shall
promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such
subscriber upon his request. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1314.   Privacy.
   Each grantee, and its officers, agents, employees, contractors, and
subcontractors, shall respect, refrain from invading, and take affirmative
action to prevent the violation of the privacy of subscribers served by the
cable communications system and others.
   (a)   Neither the grantee nor any other person, agency, or entity shall tap,
or arrange for the tapping or monitoring of, any cable, line, signal input
device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose whatsoever, except
that the grantee may conduct tests of the functioning of the system where
necessary in order to ensure proper maintenance of the system and to collect
performance data for agencies regulating the quality of signals, and the
grantee may conduct system-wide or individually addressed “sweeps” for the sole
purpose of verifying system integrity (including individual security system
integrity), controlling return path transmissions, billing for pay services, or
collecting aggregate data on viewing patterns by channel. “Tapping” shall mean
observing a communications signal exchange where the observer is neither of the
communicating parties, whether the exchange is observed by visual, aural, or
electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever. The provision of interactive
services shall not be construed to be “tapping” or “monitoring” under this
subsection.
   (b)   The grantee shall not place in any private residence or in any
institution any equipment capable of two-way communications without the written
consent of the subscriber and shall not utilize the two-way communications
capability of the system for subscriber surveillance of any kind without the
written consent of the subscriber specifying how the data collected will be
used and by whom. Tenants who occupy premises connected by the system shall be
deemed to be subscribers within the meaning of this subsection, regardless of
who actually pays for the service. The written consents shall be, and shall
show on their face, that they are revocable by the subscriber at any time by
written communication mailed by the subscriber to the grantee. No penalty shall
be invoked for a subscriber’s failure to provide a written consent or for his
or her revocation thereof, and all written consents shall so state on their
face. The grantee shall not make such written consent a condition precedent to
receipt by a subscriber of noninteractive service. The provisions of this
subsection shall not be deemed to require consent as a condition precedent to
system-wide or individually addressed “sweeps” for the sole purpose of
verifying system integrity, controlling return-path transmissions, billing for
pay services, or collecting aggregate data on viewing patterns by channel.
   (c)   No cable, line, wire, amplifier, converter, or other piece of
equipment associated with cable communications system services shall be
attached to any residence or other property of a citizen (except within
streets) without first securing the written permission of the owner or tenant
of the property. If such permission is later revoked, whether by the original
or a subsequent owner or tenant, the grantee shall remove forthwith all of the
equipment and promptly restore the property to its original condition. The
grantee shall perform all installations in a workmanlike manner and shall be
responsible for any damage to residences or other property caused by the
installation.
   (d)   No grantee, or officer, agent, or employee thereof, shall sell, or
otherwise make available, lists of the names and addresses of its subscribers,
or any list which identifies by name and otherwise individual subscriber
viewing habits, to any person, agency, or entity for any purpose whatsoever;
except that the grantee, upon a request, shall provide lists of the names and
addresses of its subscribers to authorized representatives of the County when
the Board deems such information necessary for the performance of the
regulatory functions of the County. Names and addresses of subscribers within
the possession of the County shall not be subject to public inspection or
review.
   (e)   A grantee may release the number of subscribers but only as a total
number and as a percentage of the potential subscribers within the franchise
area. When indicating the number of subscribers viewing a particular channel, a
grantee shall indicate only the total number of subscribers viewing during the
relevant time and the percentage of all subscribers which they represent, but
not the identity of any subscriber.
   (f)   No poll or other two-way response of subscribers shall be conducted,
whether for commercial purposes, in connection with community use, or
otherwise, unless the program of which the poll is a part contains an explicit
disclosure of the nature, purpose, and prospective use, of the results of the
poll. The grantee shall supervise and monitor all polls in which responses are
received through the cable communications system and shall adopt and enforce
measures which ensure that personally identifiable information concerning a
subscriber, including his or her viewing habits and response or responses to
the inquiry or inquiries, is not received by any third party, including the
party sponsoring the poll.
   (g)   A grantee shall not tabulate any test results, nor permit the use of
the system for such tabulation, which would reveal the commercial product
preference or opinions of individual subscribers, or members of their families
or their invitees, licensees, or employees, without advance written
authorization by the subscriber. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1315.   Records.
   Each grantee shall maintain for a period of five (5) years and make
available for inspection and copying by authorized representatives of the
County the following:
   (a)   A permanent service log which shows the name and address of each
person requesting maintenance or repair service, the nature of the service
requested, the date and time the request was received, and the disposition
(including the date on which the repair was made or the request otherwise
resolved and the method of resolution);
   (b)   A permanent record of each request for a subscription to basic
service, including the name and address of the person making the request, and
the date of the request; and
   (c)   A permanent record of each written complaint received by the grantee
pursuant to the provisions of Section
11-1.1319 of this article, together with the name and address of the
complainant, the nature of the complaint, and the dates and descriptions of any
and all investigatory, corrective, or other actions taken as a result thereof.
(§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1316.   Reports.
   During the term of any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, each grantee, not less frequently than annually, shall file a written
report with the Clerk of the Board. The report shall be filed not later than
forty-five (45) calendar days after the end of the grantee’s fiscal year. The
report shall include the following:
   (a)   A summary of the activities of the grantee during its previous fiscal
year in the development and operation of the cable communications system,
including, but not limited to: a description of all services provided through
the cable communications system as of the conclusion of the fiscal year; a
statement of the number of subscribers by category of services rendered as of
the end of the fiscal year; and a summary of the facilities, channels, and
resources made available during the fiscal year for community use, including a
list of the persons and organizations which have produced, sponsored, and
broadcast programming upon community use channels, a description of the types
of programming provided through such channels, and any recommendations by the
grantee for improvements in community use;
   (b)   A specific detailed description of all components, elements, and
extensions of the cable communications system which have been installed during
the grantee’s previous fiscal year, showing the locations of all such
installations, and including copies of the plans, specifications, and drawings
showing the components, elements, and extensions as installed;
   (c)   A statement showing the grantee’s investments in property within the
Yolo County community during the grantee’s previous fiscal year, including an
identification of all real property or interests therein within the Yolo County
community acquired or transferred by the grantee and the amounts which the
grantee paid for the acquisition of property or interests, a description of all
buildings or other improvements which the grantee constructed upon or added to
real property within the Yolo County community, together with the cost of such
construction or additions, and an itemization by component category of all
costs of components, elements, and extensions of the cable communications
system;
   (d)   An audited statement signed by a public or certified public accountant
of all income received by the grantee during its previous fiscal year,
including an itemization of all services provided through the cable
communications system, the unit or regular rates or charges for such services,
and the amount of income received attributable to each service, and all other
income from whatever sources, including an identification of each source and
the amount of income attributable thereto; and
   (e)   Audited financial statements for the grantee’s previous fiscal year
signed by a public or certified public accountant, including a balance sheet
and profit and loss statement.
   A grantee shall prepare and furnish to the Board, at the time and in the
form prescribed by the Board, such other reports with respect to its
operations, affairs, transactions, or property as the Board may deem necessary
or appropriate to the performance of its functions. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1317.   Discrimination in services prohibited.
   No grantee shall deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race,
color, religion, national origin, or sex.
   It shall be the right of all subscribers, subject only to the payment of the
lawful rates and reasonable terms and conditions established by a grantee or
the Board, to receive and continue to receive services. Initial subscriptions
to services shall not be denied to any person on the basis of the person’s
credit rating or for other reasons relating to economic conditions. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1318.   Grantees’ rules.
   (a)   Each grantee shall have the authority to promulgate rules and
conditions governing the conduct of its business. No such rules or conditions
shall conflict with the franchise documents applicable to the franchise, the
provisions of Federal or State statutes or regulations, or County laws.
   (b)   Such rules or conditions shall be reasonable and subject to approval
as to reasonableness by the Board after public hearings, notice of which has
been given in the manner prescribed by Section
11-1.406 of Article 4 of this chapter, and shall not conflict with rules and
regulations enacted by the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1319.   Complaints.
   The County and each grantee shall separately designate representatives whose
responsibility it is to receive and investigate complaints relating to
violations of the franchise documents.
   As subscribers are connected or reconnected to a cable communications
system, and at least annually as respects continuing subscriptions, each
grantee, by appropriate means, such as cards or brochures, shall furnish
information concerning the opportunity to make complaints, including the names,
addresses, and telephone numbers of the representatives designated by the
grantee and the County.
   Each grantee shall make available for inspection and copying all records
relating to complaints and make such other information available to the
County’s representatives as necessary to permit a complete investigation of the
complaints by the representatives. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1320.   System and services reviews.
   To provide for technological, economic, and regulatory changes in the state
of the art of cable communications, to facilitate renewal procedures, to
promote the maximum degree of flexibility in the cable system, and to provide
on a continuing basis an advanced, modern system, the grantor and the grantee
shall comply with the following system and services review provisions:
   (a)   At the grantor’s sole option, the grantor and grantee shall hold a
system and services review session on or about the third anniversary date of
the franchise agreement. Subsequent system review sessions shall be scheduled
by the grantor each three (3) years thereafter.
   (b)   Sixty (60) days prior to the scheduled system and services review
session, the grantee shall submit a report to the grantor indicating the
following:
   (1)   A survey of cable system services which are being provided on an
operational basis, excluding tests and demonstrations, to cities in the United
States of similar size and complexity; and
   (2)   A plan for the provision of such services not provided by the grantee
or an explanation indicating why such services are not feasible for the
franchise area.
   (c)   Topics for discussion and review at the system and services review
sessions shall include, but shall not be limited to, services provided, the
rate structure, the application of new technologies, system performance,
programming (including access opportunities), subscriber complaints, user
complaints, rights of privacy, amendments to the franchise, undergrounding
processes, and developments in the law.
   (d)   Either the grantor or the grantee may select additional topics for
discussion at any review session.
   (e)   Not later than sixty (60) days after the conclusion of each system and
services review session, the grantor shall issue findings, including
specifically a listing of any cable services not then being provided to the
grantor, which are considered technically and economically feasible.
   The grantor may request the grantee to provide such services within a
reasonable time, under reasonable rates and conditions. Failure to provide such
requested services may be considered a breach of the franchise, subject to
remedies as provided in this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as
amended by § 3, Ord. 965, eff. November 3, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1321.   Rules and regulations.
   At any time, the Board may adopt reasonable rules, regulations, and
standards governing the operation of cable communications systems in the
County, consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the franchise
ordinance. Such rules, regulations, and standards shall apply to and shall
govern the operations of the grantee of any cable communications franchise and
are expressly declared to be a part of any such franchise. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1322.   Hearings.
   Prior to adopting any such rule, regulation, or standard, the Board shall
conduct a duly noticed hearing thereon. At the time set for such hearing, or at
any adjournment thereof, the Board shall proceed to hear any relevant evidence
relating to the matter. Thereafter, the Board, by resolution, may adopt, amend,
or modify such rules and regulations. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1323.   Standards.
   To the extent not prompted by Federal or State laws or regulations, the
standards adopted by the Board may govern the engineering, construction,
installation, service, and maintenance of all cable communications systems in
the County, including, but not limited to, standards governing carrier levels,
signal-to-noise ratios, hum modulation, distortion levels, channel interactions
and interreactions, and composite beat levels. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983)
Sec. 11-1.1324.   No discrimination.
   In the carrying out of the construction, maintenance, and operation of the
cable communications system, the grantee shall not discriminate against any
employee or applicant for employment because of race, creed, color, sex, or
national origin. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1325.   Affirmative action.
   The grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are
employed, and that employees are treated during employment, without regard to
their race, creed, color, sex, or national origin. Such action shall include,
but not be limited to, the following: employment upgrading, recruitment or
recruitment advertising, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and
selection for training, including apprenticeship. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October
27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1326.   Posting nondiscrimination notices.
   The grantee shall post in conspicuous places available to employees and
applicants for employment notices setting forth the provisions of such
nondiscrimination clause. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1327.   Solicitations.
   The grantee, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by
or on behalf of the grantee, shall state that all qualified applicants will
receive compensation for employment without regard to race, creed, color, sex,
or national origin. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1328.   Incorporation of nondiscrimination provisions in contracts.
   The grantee shall incorporate the requirements of this article relating to
nondiscrimination in all of its contracts for work relative to the
construction, maintenance, and operation of the cable communications system,
other than contracts for standard commercial supplies or raw materials, and
shall require all of its contractors for such work to incorporate such
requirements in all subcontracts for such work. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October
27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1329.   Community use programming.
   Repealed*. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983; * § 13, Ord. 999, eff.
March 7, 1985)
Article 14.
Rates and Charges
Sec. 11-1.1401.   Applicability.
   To the extent permitted by Federal and State laws, the Board expressly
reserves the right to take such action as is authorized by law to regulate the
rates and charges associated with the providing of services under this chapter
and any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October
27, 1983, as amended by § 14, Ord. 999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.1402.   Board approval.
   Repealed*. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983; * § 15, Ord. 999, eff.
March 7, 1985)
Sec.11-1.1403.   Petitions.
   Repealed*. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983; * § 15, Ord. 999, eff.
March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.1404.   Board determinations.
   Repealed*. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983; * § 15, Ord. 999, eff.
March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.1405.   Hearings: Representatives.
   Repealed*. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983; * § 15, Ord. 999, eff.
March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.1406.   Hearings: Recommendations.
   Repealed*. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983; * § 15, Ord. 999, eff.
March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.1407.   Separate rates.
   No rate established shall afford any undue preference or advantage among
subscribers, but separate rates may be established for separate classes of
subscribers, and installation charges may reflect the increased cost of
providing service to isolated or sparsely populated areas. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1408.   Termination of services.
   A grantee may require subscribers to the subscriber network to pay for each
month of basic service in advance at the beginning of the month. Service shall
not be terminated for delinquencies in making a monthly advance payment earlier
than forty-five (45) calendar days following the date upon which the advance
payment is due, and monthly statements to subscribers shall provide notice of
the grantee’s policy respecting the termination of service for delinquencies in
making advance payments. With the foregoing exception, and except as otherwise
expressly authorized by this chapter, a grantee, without advance approval by
the Board, shall not require any other advance payment or deposit of any kind
with respect to the provision of basic service to subscribers. (§ 1, Ord. 961,
eff. October 27, 1983)
Article 15.
Compensation and Guarantees to the County
Sec. 11-1.1501.   Franchise fees.
   For the use of the streets and for the purposes of providing revenue with
which to defray the costs of regulation arising out of the issuance of
franchises under this chapter and promoting, assisting, and financing community
use programming, PEG programming, and other cable services of a public
character, each grantee shall pay franchise fees in the amount prescribed by
Section
11-1.1502 of this article. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by
§ 16, Ord. 999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.1502.   Amount and payment of franchise fees.
   (a)   During the term of each franchise, each grantee shall pay to the
County an amount equal to five (5%) percent per year of the grantee’s annual
gross revenues derived from the operation of the cable communications system.
   (b)   Such fees shall be paid quarterly not later than August 1, November 1,
February 1, and May 1 for the preceding three (3) month period ending,
respectively, June 30, September 30, December 31, and March 31. Not later than
the date of each payment, each grantee shall file with the Clerk of the Board a
written statement signed under penalty of perjury by an officer of the grantee
which identifies in detail the sources and amounts of gross revenues received
by a grantee during the quarter for which the payment is made.
   (c)   No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of
payment be construed as a release of any claim which the County may have for
further or additional sums payable under the provisions of this section. (§ 1,
Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 16, Ord. 999, eff. March 7,
1985)
Sec. 11-1.1503.   Future laws.
   (a)   The County does not have or expect in the foreseeable future to
receive sufficient funds with which to defray the costs of administering and
regulating cable communications franchises within the Yolo County community.
The ability to finance such costs through franchise fees pursuant to the
provisions of Section
11-1.1502 of this article constitutes a material inducement to initiate a cable
communications program within the community, because the County would not be
willing to reduce or eliminate other public programs in order to make public
funds available with which to defray the costs of administering and regulating
the cable communications program.
   (b)   Therefore, should any future law or regulation limit or prevent the
County from imposing a franchise fee in the amount provided for in this
article, each grantee shall make a good faith effort to obtain any possible
waiver or permission to pay the full amounts provided for in this article and,
to the extent such future law or regulation permits a grantee discretion to
make the limitation or prohibition applicable or inapplicable, each grantee
shall elect to make the limitation or prohibition inapplicable.
   (c)   The failure of the County to receive the fees prescribed by Sections
11-1.1501 and
11-1.1502 of this article, and as otherwise permitted by law, shall be deemed
to constitute a substantial and material failure to comply with the franchise
documents. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 4, Ord. 965,
eff. November 3, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1504.   Auditing and financial records.
   (a)   The County Auditor-Controller, from time to time, during the term of a
franchise, may prescribe standards governing the nature, extent, and type of
accounting system and accounting procedures utilized by a grantee and require
changes in accounting standards or procedures utilized by a grantee for the
purpose of promoting the efficient administration of the franchise pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter. Any such standards shall be in writing, shall
be filed with the Clerk of the Board, and shall be mailed to the grantee to
whom directed. A grantee shall promptly comply with all such standards.
   (b)   During the term of each franchise, the County, not more frequently
than once each year, may conduct an audit of the books, records, and accounts
of the grantee for the purpose of determining whether the grantee has paid
franchise fees in the amounts prescribed by Section
11-1.1502 of this article. The audit may be conducted by the County Auditor-
Controller or by an independent certified public accounting firm retained by
the County and shall be conducted at the sole expense of the County. The party
conducting the audit shall prepare a written report containing its findings,
and the report shall be filed with the Clerk of the Board. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this subsection, the County shall conduct such an audit at any
time if requested to do so by the County. The cost of such an audit so
requested shall be borne by and at the sole expense of the County, and the cost
shall be paid within thirty (30) calendar days following the receipt of the
billing therefor by the County. The report of the audit shall be filed and
mailed as prescribed in this subsection.
   (c)   At any time during the term of a franchise, the County, through its
County Auditor-Assessor or a certified public accounting firm which it retains,
and at its sole expense, may conduct an audit of the books, records, and
accounts of the grantee for the purpose of identifying any information which
the Board deems necessary to obtain for the purpose of administering the
franchise under the provisions of this chapter. A written report of such audit
shall be filed with the Clerk of the Board and mailed to the grantee. The
grantee shall comply with any recommendations or directives set forth in such
report respecting changes in its accounting system.
   (d)   Each grantee shall make available for inspection by authorized
representatives of the County its books, accounts, and all other financial
records at reasonable times and upon reasonable advance notice for the purpose
of permitting the exercise of the authorities conferred by this section. (§ 1,
Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1505.   Delinquent fees: Limitations: Damages.
   The period of limitation for the recovery of any franchise fees payable
pursuant to the provisions of Section
11-1.1502 of this article shall be five (5) years after the date on which
payment by the grantee is due. Unless within five (5) years after said date the
County initiates recovery pursuant to the provisions of Section
11-1.1506 of this article, recovery shall be barred. Delinquent franchise fees
shall bear interest at an annual rate equivalent to that Federal Reserve
Discount Rate on advances to member banks in effect on January 2, April 1, July
1, and October 1 for the succeeding quarter of delinquency. The interest shall
be compounded quarterly at the end of each quarter. In addition to interest as
prescribed in this section, a ten (10%) percent per annum penalty shall be paid
on all delinquent franchise fees in recognition of the fact that fluctuating
interest rates on borrowed funds make it impossible to establish a reliable
interest rate standard as a measure of damages for delinquencies in the payment
of franchise fees, and other elements of damages resulting from delinquencies,
such as the inadequacy of revenue with which to adequately administer and
enforce the franchise, arising out of such delinquencies are subjective and
impossible to estimate. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1506.   Delinquent fees: Arbitration.
   (a)   In the event a grantee fails to pay franchise fees pursuant to Section
11-1.1502 of this article, or the Board determines that a grantee has paid
franchise fees in a lower amount or amounts than prescribed, written notice
thereof shall be mailed to the grantee. The notice shall show the basis for the
determination that fees are owing, and the amount thereof, if known, and may
show the amount of interest and penalties accumulated to date.
   (b)   Within thirty (30) calendar days following the date of the mailing of
such notice, the grantee may pay any amount stated in the notice, plus interest
and penalties, without protest. Any payment made without the accompaniment of a
written statement of protest shall constitute a waiver of the right to request
arbitration or other relief respecting any and all amounts so paid.
   (c)   Within thirty (30) calendar days following the date of the mailing of
such notice, the grantee, alternatively, may file a written request for
arbitration with the Clerk of the Board objecting to the payment, and
specifically identifying why an objection is made, and wherein the grantee
disagrees with the determination. At the time of filing such a request for
arbitration, the grantee may deposit with the County, under protest, any
amount, including interest and penalties, which the grantee estimates to be in
dispute. Any such deposit shall be accompanied by a written statement by the
grantee stating that the amount deposited is pursuant to protest and a request
for arbitration. From and after the date of any such deposit, interest and
penalties on such amount shall accrue subsequent to the date of the deposit. In
the event it is finally determined that the whole or any portion of an amount
so deposited under protest was not owing by the grantee, such amount, without
interest, shall be credited against and reduce the amount of the franchise fees
which become owing by the grantee subsequent to the date of such final
determination; provided, however, no such future payment shall be reduced as
such a credit by an amount greater than ten (10%) percent of the franchise fee
payment otherwise owing; and provided, further, in no event shall the County
become or be liable to the grantee for the reimbursement of any portion of an
amount so deposited under protest, except as a credit against any future
franchise fees which become owing.
   (d)   If the notice to the grantee by the County shows the amount of
franchise fees owing, including interest and penalties, the Board’s
determination shall become final and conclusive, not subject to judicial review
or reversal by any authority and judicially enforceable, unless the grantee
requests arbitration within the time and in the manner prescribed in this
section.
   (e)   If the grantee fails to either pay the franchise fees without protest
or requests arbitration, and if the notice by the County does not specify the
amount of franchise fees, including interest and penalties, owing, or if the
grantee pays an amount without protest, and the Board disagrees that the amount
paid is the amount owing, the Board, at its sole discretion, may request
arbitration by mailing a written notice of its election to arbitrate to the
grantee.
   (f)   If arbitration is requested, the arbitration panel shall be selected,
the hearing scheduled within the time prescribed, notice given, the hearing
conducted, a decision made, and the costs divided in the manner prescribed by
Sections
11-1.1214 through
11-1.1219 of Article 12 of this chapter. The discovery provisions of the
California Arbitration Act (Sections 1280, et seq. of the Code of Civil
Procedure of the State) shall be applicable to the arbitration proceedings
under this section. The questions which may be submitted to the arbitration
panel and the jurisdiction of the arbitration panel shall be limited to the
following:
   (1)   The interpretation of the provisions of the franchise documents solely
in relation to the decision required by subsection (g)of this section; and
   (2)   The amount, if any, owing by the grantee.
   (g)   The grantee shall immediately pay any amount determined to be owing by
the arbitration panel. The arbitration award may be judicially enforced, shall
be final, binding, and conclusive upon the parties, and shall not be subject to
judicial review or vacation, except on the grounds set forth in Section 1286.2
of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983)
Sec. 11-1.1507.   Increases in franchise fees: Arbitration.
   (a)   The amount of the franchise fees prescribed by Section
11-1.1502 of this article has been established pursuant to limitations set
forth in Section 602 of the Act.
   (b)   In the event such limitations upon the amount of franchise fees,
during the term of any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, should be increased or eliminated, the grantee, upon a request by the
County, shall enter into negotiations with the County for the purpose of
formulating a mutually agreeable increase in the franchise fees prescribed by
said Section
11-1.1502.
   (c)   Any agreement relating to such an increase shall be embodied in a
written contract between the County and the grantee, which shall be deemed to
amend said Section
11-1.1502 respecting the amount of the fees. If, within ninety (90) calendar
days following the date of a request by the County for negotiations, mutual
agreement has not been reached respecting an amendment of the provisions of
said Section
11-1.1502 increasing the fees, the Board may cause written notice of its
request to arbitrate to be mailed to each concerned grantee and the County. The
notice shall specifically identify the amount of increase in fees which the
Board desires to submit to arbitration and shall describe the nature and amount
of uncompensated costs which the County incurs or desires to incur in
administering the franchise or franchises and promoting, assisting, and
regulating the various types of access use.
   (d)   The arbitration panel shall be selected, the hearing scheduled within
the time prescribed, notice given, the hearing conducted, a decision made, and
the costs divided in the manner prescribed by Sections 1-1.1214 through
11-1.1219 of Article 12 of this chapter. Parties to the arbitration proceeding
may include each grantee who would be affected by an amendment of said Section
11-1.1502 and the County. The questions which may be submitted to the
arbitration panel and the jurisdiction of the panel shall be limited to:
   (1)   The interpretation of the provisions of the franchise documents solely
in relation to the determination required by subsection (e)of this section; and
   (2)   The amount, if any, by which the franchise fees prescribed by said
Section
11-1.1502 may be increased.
   (e)   The arbitration panel shall authorize an increase in the franchise
fees by an amount which the panel finds is justified by actual (including past
uncompensated) or proposed costs incurred by the County in administering each
franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of Sections
11-1.901 through
11-1.905 of Article 9 of this chapter provided that the annual franchise fee
shall under no circumstances exceed ten (10%) percent per year of a grantee’s
annual gross revenues. In the event more than one franchise is issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, the arbitration panel shall establish such
an amount with respect to each grantee. Any increase ordered by the arbitration
panel shall be deemed to amend the provisions of said Section
11-1.1502 respecting the amount of fees. The County shall be authorized to
amend said Section
11-1.1502 by increasing the franchise fees by any amount authorized under the
decision of the arbitration panel.
   (f)   Negotiations and arbitration proceedings pursuant to this section may
be initiated by the County not more frequently than once each year during the
remainder of the term of any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter following the increase of or elimination of the statutory and
regulatory limitations upon the amount of franchise fees which may be charged
under State and Federal laws.
   (g)   The arbitration award pursuant to this section may be judicially
enforced, shall be final, binding, and conclusive upon the parties, and shall
not be subject to judicial review or vacation, except on the grounds set forth
in Section 1286.2 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 961,
eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 17, Ord. 999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.1508.   Performance bonds.
   (a)   Each grantee shall file with the certificate of acceptance which it
files pursuant to the provisions of Section
11-1.605 of Article 6 of this chapter, and at all times thereafter maintain in
full force and effect, an acceptable corporate surety bond in the amount of
Seven Hundred Fifty Thousand and no/100ths ($750,000.00) Dollars, effective for
the entire term of the franchise, and conditioned that in the event the grantee
shall fail to comply with any one or more of the provisions of the franchise
documents, whether or not the franchise is terminated, then there shall be
recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond
any damages suffered by the County as a result thereof, including, but not
limited to, the full amount of any liquidated damages, delinquent franchise
fees, compensation and costs of repairing or completing the cable
communications system, and compensation and costs of the removal or abandonment
of property and the repair of streets and other public or private improvements,
up to the full amount of the bond. Such condition shall be a continuing
obligation for the duration of the franchise and thereafter until the grantee
has satisfied all of its obligations which may have arisen from the acceptance
of the franchise or from its exercise of any privileges thereunder. Neither the
provisions of this section, any bond accepted pursuant thereto, nor any damages
recovered thereunder shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the
grantee or to limit the liability of the grantee under the franchise or for
damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. The bond shall
contain a provision which prohibits cancellation by the surety during the term
of the franchise, whether for failure to pay a premium or otherwise, without
thirty (30) calendar days’ advance written notice mailed by the surety to the
Clerk of the Board.
   (b)   The form of the bond and surety shall be subject to approval by the
County Counsel.
   (c)   On or after the date of the issuance of the final order of completion
pursuant to the provisions of Section
11-1.1101 or
11-1.1102 of Article 11 of this chapter, the Board, in its sole discretion, may
reduce, for the remainder of the term of the franchise, the required amount of
the bond to a sum not less than Two Hundred Fifty Thousand and no/100ths
($250,000.00) Dollars. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1509.   Security deposits.
   (a)   Each grantee shall file with the certificate of acceptance which it
files pursuant to the provisions of Section
11-1.605 of Article 6 of this chapter a certified or cashier’s check in the
amount of Five and no/100ths ($5.00) Dollars for each dwelling to be served,
made payable to the order of the County. The check shall be cashed and the
proceeds retained by the Treasurer-Tax Collector in a special account. Such sum
shall be maintained by the Treasurer-Tax Collector as security for the faithful
performance by the grantee of all the provisions of the franchise documents,
any damages, including, but not limited to, liquidated damages, delinquent
franchise fees, compensation and costs of completing or repairing the cable
communications system, and compensation and costs of the removal of abandoned
property and the repair of streets and other public or private improvements
incurred as a result of the failure of the grantee to comply with the
provisions of the franchise documents, and shall be payable from the account
upon the terms, conditions, and under the procedures prescribed by Section
11-1.1502 of this article. Interest earned upon the sum shall accrue to the
credit of the account; provided, however, the County shall pay to the grantee
any sums in the account in excess of the amount required for the original
deposit.
   (b)   Within ten (10) calendar days after notice is mailed to the grantee
that any amount has been withdrawn from the special account, the grantee shall
deposit with the Treasurer-Tax Collector such sum as may be necessary to
restore the account to its required amount.
   (c)   On the date of the issuance of the final order of completion pursuant
to Section
11-1.1101 or
11-1.1102 of Article 11 of this chapter, the County shall reduce the amount of
such security deposit by paying so much thereof to the grantee as will reduce
the amount of said deposit retained to Two and 50/100ths ($2.50) Dollars for
each dwelling to be served, unless on said date there are scheduled or pending,
or intended to be scheduled or pending, proceedings relating to the alleged
violation by the grantee of any of the provisions of Section
11-1.1002 of Article 10 of this chapter. In such event, the reduction shall not
occur, and payment shall not be made until such proceedings are terminated and
any damages determined to be owing compensated. Subsequent to such reduction
and payment, such deposit shall be maintained at Two and 50/100ths ($2.50)
Dollars, plus interest accumulations credited thereto during the remainder of
the term of the franchise.
   (d)   Upon the termination of the franchise and the satisfaction of any
damages, including liquidated damages, which may be due, the balance of the
special account, including all interest credited thereto, shall be returned to
the grantee.
   (e)   The rights reserved with respect to the special account are in
addition to all rights of the County, whether reserved by the franchise
documents or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a
right with respect to such account shall affect any other right which the
County may have; nor shall the amount of the special account constitute a
monetary limit on the liability for any actual or liquidated damages resulting
from a breach of the franchise documents. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983)
Sec. 11-1.1510.   Indemnification by grantees.
   (a)   Each grantee, at its sole expense, shall fully indemnify, defend, and
hold harmless the County, and, in their capacity as such, the officers, agents,
and employees thereof, from and against any and all claims, suits, actions,
liability, and judgments for damages or otherwise:
   (1)   For actual or alleged injuries to persons or property, including the
loss or use of property due to an occurrence, whether or not such property is
physically damaged or destroyed, in any way arising out of or through, or
alleged to arise out of or through, the acts or omissions of the grantee, or
its officers, agents, employees, or contractors, or to which the grantee’s, or
its officers, agents, employees, or contractors, acts or omissions in any way
contribute;
   (2)   Arising out of, or alleged to arise out of, any claim for damages for
invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm, or
corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark,
trade name, service mark, or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm,
or corporation; and
   (3)   Arising out of, or alleged to arise out of, the grantee’s failure to
comply with the provisions of any statute, regulation, or ordinance of the
United States, State, or any local agency applicable to the grantee in its
business.
   (b)   The indemnification and hold harmless provisions of this section shall
include those prescribed by Section
11-1.1309 of Article 13 of this chapter.
   (c)   Nothing set forth in this section shall be deemed to prevent the
parties indemnified and held harmless from participating in the defense of any
litigation by their own counsel at the grantee’s sole expense. Such
participation shall not under any circumstances relieve the grantee from its
duty of defense against liability or of paying any judgment entered against
such party. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1511. Public liability and property
   The grantee at all times shall maintain in full force and effect a policy of
insurance in such form as the County may require, executed by an insurance
company authorized to write the required insurance, and approved by the
Insurance Commissioner of the State, insuring the payment of any sum which the
grantee or the County, or its officers, boards, commissioners, agents, and
employees may become obligated to pay by reason of any liability imposed upon
them by law for damages because of personal injury or death, or injury to or
destruction of property that may result to any person or property arising out
of the construction, operation, or maintenance of any facilities pursuant to a
franchise. The sums, payment of which shall be so insured, shall not be less
than Two Million and no/100ths ($2,000,000.00) Dollars combined single limits,
including bodily injury liability and property damage liability. Such policy of
insurance shall be filed with the Board and approved as required by County
ordinance. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1512.   Workers’ compensation insurance.
   Upon being granted a franchise, and upon the filing of the acceptance
required under Section
11-1.605 of Article 6 of this chapter, the grantee shall file with the Clerk of
the Board and shall thereafter, during the entire term of such franchise,
maintain in full force and effect workers’ compensation insurance coverage in
at least the minimum amounts required by law. If a grantee shall fail to obtain
or maintain such required insurance coverage, the County, without notice to the
grantee, may obtain at the grantee’s sole expense such coverage or forthwith
terminate, without prior notice, the franchise as granted. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff.
October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1513.   Waivers of subrogation.
   Each grantee shall cause each insurance policy obtained by it to provide
that the insurance policy obtained by it provide that the insurance company
waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the County, and, in
their capacities as such, the officers, agents, and employees thereof, in
connection with any damage covered by any policy. The County, and, in their
capacities as such, the officers, agents, and employees thereof, shall not be
liable to the grantee for any damage caused by any of the risks insured against
under an insurance policy obtained by the grantee. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October
27, 1983)
Article 16.
Assignments and Transfers
Sec. 11-1.1601.   Transfers prohibited.
   Except as provided by either Section 11- 1.1602 or
11-1.1603 of this article, no part or element of a cable communications system
or any other real or personal property which is mandatorily included by Section
11-1.702 of Article 7 of this chapter within a purchase which the County or its
assignee is authorized to make shall be sold, transferred, assigned, mortgaged,
pledged, leased, sublet, or otherwise encumbered for any purpose whatsoever,
nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest
therein, pass to or vest in any party.
   Except as provided by either said Section
11-1.1602 or
11-1.1603, a franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
either in whole or in part, shall not be sold, transferred, assigned,
mortgaged, pledged, leased, sublet, or otherwise encumbered for any purpose
whatsoever; nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right or
interest therein, pass to or vest in any party.
   Any such sale, transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, lease, sublease, or
other encumbrance of whatever kind or nature made in violation of the
provisions of this section shall be void. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27,
1983)
Sec. 11-1.1602.   Encumbrances for financing purposes.
   Upon a written application by a grantee, the lender, and any and all
signators or guarantors upon the proposed loan, the Board, in its sole
discretion, from time to time, may consent by duly adopted resolution to the
sale, transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, lease, sublease, or other
encumbrance upon real or personal property mandatorily included by Section
11-1.702 of Article 7 of this chapter within a purchase which the County or its
assignee is authorized to make, or upon a franchise issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, for the purpose of securing a loan or capital or
constituting a purchase money security interest. Such information concerning
the identity and background of the lender, terms of the transaction, intended
expenditure of the capital, and other matters relating to the transaction shall
be provided as is required by the Board or its authorized representative. If,
in its sole discretion, the Board elects to approve such encumbrance or
encumbrances, such approval may be granted upon such terms and conditions as
the Board determines to be appropriate, including, but not limited to, the
following:
   (a)   The purpose for which the capital to which the encumbrance relates
will be utilized, including guarantees relating to the expenditure or
disposition of such capital;
   (b)   The terms and conditions of the encumbrance instruments relating to
such matters as default and the rights of the lender and successors in interest
in relation thereto;
   (c)   The amount of the encumbrance and types of properties encumbered;
   (d)   The subordination of the encumbrance to the rights of the County,
under the franchise, consistent with the terms and conditions of the
encumbrance approved by the Board; and
   (e)   An agreement by any party in whose name the loan secured by the
encumbrance is made or any signator or guarantor thereon to be bound by the
terms, conditions, provisions, and requirements of the franchise documents, in
addition to the party or parties in whose names the franchise is issued by the
franchise agreement and certificate of acceptance.
   The Board by resolution shall be authorized to delegate its power to consent
in writing to such encumbrance for financing purposes of individual items of
property described by said Section
11-1.702, subject to the limitations prescribed. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October
27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1603.   Transfers of systems or franchises.
   The Board, pursuant to the provisions of Section
11-1.1605 of this article, may consent by duly adopted resolution to the sale,
transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, lease, sublease, or other transfer of
right, title, or interest in property mandatorily included by Section
11-1.702 of Article 7 of this chapter within that authorized to be purchased,
or in a franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, when such
transfer is for a purpose other than securing a loan of capital. Any such
transfer shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the County under the
franchise documents for the franchise, and the transferee shall acknowledge in
writing such subordination and agreement to comply with and be bound by the
terms, conditions, provisions, and requirements of the franchise documents. (§
1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1604.   Transfers of control.
   Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the grantee or of any
owner of the grantee who is named in the ordinance offering the franchise shall
render the franchise subject to cancellation by the Board, unless the Board
consents thereto by duly adopted resolution pursuant to the provisions of
Section
11-1.1605 of this article. As used in this section, the word “control” shall
mean the acquisition of sufficient dominance to determine the operational and
financial policies of the grantee, including the disposition of its assets. A
rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise
upon:
   (a)   The acquisition or accumulation by any party or association of parties
of ten (10%) percent or more of the voting shares of stock of the grantee or
named owner of the grantee;
   (b)   A change in the general partners of a grantee or named owner of the
franchise; or
   (c)   A merger or consolidation of the grantee or named owner of such
grantee. The presumption shall be subject to rebuttal only by determination by
the Board. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1605.   Determinations of proposed transfers.
   (a)   A grantee shall file written notice with the Clerk of the Board as
soon as the grantee acquires knowledge of any impending transaction or other
event consent to which by the Board is required by Section
11-1.1603 or
11-1.1604 of this article. The written notice shall be filed not less than
ninety (90) calendar days in advance of the proposed effective date of the
transaction or event for which consent is required.
   (b)   The notice shall state the name or names and address or addresses of
the party or parties who are interested in the transaction or event and
describe the details of the transaction or event. In the event of a voluntary
assignment, transfer, lease, sublease, mortgage, or other encumbrance, a copy
of the executed or proposed agreement shall be filed with the notice. Any
written acknowledgment of subordination to the rights of the County under the
franchise documents and agreement to comply with and be bound thereby required
by the provisions of said Section
11-1.1603 shall be filed with the notice.
   (c)   The grantee shall immediately submit such additional information
concerning such a transaction as the Board or other authorized representative
of the County may request.
   (d)   The Board shall schedule a public hearing to determine whether the
consent required by the provisions of said Section
11-1.1603 or
11-1.1604 will be given. Notice of the hearing shall be given in the manner
prescribed by Section
11-1.406 of Article 4 of this chapter. The hearing shall be commenced not later
than sixty (60) calendar days following the filing of the notice by the grantee
pursuant to this section. At the conclusion of the hearing the Board shall
determine whether consent will be given.
   (e)   In the hearing to determine whether consent will be given, the grantee
(proposed transferor) shall have the burden of proving by clear and convincing
evidence each of the following factors:
   (1)   That the reputation, responsibility, integrity, and reliability of the
party or parties to whom the transfer is contemplated, and of the directors,
officers, employees, and agents thereof, is equal to that of the parties
obligated under the franchise documents;
   (2)   That the financial capability and capacity of the party or parties to
whom the transfer is contemplated is equal to that of the parties obligated
under the franchise documents;
   (3)   That the terms, conditions, or other circumstances of the transfer are
not likely to result in an increase in the rates or charges for services;
   (4)   That at the time of the transfer the grantee is in compliance with the
terms, conditions, and requirements of the franchise documents and any rules,
regulations, or determinations promulgated thereunder;
   (5)   That the installation of the cable television system has been
completed in the manner and within the times prescribed by Section
11-1.1002 of Article 10 of this chapter. In the absence of extraordinary
circumstances, a transfer shall not be approved in advance of such completion;
and
   (6)   That the transaction would not detrimentally affect the public
interest.
   (f)   The determination by the Board as to whether to give such consent
shall be vested within the sole discretion of the Board but shall be based
exclusively upon the factors prescribed by subsection (e)of this section. Such
consent may be given upon such express conditions relating to such factors,
including the maintenance or operation of the cable communications system,
services to be provided, rates and charges for services, management of the
franchise business, and other requirements relating to the franchise, as the
Board, in its sole discretion, may order.
   (g)   In the event the Board does not consent, and the grantee seeks a
judicial review of the Board’s decision, the grantee agrees, by the filing of
the certificate of acceptance, that the decision of the Board shall be upheld
by a trial or appellate court if there is any substantial evidence supporting
the decision of the Board as to any of the prescribed factors set forth in
subsection (e)of this section. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as
amended by §§ 5 and 6, Ord. 965, eff. November 3, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1606.   Purchases of grantees’ property.
   Repealed*. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983; * § 7, Ord. 965, eff.
November 3, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1607.   Receiverships.
   The Board shall have the right to cancel a franchise 120 calendar days after
the appointment of a receiver, or trustee, to take over and conduct the
business of the grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy,
or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall
have been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 calendar days, or unless
within such 120 calendar day period the receiver or trustee shall both:
   (a)   Have fully complied with all of the provisions of the franchise
documents and any rules, regulations, or determinations promulgated thereunder;
and
   (b)   Have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having
jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee acknowledges
that its rights are subject and subordinate to those of the County under the
franchise documents and any orders, directives, rules, or regulations issued
thereunder. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983, as amended by § 18, Ord.
999, eff. March 7, 1985)
Sec. 11-1.1608.   Recording and filing.
   Each grantee shall execute a document in a form determined by the County
evidencing the franchise documents appropriate for recording in the office of
the Clerk of the Board and a financial statement in a form determined by the
County for filing pursuant to the provisions of Sections 9401 through 9403 of
the Commercial Code of the State. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1609.   No recourse against agencies.
   No grantee shall have any recourse whatsoever against the County, or its
officers, agents, or employees, for any loss, costs, expenses, or damages
arising out of or resulting from any provision or requirement of the franchise
documents, or any rule, regulation, requirement, or directive promulgated
thereunder, or because of the enforcement of any provision of the franchise
documents, or any rule, regulation, requirement, or directive promulgated
thereunder, or in the event any provision of the franchise documents, or any
rule, regulation, requirement, or directive promulgated thereunder, is
determined to be invalid. (§ 1, Ord. 961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Sec. 11-1.1610.   Nonenforcement.
   A grantee shall not be relieved of any obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of the franchise documents, or any rule, regulation, requirement, or
directive promulgated thereunder, by reason of any failure of the County, or
its officers, agents, or employees, to enforce prompt compliance. (§ 1, Ord.
961, eff. October 27, 1983)
Chapter 2
CABLE TELEVISION LICENSES*
*   Sections 11.2-110 through 11-2.812, added by Ordinance No. 1095, effective
July 27, 1989, were renumbered by codifier to conform to the existing code
numbering system.
Sections:
Article 1. General Provisions
   
11-2.101   Purposes.
   
11-2.102   Title.
   
11-2.103   Definitions.
   
11-2.104   License or franchise required.
   
11-2.105   Utility poles.
   
11-2.106   Notices.
   
11-2.107   Authority.
   
11-2.108   Ordinances: Police powers.
   
11-2.109   Communications with regulatory agencies.
   
11-2.110   Limitation of actions.
   
11-2.111   Possessory interest taxation.
   
11-2.112   Inclusion in municipalities.
Article 2. Issuance of Licenses
   
11-2.201   Application for license.
   
11-2.202   Contents of application.
   
11-2.203   Issuance of licenses.
   
11-2.204   Term of license.
   
11-2.205   Universal service.
   
11-2.206   The license area.
Article 3. System Capability and Standards
   
11-2.301   General capability.
   
11-2.302   Standby power.
   
11-2.303   Override capability.
   
11-2.304   Interconnection.
   
11-2.305   Plans and specifications.
   
11-2.306   Technical standards.
   
11-2.307   Public, educational and governmental access.
   
11-2.308   Support for use of access.
   
11-2.309   Availability of access facilities.
Article 4. Construction Requirements
   
11-2.401   Dwelling units.
   
11-2.402   Isolated dwelling exception.
   
11-2.403   Duty to report.
   
11-2.404   Completion.
   
11-2.405   Excuses for violations.
   
11-2.406   Examples of excuses for violations.
   
11-2.407   Use of streets: Interference.
   
11-2.408   Permits and approvals.
   
11-2.409   Restoration of streets and private property.
   
11-2.410   Street work.
   
11-2.411   Erection of poles.
   
11-2.412   Underground facilities.
   
11-2.413   System extension.
   
11-2.414   Relocation.
   
11-2.415   Tree trimming.
   
11-2.416   Movement of buildings.
   
11-2.417   Removal.
   
11-2.418   Abandonment of licensed property.
   
11-2.419   Enforcement.
Article 5. Services
   
11-2.501   System ownership.
   
11-2.502   Services.
   
11-2.503   Subscriber antennae.
   
11-2.504   Anti-competitive practices.
   
11-2.505   Maintenance and repair.
   
11-2.506   Discrimination in service prohibited.
   
11-2.507   Privacy.
   
11-2.508   Standards for system quality.
   
11-2.509   Affirmative action.
Article 6. License Fees
   
11-2.601   License fees.
   
11-2.602   Amount and payment of license fees.
   
11-2.603   Interest on delinquent license fees.
   
11-2.604   Accounting standards.
   
11-2.605   Gross accounting calculations.
   
11-2.606   Auditing and financial records.
Article 7. Bonds and Insurance
   
11-2.701   Performance bond.
   
11-2.702   Indemnification by licensee.
   
11-2.703   Licensee insurance.
   
11-2.704   Waiver of subrogation.
Article 8. Transfer and Termination
   
11-2.801   Transfers.
   
11-2.802   Crimes.
   
11-2.803   Termination of license.
   
11-2.804   Commencement of termination proceedings.
   
11-2.805   Conduct of hearing.
   
11-2.806   Alternative remedies.
   
11-2.807   Nonenforcement.
Article 1.
General Provisions
Sec. 11-2.101.   Purposes.
   The purposes of this chapter include, but are not limited to, the promotion
of the general welfare of the citizens of the County by:
   (a)   Establishing a plan for the licensing of cable television services
within the County;
   (b)   Establishing a regulatory framework for the administration of licenses
in order to insure that the potential recreational, technical, educational,
social, economic and other advantages of cable television will in fact inure to
the benefit of the citizens of the County;
   (c)   To provide for the equal and uniform provision of cable television
services throughout the County;
   (d)   To insure that licensees have the requisite financial qualifications
to promptly complete and operate the Cable Television System proposed to be
constructed hereunder;
   (e)   To allow a mechanism whereby licensees may provide certain limited
types of cable television service with lesser public benefits and burdens than
they would incur if they chose to obtain a franchise pursuant to the provisions
of Chapter 1 of this title.
   (f)   To regulate the operations of licensees for the purpose of protecting
and promoting the public health, peace, safety, and welfare.
   The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to confer any right upon
a licensee which is not otherwise conferred by another express provision of
this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.102.   Title.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as “The Cable
Television Licensing Ordinance of the County of Yolo.” (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff.
July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.103.   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words shall be
ascribed the following meanings, unless the context indicate otherwise. The
word “shall” is mandatory, and the word “may” is permissive. Words not defined
herein shall be given their common and ordinary meanings, consistent with the
context in which such words are used and the purposes of this chapter.
   “County” shall mean the County of Yolo, a political subdivision of the State
of California.
   “Cable television system” shall mean a system of antennae, cables, wires,
lines, towers, waveguides, or other conductors, converters, amplifiers, headend
equipment, master controls, earth stations, equipment and facilities designed
and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting,
amplifying and distributing audio, video, and other forms of electronic or
electrical signals within the County.
   “CCPA” shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (47 USC 521,
et seq.).
   “Encroachment permit” shall mean a permit issued to a licensee by the County
pursuant to Division 2, Chapter 5.5 of the California Streets and Highways
Code.
   “Gross revenues” shall mean all cash, credits, property of any kind or
nature or other consideration derived directly or indirectly by a licensee, its
affiliates, subsidiaries, parents, and any other person or entity in which the
licensee has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in the
licensee, arising from or attributable to operation of the cable television
system, including, but not limited to: (1) revenue from all charges for service
provided to subscribers of entertainment and nonentertainment services
(including leased access fees); (2) revenues from all charges for the insertion
of commercial advertisements upon the Cable Television System; (3) revenue from
all charges for the leased use of studios; (4) revenue from all equipment
necessary for the utilization of the cable television system and the provision
of subscriber and other services; and (5) the sale, exchange, or use of
cablecast of any programming developed for community use or institutional
users.
   “Gross revenues” shall include, valued at retail price levels, the value of
any goods, services, or other remuneration in nonmonetary form received by the
licensee or others described above in consideration for performance by a
licensee or others described above of any advertising or other service in
connection with the cable television system.
   “Gross revenues” shall not include (1) any taxes on services furnished by
the licensee which are imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the
United States, State of California or government; (2) revenue received directly
from the licensee by an affiliate, subsidiary or parent of the licensee or any
other person or entity in which the licensee has a financial interest or which
has a financial interest in the licensee, when the revenue received has already
been included in the reported gross revenues as received by the licensee; and
(3) revenue received by such an affiliate, subsidiary, parent, person or entity
when the revenue received is from the sale of national advertising shown on
programs distributed on a national basis by the affiliate, subsidiary, parent,
person or entity and, but for this exception, that portion of the revenue
attributable to broadcasts through the cable television system would be treated
as gross revenues.
   “Leased access” shall mean the use of a fee-for-service basis of the cable
television system by business enterprises (whether profit, nonprofit, or
governmental) to render services to the citizens of the County and shall
include without limitation all use pursuant to Section 612 of the CCPA.
   “Licensee” shall mean a person or entity to whom a license to construct and
operate a cable television system is issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
   “Streets” shall mean the surface of and the space above and below any
street, road, highway, freeway utility right-of-way or any other easement which
now or hereafter exists for the provision of public or quasi-public services to
residential or properties, and in which the county is expressly or impliedly
authorized or empowered to permit use for the installation and operation of a
cable television system.
   “Subscriber” shall mean a lawful recipient of service from a cable
television system.
   “User” shall mean a party utilizing a cable television system channel for
purposes of production or transmission of material to subscribers, as
contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff.
July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.104.   License or franchise required.
   Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, streets within the county
shall not be occupied by or used for a cable television system except under (1)
a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or (2) a franchise
issued pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1 of this title. (§ 1, Ord. 1095,
eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.105.   Utility poles.
   No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
to expressly or impliedly authorize the licensee to utilize poles owned by
Pacific Gas and Electricity Company and Pacific Telephone or any public or
private utility which are located within the streets, without the express
consent of the utility. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.106.   Notices.
   All notices and other writings authorized or prescribed by the provisions of
this chapter to be “mailed” shall be deemed to have been given and served when
deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, and addressed, with
respect to a licensee to the office set forth in the license application as the
main office for the licensee within the County, and with respect to other
parties to the last known address of such party.
   Any notice or other writing authorized or required by the provisions of this
chapter to be “filed,” shall be deemed “filed” when received in the business
office of the party with whom such notice or writing is authorized or required
to be filed. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.107.   Authority.
   It is declared that the provisions of this chapter are enacted pursuant to
the police power authority conferred by Article 11, Section 7 of the California
Constitution for the promotion and protection of the peace, health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the County. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27,
1989)
Sec. 11-2.108.   Ordinances: Police powers.
   All zoning and other land use ordinances, building, electrical, plumbing and
mechanical codes, business license ordinances and all other ordinances of
general application now in existence or hereafter enacted by the County shall
be fully applicable to the exercise of any license issued pursuant to
provisions of this chapter, and the licensee shall comply therewith. In the
event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and those of such an
ordinance of general application, the provisions of such ordinance of general
application shall prevail. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.109.   Communications with regulatory agencies.
   Copies of all petitions, applications, communications, and reports submitted
by a licensee to the FCC or any other Federal or State regulatory commission or
agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting construction or
operation of a cable television system or services provided through such a
system, shall be filed simultaneously with the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors. Copies of responses or any other communications from the
regulatory agencies to a licensee likewise shall be filed immediately on
receipt with said Director. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.110.   Limitation of actions.
   Except as otherwise expressly provided by this chapter, any judicial
proceeding, whether for the recovery of damages or otherwise, brought for the
purpose of adjudicating the validity of any provision of this chapter or
amendments thereof shall be commenced not later than thirty (30) calendar days
following the latter of: (1) the effective date of the provisions; or (2) the
accrual of the cause of action. Any such judicial proceeding brought for the
purpose of adjudicating the validity of any rule, order, regulation or
determination which purports to have been made pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be commenced not later than thirty (30) calendar days
following the date of adoption, issuance or making of such rule, order,
regulation or determination. No judicial proceeding shall be commenced in
violation of the limitations prescribed by this section.
   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any judicial
proceeding for the recovery of damages or otherwise, commenced by the County
for breach or enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any regulation
or determination purporting to have been issued thereunder. (§ 1, Ord. 1095,
eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.111.   Possessory interest taxation.
   The County hereby declares that as a result of the ordinance codified in
this chapter and any license issued pursuant hereto, a possessory interest
subject to property taxation may be created and any such property interest may
be subject to property taxation if it is created. The licensee, as the party in
whom the possessory interest will be vested, may be subject to the payment of
property taxes levied upon such an interest. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27,
1989)
Sec. 11-2.112.   Inclusion in municipalities.
   The inclusion within a municipality by reason of incorporation, annexation
or other proceedings of territory lying within the licensed area of a license
issued under this chapter shall not operate to divest the licensee of any
authority granted by the license within the newly included territory. The terms
and conditions of the license shall inure to the benefit of and bind the
municipality as to any such newly included territory. The terms and conditions
of the license shall continue to inure to the benefit of and bind the County as
to any remaining unincorporated territory. The County and any such municipality
may act independently in the exercise of any authority granted or in the claim
of any benefits derived from the license. License fees based upon subscriber
revenues shall be apportioned between the County and the municipality in
accordance with the derivation of the subscriber revenue from either
incorporated or unincorporated territory. License fees based upon other
revenues shall be allocated between the County and the municipality in the same
proportion as fees based upon subscriber revenue are allocated. (§ 1, Ord.
1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Article 2.
Issuance of Licenses
Sec. 11-2.201.   Application for license.
   Applications for a license under the provisions of this chapter shall be
made to the Board of Supervisors upon a form as established from time to time
for that purpose by the Board of Supervisors or in the absence of such action,
shall set forth the contents required by this article. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff.
July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.202.   Contents of application.
   Applications for a license shall include at a minimum:
   (a)   A clear description of the identity of the applicant, including but
not limited to the name of the applicant, the address of the applicant, the
nature of the business entity, evidence of the compliance of the business
entity with all applicable law;
   (b)   Evidence that the applicant has applied (including the payment of all
applicable fees) to the Department of Public Works for all applicable
encroachment permits;
   (c)   Evidence that all aspects of the applicant’s cable television system
comply with applicable zoning laws of the County;
   (d)   A map or maps of a scale of not less than one (1”) inch equals one
hundred (100’) feet or such other scale as is specified for good cause by the
Director of Public Works showing the precise geographic area for which
applicant seeks a license (“license area”);
   (e)   Evidence that applicant has applied (including the payment of all
applicable fees) to the Community Development Agency for building and
electrical code review and approval of the plans and construction of the entire
cable television system within the license area;
   (f)   Evidence of financial responsibility in the form of a performance bond
conforming to Section
11-2.701 of this chapter;
   (g)   A nonrefundable application fee equal to one-quarter of one percent
(.0025) of the principal penal amount of the initial performance bond
established pursuant to Section
11-2.701 of this chapter, or such other sum as may be established by the Board
of Supervisors, to cover the costs of review, issuance and enforcement of
licenses issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (h)   A schedule of construction, as established by the applicant and
reflected upon the map(s) provided pursuant to subsection (d)of this section,
showing by a logical geographic progression which streets within the license
area shall be constructed by the applicant within each calendar quarter during
the period of construction;
   (i)   Detailed plans and specifications for the cable television system
which is proposed by the applicant showing the location of line extenders,
amplifiers, pedestal boxes and all repositories of active or passive equipment
of any kind whatsoever;
   (j)   The process and schedule for notifying residents of the area affected
of installation schedule, manner of installation, and manner of resolving
disputes;
   (k)   A promise by the applicant at its sole expense, fully to indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the County, and in their capacity as such, the
officers, agents and employees thereof, from and against any and all claims,
suits, actions, liability, and judgments for damages or otherwise, in
connection with the application or performance authorized by any license issued
hereunder in any way arising out of or through or alleged to arise out of or
through the acts or omissions of the applicant or its officers, agents,
employees, or contractors or to which the applicant or its officers’, agents’,
employees’ or contractors’ acts or omissions in any way contribute;
   (1)   For actual or alleged injury to persons or property, including loss or
use of property due to an occurrence, whether or not such property is
physically damaged or destroyed;
   (2)   Arising out of or alleged to arise out of any claim for damages for
invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or
corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark,
trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm
or corporation;
   (3)   Arising out of or alleged to arise out of applicant’s failure to
comply with the provisions of any statute, regulation or ordinance of the
United States, State of California, or any local agency applicable to the
licensee in its business; or
   (4)   Arising out of or alleged to arise out of:
   (i)   Any act or omission whereby applicant’s cable communications system is
utilized to provide any service in such a manner as to unlawfully damage any
business competitor or other third party or violate any statutes or regulations
of the United States or State of California; or
   (ii)   Any anti-competitive practice in violation of any statutes or
regulations of the United States or State of California. The provisions of this
section shall be enforceable in courts of competent jurisdiction against an
applicant by any party who alleges injury as a result of an alleged violation
thereof.
   Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the parties indemnified and held
harmless from participating in the defense of any litigation by their own
counsel at the applicant’s sole expense. Such participation shall not under any
circumstances relieve the applicant from its duty of defense against liability
or of paying any judgment entered against such party. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff.
July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.203.   Issuance of licenses.
   The Board of Supervisors shall issue all licenses for which applications are
received unless (1) the application shall fail to comply with the provisions of
Section
11-2.202 or (2) any license theretofore issued to any affiliate, subsidiary or
parent of the licensee or any other person or entity in which the licensee has
a financial interest or which has a financial interest in the licensee shall be
thereupon in default as to any provision of this chapter or as to any provision
of any license issued hereunder. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
11-2.202, the Board of Supervisors may, in its discretion, issue licenses
subject to the subsequent performance of conditions specified herein, provided
that in any event all such requirements shall be fulfilled prior to the
commencement of any construction within the license area. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff.
July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.204.   Term of license.
   The term of all licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be five (5) years. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.205.   Universal service.
   Any cable television system licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall provide equal and uniform cable television service, subject only
to a reasonable construction schedule established by the applicant pursuant to
Section
11-2.202(h), to all dwelling units within the license area defined by the
applicant; provided, however, that no licensee shall be required to extend
cable service to any dwelling unit that does not meet the requirements of
Sections
11-2.402 and
11-2.413 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.206.   The license area.
   The applicant shall define a license area whose contour, so far as is
possible, shall follow streets. Within the perimeter of the contour, no
dwelling units shall be excluded from service provided to the license area
defined by the applicant, except pursuant to Section
11-2.402 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Article 3.
System Capability and Standards
Sec. 11-2.301.   General capability.
   Each cable television system shall, at minimum:
   (a)   Relay to subscriber terminals those broadcast signals required by the
FCC;
   (b)   Distribute in color all television signals which it receives in color;
   (c)   Make available upon request by any subscribers receiving channels
showing premium services and pay-per-view events, a lockout device which
prevents the unauthorized viewing of such channels;
   (d)   Make available to subscribers, upon request, an RF switch (an A-
B switch) permitting conversion from cable to antenna reception; and
   (e)   Have a present, activated capacity of 450 megahertz with all amplifier
cascades designed and spaced to accommodate conversion to 550 megahertz
capacity. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.302.   Standby power.
   Each cable television system shall include equipment capable of providing
standby powering for headend, transportation and trunk amplifiers for a minimum
of two (2) hours. The equipment shall be so constructed as to automatically
notify the cable office when it is in operation and to automatically revert to
the standby mode when the AC power returns. The system shall incorporate
safeguards necessary to prevent injury to lineman resulting from a standby
generator powering a “dead” utility line. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.303.   Override capability.
   Each cable television system shall include an “Emergency Alert Capability”
which will permit the County, in times of emergency, to override by remote
control alternatively the audio and video of all channels simultaneously. Each
cable television system shall include the capability to broadcast from the
County’s headquarters for emergency services. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27,
1989)
Sec. 11-2.304.   Interconnection.
   The cable television system shall have the technical capability to be
interconnected with other cable systems within the County and the greater
Sacramento area, so as to technically enable each system to carry the public,
educational, and governmental access programming of the other systems. Actual
interconnection will be dependent upon the execution of mutually acceptable
interconnection agreements between cable television systems relating to all
interconnection issues, including issues of cooperation, technical assistance,
economic feasibility, maintenance and service, requirements, and so forth. (§
1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.305.   Plans and specifications.
   Each application for a license shall include detailed plans and
specifications for the cable television system which is proposed by the
applicant. The system shall be constructed and installed by a licensee in
compliance with the plans and specifications contained in the application. Upon
completion, the applicant shall file “as built” plans with the County showing
the detailed location of all underground cable plant and active electronics. (§
1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.306.   Technical standards.
   Each licensee shall construct, install and maintain its cable television
system in a manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable laws,
ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, and technical
standards equivalent to those established by the FCC. Each licensee shall
provide to the Director of Public Works upon request, written reports of the
licensee’s annual proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC
standards and requirements.
   (a)   Each licensee shall at all times comply with the National Electrical
Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); National Electrical Code (National
Bureau of Fire Underwriters); California Public Utilities Commission General
Orders 95, 112-d and 128; applicable FCC and other Federal, State and local
regulations; and Codes and other ordinances of the County.
   (b)   In any event, the cable television system shall not endanger or
interfere with the safety of persons or property within the County or other
areas where the licensee may have equipment located.
   (c)   All working facilities, conditions, and procedures used or occurring
during construction of the cable television system shall comply with the
standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
   (d)   Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable television
system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, and in close
coordination with public and private utilities serving the County following
accepted construction procedures and practices and working through existing
committees and organizations.
   (e)   All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with
electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be
arranged in parallel and bundled with the respect for engineering
consideration.
   (f)   Any antenna structure used in the cable television system shall comply
with construction, marking and lighting of antennae structures, required by the
United States Department of Transportation.
   (g)   RF leakage shall be monitored in accordance with FCC Rules and
Regulations. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.307.   Public, educational and governmental access.
   Every cable television system licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall provide not less than the following for public, educational and
governmental access pursuant to the provisions of CCPA Section 611 (47 USC
531):
   (a)   One downstream video channel for public and community access;
   (b)   One downstream video channel for educational access; and
   (c)   One downstream video channel for governmental access. (§ 1, Ord. 1095,
eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec.11-2.308.   Support for use of access.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit the authority
of the licensee to make payments in support of the use of public, educational
and/or government. However, such payments are expressly not a requirement of
any license granted hereunder and shall in no event be considered in the
calculation of license fees pursuant to Article 5 of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord.
1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.309.   Availability of access facilities.
   Use of facilities for public, educational and govemment access upon the
cable television system pursuant to Section
11-2.307 shall be made available, without rental, deposits, or any other charge
whatsoever, for use twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days a week, in
connection with the production of public, educational and/or governmental
access programming cablecast upon the cable television system. A licensee shall
(1) allow all persons and entities desiring to cablecast public, educational
and/or governmental access programming to produce programming upon and
electronically interface directly with cable television system of licensee so
as to effectively cablecast the public, educational, and/or governmental access
programming or, in the alternative, (2) establish such reasonable rules and
procedures designed to promote the utilization of such public, educational and/
or governmental access programming and subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, whereby the
licensee shall accept and cablecast such public, educational and/or
governmental access programming upon the cable television system as shall be
provided to the licensee by such persons and entities. A licensee shall make
all reasonable efforts to coordinate the cablecasting of public, educational
and/or governmental access programming upon the cable television system at the
same time and upon the same channel designations as such programming is
cablecasting upon other cable television systems within the County. (§ 1, Ord.
1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Article 4.
Construction Requirements
Sec. 11-2.401.   Dwelling units.
   As used in this chapter, the term “dwelling units” means residential living
facilities as distinguished from temporary lodging facilities such as hotel and
motel rooms and dormitories, and includes single family residential units and
individual apartments, condominium units, mobile homes with mobile home parks,
and other multiple family residential units. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27,
1989)
Sec. 11-2.402.   Isolated dwelling exception.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a licensee shall be
excused from making cable television services available to a particular
dwelling unit within a licensee area if that dwelling unit is situated at least
500 feet from another dwelling unit and making service available to the
dwelling unit would require an aerial or underground extension of cable in
excess of 500 feet from an otherwise existing aerial or underground trunk
cable. The sole purpose of this exception is to relieve a licensee from
providing service to an isolated dwelling unit within a license area under
circumstances wherein extension of the system would constitute an excessive
burden, and occupants of only one dwelling unit within the area would be
deprived of services as a result of the relief. A licensee shall not be
entitled to relief under this section unless it shows that it would not have
been reasonable to have located cable in such a manner as to be within the
distance limitation prescribed by this section. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27,
1989)
Sec. 11-2.403.   Duty to report.
   Commencing at the end of the first full calendar quarter following the
issuance of a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and
continuing every calendar quarter thereafter until the date cable television
services are made available to 100 percent of the dwelling units within each
license area, the chief executive officer of the licensee shall file with the
Director of Public Works a written declaration identifying the number and
percentage of dwelling units in each license area to which such services have
been made available as of the last day of the quarter for which the declaration
is made. Upon request, the licensee shall make available to the County such
maps, documents and other data as were used by the licensee to compile the
aforesaid declaration. Said quarterly declarations shall be filed not later
than forty (40) days after the end of the quarter for which the report is
filed. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec.11-2.404.   Completion.
   (a)   A final order of completion shall be issued by the Board of
Supervisors when: (1) construction of the cable television system has been
completed within the entirety of each license area in compliance with
construction standards and the design and other requirements of this chapter;
(2) cable television services have been made available to 100 percent of the
dwelling units within each license area; (3) any and all studio facilities,
equipment, channels and other services, resources or benefits required for
public, educational, and governmental access purposes pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter have been completed and made available; (4) complete
and accurate “as built” plans pursuant to Section
11-2.305 have been filed by the licensee with the County; and (5) a notice of
completion has been filed by the licensee as hereinafter provided.
   (b)   For purposes of this chapter, cable television service shall be deemed
to be made available when cable television services are offered on a
nondiscriminatory basis for immediate provision to the owner or legal
representative of the owner empowered to consent to use of the property of such
individual dwelling units.
   (c)   For the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and of determining completion under this section, the total number of
dwelling units within each license area shall be deemed to be the actual number
of units available for occupancy as of the date forty-five (45) calendar days
in advance of the filing of notice, the total number of dwelling units to which
cable television service have been made available within each license area as
of the date of filing, and shall otherwise certify completion as defined by
subsection (a)of this section. Neither the notice of completion nor the
statements, assertions or certifications contained therein shall be deemed to
be binding upon the County.
   (d)   A licensee who asserts completion shall file a written notice of
completion with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors. The notice of completion
shall state the total number of dwelling units available for occupancy within
each license area forty-five (45) calendar days in advance of the filing of the
notice, the total number of dwelling units to which cable television service
have been made available within each license area as of the date of filing, and
shall otherwise certify completion as defined by subsection (a)of this section.
Neither the notice of completion nor the statements, assertions or
certifications contained therein shall be deemed to be binding upon the County.
   (e)   During the period of construction of the cable television system or
during the sixty (60) day period following filing of the notice of completion,
all elements and components thereof, and all equipment and studio facilities
required by the license document shall be subject to inspection by County
employees or authorized agents or representatives thereof, for the purpose of
determining whether the system and related facilities comply with the license
and the provisions of this chapter. The licensee shall authorize such
inspection and provide such information and cooperation as is required in order
to permit an adequate investigation to determine the existence or nonexistence
of such compliance. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.405.   Excuses for violations.
   (a)   Except as hereinafter provided, violation by a licensee of any of the
provisions of this chapter caused by circumstances beyond the control of the
licensee shall constitute good and sufficient excuse and justification for such
violations precluding the licensee from being in breach of said provisions. The
following are examples of acts or omissions by a licensee or circumstances
which shall be deemed not to be beyond the control of the licensee and which
shall not constitute excuses or justifications for violations:
   (1)   The failure at any time by a licensee or its officers, agents or
employees to exercise diligence in planning, organizing, arranging for or
prosecuting the work of construction and installation, or in taking any other
action necessary to permit or facilitate the work or construction and
installation;
   (2)   Unanticipated cost increases or insufficiency of capital with which to
take actions necessary to comply or facilitate compliance with any of the
provisions of this chapter;
   (3)   Considerations relating to economy or cost efficiency, as respects
acts or omissions by a licensee;
   (4)   Delays occasioned by the failure of a licensee to diligently apply for
and prosecute any request for a required certificate, approval or consent from
the FCC;
   (5)   Delays occasioned by seasonal changes in weather or climatic
conditions, such as rain (exclusive of catastrophic conditions in the nature of
“Acts of God”). (Rain delay shall not constitute an excuse or justification for
violation except with respect to measurable precipitation occurring on more
than fifty-nine (59) days during any period commencing July 1st, and ending the
next following June 30th; and only if such is the proximate cause of the
violation);
   (6)   Delays occasioned by the customary and usual time required to obtain
approval to attach lines to poles owned by private or public utilities or in
the attaching of cable to the poles; provided that if a licensee submits all
plans and documentation required by private or public utility in connection
with the approval to attach lines or poles, any time consumed by such approval
process which is longer than 150 calendar days following the submission of all
necessary plans and documentation shall be deemed to excuse the licensee from
any violations which are proximately caused by such delay in excess of 150
calendar days;
   (7)   Delays occasioned by the customary and usual time required to process
and secure approvals under zoning ordinances of the County for the location of
components of the cable television system and other installations associated
therewith, given the nature of the approval required and magnitude of the
project.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a)of this section a
licensee shall not be excused from any violation of the provisions of this
chapter except for causes which are beyond the control of the licensee and
except with respect to violations which have not been contributed to or
aggravated by acts or omissions by the licensee.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided above, violations caused exclusively by
acts or omissions by the County or its officers, agents, or employees shall
constitute and excuse and justification for failure of the licensee to comply
with the provisions of this chapter precluding a determination that the
licensee is in breach. However, violations as a result of such exclusive causes
shall not be deemed to excuse the licensee from other violations, shield the
licensee from a determination that it is in breach for violations, or bar any
relief for damages or otherwise as a result of such breach. (§ 1, Ord. 1095,
eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.406.   Examples of excuses for violations.
   Examples of circumstances beyond the control of licensee which excuse a
licensee from violation and being in breach of the provisions of this chapter,
when such violations are caused thereby, including but not limited to the
following: strikes, acts of public enemies; orders by military authority;
insurrections; riots; epidemics; landslides; lightning; earthquakes; fires;
floods; civil disturbances; explosions; and partial or entire failure of
utilities. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.407.   Use of streets: Interference.
   Each cable television system, including wires and appurtenances, shall be
located and installed and maintained so that none of the facilities endanger or
interfere with the lives or safety of persons, or interfere with any
improvements the County or the State of California may deem proper to make or
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets or other public
property. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected or installed by a licensee within the County shall be so located as to
cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners who adjoin any of the streets or other public property. (§ 1,
Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.408.   Permits and approvals.
   During the term of each license, in advance of occupying, working upon or
otherwise utilizing any street, the licensee shall apply for and obtain any
encroachment permit, license, authorization or other approval required by
ordinances in force within the County, pay any fees and post any security
required by such ordinance, and in the course of construction, installing,
replacing, maintaining and repairing the cable television system shall comply
with all applicable requirements of such ordinances and any terms or conditions
of encroachment permits, licenses, authorizations or approvals issued
thereunder.
   The County shall be authorized to establish special fees payable by a
licensee to defray the costs incurred by the Department of Public Works of the
County in supervising and regulating the installation of a cable television
system within the streets of the County. The Director of Public Works of the
County shall be authorized to formulate the purpose of promoting safety,
reducing inconvenience to the public, and insuring adequate restoration and
repair of the streets, and a licensee and its officers, agents, contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with any and all such schedules. (§ 1, Ord. 1095,
eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.409.   Restoration of streets and private property.
   All disturbance by a licensee of pavement, sidewalk, driveways, landscaping
or other surfacing of streets shall be restored, repaired or replaced by
sidewalk, driveways, landscaping or other surfacing of streets shall be
restored, repaired or replaced by the licensee at its sole cost in a manner
approved by the Director of Public Works and in compliance with generally
applicable ordinances of the agency vested with jurisdiction thereover, and in
as good condition as before the disturbance occurred.
   To the extent practicable and reasonable, each licensee shall accommodate
the desires of any property owner respecting location within easements or
rights-of-way traversing private land of the property owner of above ground
boxes or appurtenances constituting a part of the cable television system. Any
disturbance of landscaping, fencing or other improvements upon private
property, including private property traversed by easements or rights-of-way
utilized by a licensee, shall, at the sole expense of the licensee, be promptly
repaired or restored (including replacement of such valuables as shrubbery and
fencing) to the reasonable satisfaction of the property owner as soon as
possible. Each licensee shall, through authorized representatives, make a
reasonable attempt to personally contact the occupants of all private property
in advance of private property in advance of entering such property for the
purpose of commencing any installation of elements of the system within
easements or rights-of-way traversing such property. As used in this paragraph,
the terms “easements” and “rights-of-way” do not include easements or rights-
of-way for roadway purposes. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.410.   Street work.
   (a)   Upon any failure of the licensee to commence, pursue or complete any
work required by it by law or by the provisions of a franchise to be done in
any street, the Board at its option and according to law, may cause such work
to be done and the licensee shall pay to the County the cost thereof in the
itemized amounts reported by the Board to the licensee, within thirty (30) days
after receipt of such itemized report.
   (b)   In the event that:
   (1)   Any part of such system has been installed in any street or other area
without complying with the requirements hereof and/or the franchise ordinance;
or
   (2)   The use of any part of the system of licensee is discontinued for any
reason for a continuous period of thirty (30) days, without prior written
notice to and approval by the County; then:
   The licensee shall, at the option of the County, and at the expense of
licensee and at no expense to the County, and upon demand of the County,
promptly remove from any streets or other area all property of licensee, and
licensee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such
property has been removed to such condition as the County Director of Public
Works shall approve. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.411.   Erection of poles.
   No license shall be deemed to expressly or impliedly authorize the licensee
to construct or install poles or wire-holding structures within the streets for
the purpose of placing cables, wires, lines or otherwise, without the written
consent of the Board of Supervisors. Such consent shall be given upon such
reasonable terms and conditions as the Board of Supervisors in its sole
discretion may prescribe which shall include a requirement that the licensee
perform, at its sole expense, all tree trimming required to maintain the poles
clear of obstructions.
   With respect to any poles or wire-holding structures which a licensee is
authorized to construct and install within streets, a public utility or public
utility district serving the County may, if denied the privilege of utilizing
such poles or wire-holding structures by the licensee, apply for such
permission to the Board of Supervisors. If the Board of Supervisors finds that
such use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere
with the licensee’s operations, the Board of Supervisors may authorize such use
subject to the terms and conditions as it deems appropriate. Such authorization
shall include the condition that the public utility or public utility district
pay to the licensee any and all actual and necessary costs incurred by the
licensee in permitting such use. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.412.   Underground facilities.
   (a)   Unless otherwise authorized by the Board in those areas and portions
of the County where transmission and/or distribution facilities of the public
utility providing telephone service, and those of the utility providing
electric service, are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, or
are to be placed underground by a builder, developer or subdivider as part of a
development or subdivision, then the licensee shall likewise construct, operate
and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground to
the maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits the licensee to
do so.
   (b)   In new developments or subdivisions the builder, developer, or
subdivider shall be responsible for the performance of all necessary trenching
and backfilling of main line and service trenches, including furnishing of any
imported backfill material required. The licensee will be responsible for the
conduct of the engineering and labor to put the cable conduit in the trench.
Pre-wiring of new dwellings to franchise specifications while under
construction shall be mandatory. The licensee will be responsible for pulling
in the cable, and providing the plant electronics and drops to individual
homes, after occupancy.
   (c)   In those areas and portions of the County where utility service
facilities are currently located underground, the licensee shall be responsible
for the undergrounding of cable facilities, including the performance of all
necessary trenching, and the furnishing of any imported backfill material
required.
   (d)   Previously installed aerial cable shall be undergrounded in concert,
and on a cost-sharing basis, with other utilities pursuant to the general
ordinances of the County or applicable State law, or in the event such action
shall be taken by all other utilities on a voluntary basis.
   (e)   Subject to approval by the Board, incidental appurtenances such as
amplifier boxes and pedestal mounted terminal boxes may be placed above ground,
but shall be of such size and design and shall be so located as not to be
unsightly or hazardous to the public. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.413.   System extension.
   The licensee shall be required to extend the cable television system to any
new developments or general areas within the license area as authorized to do
so within the remainder of the license area pursuant to the following
requirements:
   (a)   The licensee shall be required to extend the subscriber network to any
new developments or general areas within the service area and is authorized to
do so within the remainder of the franchise area pursuant to the following
requirements:
   (1)   Licensee must extend and make cable communications service available
to every dwelling unit within the area reaching the minimum density of at least
forty (40) dwelling units per street mile, or five (5) dwelling units within
660 feet, as measured from existing feeder cable.
   (2)   Licensee must extend and make cable communications service available
to every dwelling unit in all unserved, developing areas having at least forty
(40) dwelling units planned per street mile, as measured from the existing
system, and shall extend its system simultaneously with the installation of
utility lines.
   (3)   Licensee must extend and make cable communications service available
to any isolated resident requesting connection at the standard connection
charge, if the connection to the isolated resident would require no more than a
standard 150 foot aerial drop line or underground connection.
   (4)   With respect to requests for connection requiring an aerial drop line
in excess of 150 feet, the licensee must extend and make available cable
television service to such residents at a connection charge not to exceed the
actual installation costs incurred by the licensee for the distance exceeding
150 feet.
   (5)   Whenever the licensee shall have received written requests for
services from at least fifteen (15) assured subscribers within 1,300 cable feet
of its aerial trunk cable, it shall extend its system to such subscribers
solely for the usual connection and service fees for all subscribers, provided
that such extension is technically and economically feasible. The 1,300 cable
feet shall be measured in extension length of grantee’s cable required for
service located within public way or easement and shall not include the length
of necessary drop to the subscribers house or premises.
   (b)   Special agreement. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent
licensee from serving areas not covered under this section upon agreement with
developers, property owners, or residents.
   (c)   Any violation of this section shall be considered a breach of the
terms of this chapter. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.414.   Relocation.
   If during the term of a license the County, a county service area, a
community services district, a utility district, a public water district, a
public sanitation district, a public drainage district or any other similar
special public district elects to alter, repair, realign, abandon, improve,
vacate, reroute or change the grade of any street or to replace, repair,
install, maintain, or otherwise alter any above ground or underground cable,
wire conduit, pipe, line, pole, wire-holding structure, structure, or other
facility utilized for the provision of utility or other services or
transportation of drainage, sewage or other liquids, the licensee shall, except
as otherwise hereinafter provided, at its sole expense, remove or relocate as
necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and any
other facilities which it has installed. If such removal or relocation is
required within the subdivision in which all utility lines, including those for
the cable television system were installed at the same time, the entities may
decide among themselves who is to bear the cost of relocation; provided that
the County shall not be liable to a licensee for such costs. Regardless of who
bears the costs, a licensee shall take action to remove or relocate at such
time or times as are directed by the agency or company undertaking the work.
Reasonable advance written notice shall be mailed to the licensee advising the
license of the date or dates removal or relocation is to be undertaken. (§ 1,
Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.415.   Tree trimming.
   The licensee shall not, and shall prohibit any officer, agent, employee,
contractor or subcontractor which it retains from removing or trimming any tree
or portions thereof (either above, at or below ground level), which is located
within a street without the prior written approval of the Director of Public
Works of the County. Such consent may be given or withheld upon such terms and
conditions as the Director of Public Works deems appropriate. Each licensee
shall be responsible for, shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City
and its officers, agents and employees from and against any and all damages
arising out of or resulting from the removal, trimming, mutilation of or any
injury to any tree or trees proximately caused by the licensee or its officers,
agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July
27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.416.   Movement of buildings.
   Each licensee shall, upon request by any person holding a building moving
permit, license or other approval issued by the County or State of California,
temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires to permit the movement of
buildings. The expense of such removal, raising or lowering shall be paid by
the person requesting same, and a licensee shall be authorized to require such
payment in advance. A licensee shall be given not less than one week oral and
written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. (§ 1, Ord. 1095,
eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.417.   Removal.
   Upon expiration or termination of a license, if the license is not renewed
and if neither the County nor an assignee purchase the cable television system,
the licensee may remove any underground cable from the streets which has been
installed in such a manner that it can be removed without trenching or other
opening of the streets along the extension of cable to be removed. The licensee
shall not remove any underground cable or conduit which requires trenching or
other opening of the streets along the extension of cable to be removed, except
as hereinafter provided. The licensee shall remove, at its sole cost and
expense, any underground cable or conduit by trenching or opening of the
streets along the extension thereof or otherwise which is ordered to be removed
by the Board of Supervisors based upon a determination, in the sole discretion
of the Board, that the removal is required in order to eliminate or prevent a
hazardous condition or promote future utilization of the streets for public
purposes. Any order by the Board of Supervisors to remove cable or conduit
shall be mailed to the licensee not later than ninety (90) calendar days
following the date of expiration of the license. A licensee shall file written
notice with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors not later than sixty (60)
calendar days following the date of expiration or termination of the license of
its intention to remove cable intended to be removed and a schedule for removal
by location. The schedule and timing of removal shall be subject to approval
and regulation by the Director of Public Works of the County. Removal shall be
completed not later than twelve (12) months following the date of expiration or
expiration of the license. Underground cable and conduit in the streets which
is not removed shall be deemed abandoned and title thereto shall be vested in
the County.
   Upon expiration or termination of a license, if the license is not renewed
and if neither the County nor an assignee purchase the system, the licensee, at
its sole expense shall, unless relieved of the obligation by the County remove
from the streets all above ground elements of the cable television system,
including but not limited to amplifier boxes, pedestal mounted terminal boxes,
and cable attached to or suspended from poles, which are not purchased by the
County or its assignee.
   The licensee shall apply for and obtain such encroachment permits, licenses,
authorizations or other approvals and pay such fees and deposit such security
as required by applicable ordinances of the County, shall conduct and complete
the work of removal in compliance with all such applicable ordinances, and
shall restore the streets to the same condition they were in before the work of
removal commenced. The work of removal shall be completed not later than one
year following the date of expiration of the license. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff.
July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.418.   Abandonment of licensed property.
   (a)   In the event the use of any license property is permanently
discontinued, or no license has been obtained therefor, upon expiration of or
within twelve (12) months after any termination of a license, the licensee
shall promptly remove from the streets all property involved, other than any
the Board may, at its sole option, permit to be abandoned in place.
   (b)   A permit to abandon in place must first be obtained from the County
Director of Public Works. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the
property of licensee, and licensee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason
of anything hereunder.
   (c)   License property to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such
manner as the Board shall prescribe. Upon abandonment of any license property
in place, the licensee shall submit to the Board an instrument, satisfactory to
the County Counsel, transferring to the County the ownership of such property.
(§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.419.   Enforcement.
   Any Director of Public Works for the County who determines that a licensee
has committed an act or omission in violation of any of the provisions of
Sections
11-2.407 through
11-2.417 shall be authorized to mail written notice of the violation to the
licensee.
   Not later than seven (7) calendar days following the mailing of such notice,
the licensee shall be authorized to file an appeal with the Clerk of the Board
of Supervisors. The licensee shall also file a copy of the notice in the office
of the Director of Public Works. The Board of Supervisors shall hear the
appeal, and shall be authorized to do so at its earliest convenience. The
licensee shall be authorized to present oral and documentary evidence and
cross-examine witnesses. Formal rules of evidence shall not be applicable.
   If no appeal is filed and within ten (10) calendar days following mailing of
the notice the licensee has failed to correct the violation, or if an appeal is
filed and within five (5) calendar days following mailing to the licensee of an
order by the Board of Supervisors, the licensee has failed to correct the
violation through assignment of such task to his subordinate personnel or
delegation of authority to take such corrective action to a public utility,
public district, contractor or other third party. In such event, the licensee
shall be liable for the full amount of any charges made for such corrective
action, and salary and benefit costs of any public employees assigned to take
such corrective action, and the costs of material, supplies and goods utilized
in taking such corrective action.
   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to fix the date of a
breach by a licensee of any of the provisions of this chapter at the prescribed
period following mailing of the notice of violation, or to prevent a
determination that a licensee has breached any of said sections in advance
either of the ten (10) days following the mailed notice or in advance of
mailing of the notice or any communication pursuant to this section to the
licensee. Nor shall the provisions of this section be so construed as to
relieve the licensee from liability for the damages which may arise out of and
be proximately caused by breach by a licensee of any of the provisions of said
provisions. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Article 5.
Services
Sec. 11-2.501.   System ownership.
   Legal and equitable title to the cable television system, including any and
all studio facilities and production equipment provided for public,
educational, and govemmental access, and all channels for whatever kind or
nature, shall be vested in the licensee. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.502.   Services.
   Within a license area, services provided by a licensee through its cable
television system shall be offered uniformly upon nondiscriminatory terms to
subscribers and users, and shall not differ based upon geographical location,
income levels, racial and ethnic composition; provided, however, that licensee
shall be entitled to offer bulk rate discounts to multiple dwelling unit
developments, hotels, mobile home parks, and other similar developments or
subdivisions. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.503.   Subscriber antennae.
   No licensee shall remove or offer to remove any potential or existing
subscriber antenna, or provide any inducement for removal as a condition
respecting the provision of service.
   It is not necessarily the County’s intention to prohibit the erection or
controlled use of individual television antennae, and no one is or will be
required to receive cable communications service or connect with a cable
communications system.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any person from
constructing or operating any private noncommercial satellite receiving station
to the extent permitted by County, State and Federal law. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff.
July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.504.   Anti-competitive practices.
   (a)   No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to expressly or impliedly authorize the licensee to utilize its cable
communications system to provide any service in such a manner as to unlawfully
damage any business competitor or other third party or violate any statutes or
regulations of the United States or State of California. Nor shall any
licensee, by act or omission, engage in any anti-competitive practice in
violation of any statutes or regulations of the United States or State of
California. The provisions of this section shall be enforceable in courts of
competent jurisdiction against a licensee by any party who alleges injury as a
result of an alleged violation thereof.
   (b)   Each licensee shall hold harmless, indemnify and defend the County,
and its officers, agents and employees from and against any and all suits,
claims and liability for damages, penalties, fines, or other relief arising out
of, resulting from or in any manner relating to any act or omission by the
licensee, the allegation of which could constitute a violation of the
provisions of this section. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.505.   Maintenance and repair.
   During the term of each license, the licensee shall maintain its cable
television system in good condition and repair, render efficient service, make
repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the
shortest time possible. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.506.   Discrimination in service prohibited.
   No licensee shall deny service, deny access or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the basis of race,
color, religion, national origin or sex. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989,
as amended by § 1, Ord. 1129, eff. November 21, 1991)
Sec. 11-2.507.   Privacy.
   Each licensee, and its officers, agents, employees, contractors and
subcontractors, shall respect, refrain from invading, and take affirmative
action to prevent violation of the privacy of subscribers served by the cable
television system and others.
   (a)   Neither the licensee nor any other person, agency, or entity shall
tap, or arrange for the tapping or monitoring of any cable, line, signal input
device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose whatsoever, except
that the licensee may conduct tests of the functioning of the system where
necessary in order to ensure proper maintenance of the system and to collect
performance data for agencies regulating the quality of signals, and the
licensee may conduct system-wide or individually addressed “sweeps” for the
sole purpose of verifying system integrity (including individual security
system integrity), controlling return path transmissions, billing for pay
services, or collecting aggregate data on viewing patterns by channel.
“Tapping” shall mean observing a communications signal exchange where the
observer is neither of the communicating parties, whether the exchange is
observed by visual, aural or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever. The
provision of interactive services shall not be construed to be “tapping” or
“monitoring” under this section.
   (b)   The licensee shall not place in any private residence or in any
institution any equipment capable of two-way communications without the written
consent of the subscriber, and shall not utilize the two-way communications
capability of the system for subscriber surveillance of any kind without the
written consent of the subscriber specifying how the data collected will be
used and by whom. Tenants who occupy premises connected by the system shall be
deemed to be subscribers within the meaning of this subsection regardless of
who actually pays for the service. The written consents shall be, and shall
show on their face that they are, revocable by the subscriber at any time by
written communication mailed by the subscriber to the licensee. No penalty
shall be invoked for a subscriber’s failure to provide a written consent for
his or her revocation thereof, and all written consents shall so state on their
face. The licensee shall not make such written consent a condition precedent to
receipt by a subscriber of noninteractive service. The provisions of this
subsection shall not be deemed to require consent as a condition precedent to
system-wide or individually addressed “sweeps” for the sole purpose of
verifying system integrity, controlling return-path transmissions, billing for
pay services, or collecting aggregate data on viewing patterns by channel.
   (c)   No cable, line, wire, amplifier, converter, or other piece of
equipment associated with cable television system services shall be attached to
any residence or other property of a citizen (except within streets) without
first securing the written permission of the owner or tenant of the property.
If such permission is later revoked, whether by the original or subsequent
owner or tenant, the licensee shall remove forthwith all of the equipment and
promptly restore the property to its original condition. The licensee shall
perform all installations in a workmanlike manner and shall be responsible for
any damage to residences or other property caused by the installation.
   (d)   No licensee or officer, agent or employee thereof shall sell, or
otherwise make available, lists of the names and addresses of its subscribers,
or any list which identifies, by name or otherwise individual subscriber
viewing habits, to any person, agency, or entity for any purpose whatsoever;
except that the licensee shall, upon request provide lists of names and
addresses of its subscribers to authorized representatives of the Board of
Supervisors when the Board of Supervisors deems such information necessary for
performance of the regulatory functions of the County. Names and addresses of
subscribers within the possession of the County shall not be subject to public
inspection or review.
   (e)   A licensee may release the number of subscribers but only as a total
number and as a percentage of the potential subscribers within the license
area. When indicating the number of subscribers viewing a particular channel, a
licensee shall indicate only the total number of subscribers viewing them
during the relevant time and, the percentage of all subscribers which they
represent, but not the identity of any subscriber.
   (f)   No polls or other two-way responses of subscribers shall be conducted
whether for commercial purposes, in connection with community use, or otherwise
unless the program of which the poll is a part contains an explicit disclosure
of the nature, purpose, and prospective use of the results of the poll. The
licensee shall supervise and monitor all polls in which responses are received
through the cable television system, and shall adopt and enforce through
measures which ensure that personally identifiable information concerning a
subscriber, including his or her viewing habits and responses or responses to
the inquiry or inquiries, is not received by any third party, including the
party sponsoring the poll.
   (g)   A licensee shall not tabulate any test results, nor permit the use of
the system of such tabulation, which would reveal the commercial product
preferences or opinions of individual subscribers, members of their families or
their invitees, licensees or employees, without advance written authorization
by the subscriber. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.508.   Standards for system quality.
   After public hearings, notice of which is properly given, the Board of
Supervisors shall, from time to time, be authorized to enact technical
standards applicable to the operation, maintenance, repair, replacement or
functioning of a cable television system for the purpose of improving or
maintaining quality of video or audio signals, freedom from interference,
reliability of service delivery, or other similar types of functional
characteristics of the system. Each licensee shall take such actions as are
necessary to comply with such standards, and the failure to do so shall
constitute a material violation and breach of the license. (§ 1, Ord. 1095,
eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.509.   Affirmative action.
   No licensee shall discriminate in employment or selection of contractors or
subcontractors on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin or sex
(including marital status). Each licensee shall strictly comply with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Regulations promulgated by the FCC, and all applicable
Federal and State statutes and regulations and ordinances of the County. Each
licensee shall establish as objectives the employment of a work force based
upon merit and achievement of a racial balance within its work force consistent
with that which pertains within the residential population of the County. (§ 1,
Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Article 6.
License Fees
Sec. 11-2.601.   License fees.
   For the use of the streets and for the purposes of providing revenue with
which to defray the cost of regulation arising out of the issuance of licenses
under this chapter and promoting, assisting and financing public, educational,
and governmental access programming, each licensee shall pay license fees in
the amount prescribed by Section
11-2.602, below. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.602.   Amount and payment of license fees.
   During the term of each license, each licensee shall pay to the Board of
Supervisors an amount equal to five (5%) percent per year of the licensee’s
annual gross revenue.
   Said fees shall be paid quarterly not later than August 1, November 1,
February 1, and May 1 for the preceding three month period ending, respective,
June 30, September 30, December 31, and March 31. Not later than the date of
each payment, each licensee shall file with the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors a written statement signed under penalty of perjury by an officer
of the licensee which identifies in detail the sources and amounts of gross
revenues received by a licensee during the quarter for which payment is made.
   No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount
paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be
construed as a release of any claim which the County may have for further or
additional sums payable under the provisions of this section. (§ 1, Ord. 1095,
eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.603.   Interest on delinquent license fees.
   Any license fees which remain unpaid after the dates specified in Section
11-2.602 above shall be delinquent and shall thereafter accrue interest at the
maximum legal rate until paid. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.604.   Accounting standards.
   Not less than annually, the licensee shall provide the Board of Supervisors
with an unqualified certification of an independent certified public accountant
certifying the accuracy of the quarterly license fee payments paid within the
preceding twelve (12) months pursuant to Section
11-2.602 above. Said certification shall be prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting standards as established by the Financial
Accounting Standards Board (FASB). (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.605.   Gross accounting calculations.
   (a)   For purposes of the gross revenue calculations required by Section
11-2.602, the phrase “financial interest” as used in Section
11-2.103 shall include but not be limited to:
   (1)   Any contract in which the licensee or any named owner thereof is to
receive a percentage of the gross revenues and/or a percentage of the net
income of the other party to the transaction by reason of the activities
encompassed by said contract;
   (2)   Any debt relationship in which the licensee or any named owner thereof
as debtor borrows funds at a rate more advantageous than that generally
available to similarly situated entities of similar credit worthiness;
   (3)   Any debt relationship in which the licensee or any named owner thereof
as debtor borrows funds at a rate more advantageous than that generally
available to similarly situated entities of similar credit worthiness;
   (4)   Any option or warrant to purchase the stock or other equity interest
in an entity or entity related to an entity which generates revenues arising
from or attributable to the operation of the system;
   (5)   Any debt relationship which has conversion privileges to a form of
equity of the nature described in the preceding subdivision.
   (b)   For purposes of the gross revenue calculation required by Section
11-2.602, the phrase “arising from or attributable to operation of the cable
television system” as used in Section
11-2.103 shall include but not be limited to:
   (1)   Any activity, product or service which generates revenue of any type
whatsoever and which is offered to the subscribers of the system by means of
the system or any related service;
   (2)   Any activity, product or service which is revenue producing and is
offered to the subscribers of the system by any medium other than the system
including but not limited to direct mail and home delivery if the system’s
subscriber list or any portion thereof is utilized for purposes of
solicitation;
   (3)   Any activity, product or service in the production or provision of
which any of the assets of the system including but not limited to cable,
production facilities, and administrative facilities, are included, unless
reasonable consideration is paid to the system for such utilization;
   (4)   Any television programming or other services offered to the citizens
of Yolo County within the term of the license by any means of delivery
whatsoever where such programming or services are or could be offered by means
of the system. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.606.   Auditing and financial records.
   The Auditor of the County may, from time to time during the term of a
license prescribe standards governing the nature, extent and type of accounting
system and accounting procedures utilized by a licensee and require changes in
accounting standards or procedures utilized by a licensee, for the purpose of
promoting the efficient administration of the license fee requirements of this
chapter. Any such standards shall be in writing, shall be filed with the Clerk
of the Board of Supervisors, and shall be mailed to the licensee to whom
directed. A licensee shall promptly comply with all such standards.
   During the term of each license, the County may, not more frequently than
once each year, conduct an audit of the books, records and accounts of the
licensee fee for the purpose of determining whether the licensee has paid
license fees in the amounts prescribed by Section
11-2.602. The audit may be conducted by the Auditor of the County or by an
independent certified public accounting firm retained by the County, and shall
be conducted at the sole expense of the County. The party conducting the audit
shall prepare a written report containing its findings, and the report shall be
filed with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors, and mailed to the County and
licensee.
   Each licensee shall make available for inspection by authorized
representatives of the County, its books, accounts, and all other financial
records at reasonable times and upon reasonable advance notice for the purpose
of permitting exercise of the authorities conferred by this section. (§ 1, Ord.
1095, eff. July 27, 1989, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1129, eff. November 21, 1991)
Article 7.
Bonds and Insurance
Sec.11-2.701.   Performance bond.
   Each licensee shall file with it application for a license, and at all times
thereafter until the filing of a final notice of completion pursuant to Section
11-2.404(a)   of this chapter, maintain in full force and effect an acceptable
corporate surety bond issued by a surety licensed therefor by the State of
California in an amount equal to the greater of (a)the licensee’s estimate of
the total cost of the sum of (i)the product of the number of miles of aerial
plant (to the nearest one-tenth (1/10) of a mile) in the license area and
Eighteen Thousand and no/100ths ($18,000.00) Dollars and (ii)the product of the
number of miles of underground plant (to the nearest one-tenth (1/10) of a
mile) in the license area and Thirty-Two Thousand and no/100ths ($32,000.00)
Dollars effective for the entire term of the license, and conditioned that in
the event the licensee shall fail to comply with any one or more of the
provisions of the license documents, whether or not the license is terminated,
then there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and
surety of such bond, any damages suffered by the County as a result thereof,
including but not limited to, the full amount of any liquidated damages,
delinquent license fees, compensation and costs of repairing or completing the
cable television system, and compensation, and cost of removal or abandonment
of property and repair of streets and other public or private impoundments, up
to the full amount of the bond; said condition to be a continuing obligation
for the duration of the license and thereafter until the licensee has satisfied
all of its obligations which may have arisen from the acceptance of the license
or from its exercise of any privilege thereunder.
   Upon the issuance of a final order of completion pursuant to Section
11-2.404(a) of this chapter, the amount of the aforesaid corporate surety bond
shall be reduced to an amount equal to Fifty and no/100ths ($50.00) Dollars for
each dwelling unit located within the license area upon the date of the notice
of final completion and maintained at such an amount at all times thereafter
during the operation of the cable television system.
   Neither the provisions of this section, any bond accepted pursuant thereto,
nor any damages recovered thereunder shall be construed to excuse faithful
performance by the licensee or to limit the liability of the licensee under the
license or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. The
bond shall contain a provision which prohibits cancellation by the surety
during the term of the license, whether for failure to pay a premium or
otherwise, without thirty (30) calendar days advance written notice mailed by
the surety to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors. The form of the bond and
surety shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors. (§ 1, Ord.
1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.702.   Indemnification by licensee.
   (a)   Each licensee shall, at its sole expense, fully indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the County, and in their capacity as such, the officers, agents
and employees thereof, from and against any and all claims, suits, actions,
liability and judgments for damages or otherwise:
   (1)   For actual or alleged injury to persons or property, including loss of
use of property due to an occurrence, whether or not such property is
physically damaged or destroyed, in any way arising out of or through or
alleged to arise out of or through the acts or omissions of the licensee or its
officers, agents, employees or contractors or to which the licensee’s or its
officers, agents, employees or contractors acts or omissions in any way
contribute;
   (2)   Arising out of or alleged to arise out of any claim for damages for
invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or
corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trade mark,
trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm
or corporation; and
   (3)   Arising out of or alleged to arise out of licensee’s failure to comply
with the provisions of any statute, regulation or ordinance of the United
States, State of California or any local agency applicable to the Licensee in
its business.
   (b)   The indemnification and hold harmless provisions of this Section shall
include those activities proscribed by Section
11-2.406.
   (c)   Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the parties indemnified and
held harmless herein from participating in the defense of any litigation by
their own counsel at the licensee’s sole expense. Such participation shall not
under any circumstances relieve the licensee from its duty of defense against
liability or of paying any judgment entered against such party. (§ 1, Ord.
1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.703.   Licensee insurance.
   As a part of the indemnification provided by Section
11-2.702, but without limiting the foregoing, each licensee shall file with the
application, and at all times thereafter maintained in full force and effect at
its sole expense, an acceptable policy or policies of liability insurance,
including comprehensive general liability insurance, products/completed
operations liability, personal injury liability, owners and contractors
protective liability, broad form property damage, and contractual liability,
automobile liability (owned; nonowned and hired automobiles), workers
compensation and employer liability. The policy or policies shall name as
primary insured the County and their capacity as such, their officers, agents
and employees. The licensee and said County and officers, agents, and employees
shall be named as co-insured and the policy or policies shall contain cross-
liability endorsements. The policy or policies of insurance shall be in the
minimum single limit amount of Five Million and no/100ths ($5,000,000.00)
Dollars per occurrence. The insurance policy or policies shall contain
contractual liability insurance naming the licensee, and shall insure against
the types of liabilities covered by the indemnification and hold harmless
provisions of Section
11-2.702.
   The insurer or insurers shall be authorized to write the required insurance,
approved by the Insurance Commissioners of the State of California, and subject
to the reasonable approval of the Board of Supervisors. The form and substance
of the policy or policies of insurance shall also be subject to approval by the
Board of Supervisors.
   The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by the licensee in
full force and effect during the entire term of the license. Each policy of
insurance shall contain a statement on its face that the insurer will not
cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of
premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of the licensee or for other
reasons, except after thirty (30) calendar days advance written notice mailed
by the insurer to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors and that such notice
shall be transmitted, postage prepaid, with return receipt requested, and
addressed to the Clerk at 625 Court Street, Woodland, California. 95695. (§ 1,
Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.704.   Waiver of subrogation.
   Each licensee shall cause each insurance policy obtained by it to provide
that the insurance company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation
against the County and in their capacities as such the officers, agents, and
employees thereof in connection with any damage covered by any policy, whether
for nonpayment of premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of the
licensee or for other reasons, except after thirty (30) calendar days advance
written notice mailed by the insurer to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
and that such notice shall be transmitted postage prepaid, with return receipt
requested, and addressed to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors at 625 Court
Street, Woodland, California, 95695. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Article 8.
Transfer and Termination
Sec. 11-2.801.   Transfers.
   No part or element of a cable television system or any other real or
personal property which is a part of said cable television system shall be
sold, transferred, assigned, mortgaged, pledged, leased, sublet or otherwise
encumbered for any purpose whatsoever, nor shall title thereto, either legal or
equitable, or any right or interest therein pass to or vest in any party
without the prior written consent of the County.
   A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not,
either in whole or in part, be sold, transferred, assigned, mortgaged, pledged,
leased, sublet or otherwise encumbered for any purpose whatsoever; nor shall
title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest therein,
pass to or vest in any party without the prior written consent of the County.
   Any such sale, transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, lease, sublease or
other encumbrance of whatever kind or nature made in violation of the
provisions of this section shall be void. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989,
as amended by § 1, Ord. 1162, eff. July 1, 1993)
Sec. 11-2.802.   Crimes.
   Violation of the provisions of Section
11-2.407 shall constitute a misdemeanor. With the foregoing exception,
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall not constitute a misdemeanor,
infraction or other crime. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.803.   Termination of license.
   The following material breaches of the obligations of a licensee under the
license shall constitute grounds for termination of license by the County:
   (a)   Cumulative unexcused delay in excess of thirty (30) calendar days in
completion of the cable television system in accordance with the construction
schedule submitted pursuant to Section
11-2.202;
   (b)   Any violation of Section
11-2.701;
   (c)   The failure to make any disclosure of fact within the application for
the license which is required by this chapter, or the misrepresentation of such
a fact in the application;
   (d)   The willful failure to make any payments required by Section
11-2.602; or
   (e)   Any other act or omission by the licensee which materially violates
the terms, conditions or requirements of this chapter or any order, directive,
rule or regulation issued thereunder and which is not corrected or remedied
within thirty (30) calendar days following mailing to the licensee of written
notice of the violation. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.804.   Commencement of termination proceedings.
   The Board of Supervisors of the County shall not determine that the license
shall be terminated upon grounds identified by Section
11-2.803, above, until a hearing has been conducted upon the matter. Written
notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the
licensee, and the licensee’s surety on the performance bond filed pursuant to
Section
11-2.601, not later than thirty (30) calendar days in advance of the date of
commencement of the hearing. The notice shall state the reasons for the
hearing, describe the basis for termination, and identify the terms, conditions
or requirements with respect to which the breach has occurred.
   The hearing may be conducted either by the Board of Supervisors or, at the
sole discretion of the Board, by a hearing officer appointed by the Board to
conduct the hearing. Any such hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to
practice under the laws of the State of California.
   The cost of providing quarters for the hearing, the compensation for the
hearing officer, if any, and the per diem cost of any reporter retained to
record the proceedings shall be borne by the County. The costs incurred by the
parties for attorneys fees, expert witness fees and other expenses shall be
borne solely by the party incurring the costs. (§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27,
1989)
Sec. 11-2.805.   Conduct of hearing.
   (a)   All witnesses testifying at the hearing concerning termination shall
be sworn. Witnesses shall be subject to direct and cross-examination. However,
formal rules of evidence applicable to the trial of civil or criminal
proceedings in the trial courts of this State shall not be applicable to the
hearing. The provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, commencing at
Section 11500 of the Government Code or any successor legislative enactment,
shall not be applicable to any such hearing. The hearing may be continued from
time to time.
   (b)   If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, the officer shall,
upon conclusion of the hearing, prepare a recommended decision which includes
findings of fact and conclusions. The recommended decision shall be filed with
the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors and mailed to the parties not later than
thirty (30) calendar days after conclusion of the hearing. Upon receipt of such
a recommended decision, the Board of Supervisors may, without a hearing except
as otherwise required below, either:
   (1)   Adopt the recommended decision, including findings of fact and
conclusions submitted by the hearing officer;
   (2)   Adopt the findings of fact and conclusions contained in the
recommended decision, modify the decision, and adopt the recommended decision
as so revised;
   (3)   Based upon the record of the hearing, modify the findings of fact,
conclusions or decisions, and adopt the recommended decision as so revised; or
   (4)   Reject the recommended decision and conduct a new hearing.
   (c)   If the hearing is conducted by the Board of Supervisors, upon
conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall adopt a decision
which includes findings of fact and conclusions.
   (d)   If the decision by the Board of Supervisors is that there are grounds
for termination of the license and that the license shall be terminated, the
Board shall adopt a resolution which terminates the license and includes its
decision. The effective date of termination shall be such date as is prescribed
by the Board of Supervisors, within its sole discretion, in the resolution. (§
1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.806.   Alternative remedies.
   No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to bar the right of the County
to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provision of the
license documents or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated
thereunder. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in said chapter
nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of
the County to recover monetary damages (except where liquidated damages are
otherwise prescribed) for such violations by the licensee, or judicial
enforcement of the licensee’s obligations by means of specific performance,
injunctive relief or mandate, or any other judicial remedy at law or in equity.
(§ 1, Ord. 1095, eff. July 27, 1989)
Sec. 11-2.807.   Nonenforcement.
   A licensee shall not be relieved of any obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of the license documents or any rules, regulation, requirement or
directive promulgated thereunder by reason of any failure of the County or its
officers, agents, or employees to enforce prompt compliance. (§ 1, Ord. 1095,
eff. July 27, 1989)
Title 12
BUSINESS LICENSES
Chapters:
1.   Business Licenses in General
2.   Hazardous Materials
3.   Itinerant Business License
4.   Cannabis Licensing
Chapter 1
BUSINESS LICENSES IN GENERAL
Sections:
Article 1. Title, Purpose, and Authority
   
12-1.101   Title.
   
12-1.102   Purpose.
   
12-1.103   Authority.
   
12-1.104   Other licenses.
Article 2. Administration
   
12-1.201   Business Licensing Officer.
   
12-1.202   Investigations.
   
12-1.203   Business License Appeals Board.
Article 3. Definitions
   
12-1.301   Scope.
   
12-1.302   Building Codes.
   
12-1.303   Building Inspector.
   
12-1.304   Business.
   
12-1.305   Business Licensing Officer.
   
12-1.306   Fire Marshal.
   
12-1.307   Fixed place of business.
   
12-1.308   Health Officer.
Article 4. Prohibitions
   
12-1.401   Occupation without license.
   
12-1.402   Occupation in violation of license.
   
12-1.403   Occupation in violation of Code provisions.
   
12-1.404   Occupation in violation of standards.
   
12-1.405   Occupation after revocation or suspension.
   
12-1.406   Display of business licenses.
   
12-1.407   False statements. (Repealed)
   
12-1.408   Exemptions: Agricultural products sold by producers.
   
12-1.409   Other exemptions.
   
12-1.410   Exemptions: Existing businesses after application.
Article 5. Licenses
   
12-1.501   Applications.
   
12-1.502   Licenses required.
   
12-1.503   Different locations.
   
12-1.504   Business confined to locations specified.
   
12-1.505   Fictitious names.
   
12-1.506   Illegal occupations.
   
12-1.507   Undetected violations.
   
12-1.508   Transfers.
   
12-1.509   Partnerships.
   
12-1.510   Applications: Investigations: Issuance: Denial.
   
12-1.511   Form.
   
12-1.512   Term.
   
12-1.513   Applications: Fees.
   
12-1.514   Applications: Appeals.
   
12-1.515   Applications: Orders: Finality.
   
12-1.516   Applications: Orders: Appeals: Procedures.
   
12-1.517   Applications: Orders: Appeals: Hearings: Determinations.
   
12-1.518   Suspension or revocation.
   
12-1.519   Suspension or revocation: Petitions.
   
12-1.520   Suspension or revocation: Hearings: Determinations.
   
12-1.521   Judicial reviews.
   
12-1.522   Orders for suspension pending hearings.
   
12-1.523   Orders granting or denying applications: Effective date.
Article 6. Standards
   
12-1.601   Scope.
   
12-1.602   Standards.
   
12-1.603   Safe buildings.
   
12-1.604   Building codes.
   
12-1.605   Zoning regulations.
   
12-1.606   Fire regulations.
Article 7. Violations: Penalties
   
12-1.701   Violations: Penalties.
Article 1.
Title, Purpose, and Authority
Sec. 12-1.101.   Title.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
“Business License Law of the County of Yolo”. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6,
1983)
Sec. 12-1.102.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the people of the County by regulating businesses for the
purposes of:
   (a)   Assuring compliance with the minimum standards for safe buildings;
   (b)   Assuring compliance with the Building Code provisions concerning the
alteration and modification of premises;
   (c)   Assuring compliance with the zoning regulations;
   (d)   Encouraging compliance with the fire regulations;
   (e)   Monitoring the use and storage of hazardous materials; and
   (f)   Assuring compliance with other regulations of the County. Such
purposes shall be accomplished through this chapter by licensing the occupancy
of real property for business purposes. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.103.   Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by Section 7 of
Article 12 of the Constitution of the State and Chapter 2 of Part 1 of Division
7 of the Business and Professions Code of the State (commencing with Section
16100). (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.104.   Other licenses.
   Certain types of persons required to obtain a business license pursuant to
this chapter are also required to obtain other permits or licenses under other
provisions of this Code. The issuance of a business license pursuant to this
chapter shall not be deemed to excuse the requirement for any other permit or
license. The issuance of any other license or permit shall not excuse the
requirement for a business license. The provisions of this chapter are declared
to be independently applicable to each business to which the provisions of this
chapter apply. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Article 2.
Administration
Sec. 12-1.201.   Business Licensing Officer.
   The Business Licensing Officer shall:
   (a)   Receive applications and fees;
   (b)   Refer applications for investigation;
   (c)   Receive investigation reports;
   (d)   Grant or deny licenses pursuant to this title;
   (e)   Give notice of renewals; and
   (f)   Undertake proceedings for the suspension or revocation of licenses
issued pursuant to this title. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.202.   Investigations.
   The following persons shall investigate and report to the Business Licensing
Officer on applications referred to them:
   (a)   The Building Official;
   (b)   The Health Officer;
   (c)   The Fire Marshal;
   (d)   The Planning Emergency Services Coordinator;
   (e)   The Sheriff-Coroner; and
   (f)   In the case of veterans or severely handicapped persons, the Emergency
Services Coordinator of Social Services. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
   (g)   The Code Enforcement Officer. (§ 2, Ord. 1356, eff. Jan. 11, 2007)
Sec. 12-1.203.   Business License Appeals Board.
   The Business License Appeals Board shall:
   (a)   Hear and determine appeals from the granting or denial of a license
pursuant to this title; and
   (b)   Hear and determine petitions for the suspension or revocation of a
license issued pursuant to this title. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.204.   Business License Appeals Board: Designation.
   The Yolo County Planning Commission shall be designated as the Business
License Appeals Board and shall perform all duties ascribed thereto as
described in this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 1275, eff. December 6, 2001)
Article 3.
Definitions
Sec. 12-1.301.   Scope.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this title are defined as set forth
in this article. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.302.   Building Codes.
   “Building Codes” shall mean the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Mechanical
Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, National Electrical Code, and all amendments
thereto, in the form adopted by Title 7 of this Code. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff.
October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.303.   Building Inspector.
   “Building Inspector” shall mean the Chief Deputy, Building and Site
Inspection of the County, or his authorized representative. (§ 2, Ord. 960,
eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.304.   Business.
   (a)   “Business” shall mean any trade, manufacture, profession, occupation,
or service of all and every kind, whether or not carried on for profit or for
charitable, philanthropic, or other purposes, including the arrangement of
business transactions, holding of sales or training meetings and administrative
conferences, the receipt of client or customer payments, and the keeping of
records and accounts pertaining to a business.
   (b)   A business shall include the following:
   (1)   Manufacturing operations;
   (2)   Warehouse, corporation yard, or other facilities for the storage of
equipment, merchandise, chemicals, or other property maintained or stored for
commercial purposes;
   (3)   Wholesaling businesses;
   (4)   Stores for the sale of merchandise at retail;
   (5)   Offices for the delivery of legal, medical, engineering, accounting,
or other professional services;
   (6)   Insurance, real estate, or other businesses or administrative offices;
   (7)   Banks, savings and loan, or other financial establishments;
   (8)   Stores, shops, offices, service stations, or other outlets for the
sale of products, performance of repair services (such as the repair of shoes,
motor vehicles, or appliances), or provision of personal services (such as
equipment rental, barber and beauty shops, cleaners, swimming pool maintenance,
or taxicabs);
   (9)   Motion picture or live entertainment theaters, bowling alleys, skating
rinks, golf courses, race tracks, stadiums, auditoriums, museums, swim and
racket clubs, country clubs, pool halls, arcades, or other places of public
assembly or gathering;
   (10)   Hotels, motels, or other lodgings for intermittent or other overnight
use or other uses in which living units are rented or leased solely on a term
of under thirty (30) days;
   (11)   Restaurants, bars, or other establishments for the sale of food or
beverages;
   (12)   Hospitals, convalescent homes, laboratories, schools or colleges, or
other institutions;
   (13)   Traveling merchants, hawkers, peddlers, or itinerant vendors of any
minor article of trade, or vendor of goods, wares, or merchandise, either by
sample or otherwise, to persons not engaged in carrying on such lines of
business;
   (14)   Use for a business or other commercial purpose of a single-family or
other residence (such as day and boarding child, handicapped, and other care
homes required to be licensed under State laws and home occupations); and
   (15)   Other establishments or uses for business or commercial purposes.
   (c)   A business shall not include the following:
   (1)   Apartments, rooming houses, duplexes, or other residential facilities
in which living units are rented or leased solely for a term of thirty (30)
days or longer;
   (2)   Churches to the extent of use for worship, religious education, or
social affairs of the religious group; however, this exception does not extend
to other activities not undertaken primarily for members of the religious
group, including, but not limited to, day schools and social services programs;
   (3)   Non-profit organizations that are exempted from taxes by Chapter 4
(commencing with Section 23701) of Part 11 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code or Subchapter F (commencing with Section 01) of Chapter 1 of
Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or the success of either;
   (4)   Offices, stores, or other facilities maintained without paid employees
by a nonprofit public benefit corporation; and
   (5)   Business does not include furnishing vending machines located on the
premises of another person who holds a valid business license. (§ 2, Ord. 960,
eff. October 6, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1275, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 12-1.305.   Business Licensing Officer.
   “Business Licensing Officer” shall mean the Director of Planning and Public
Works Department or his designee. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983, as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1275, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 12-1.306.   Fire Marshal.
   “Fire Marshal” shall mean the Fire Marshal or, in his absence, the Fire
Chief, or their designee. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983, as amended by §
2, Ord. 1275, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 12-1.307.   Fixed place of business.
   “Fixed place of business” shall mean a particular location where a business
is regularly conducted on four (4) or more days during any consecutive thirty
(30) day period by the owner, or agents or employees of the owner, and shall
include a business carried on in a residence. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6,
1983)
Sec. 12-1.308.   Health Officer.
   “Health Officer” shall mean the Health Officer of the County. (§ 2, Ord.
960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Article 4.
Prohibitions
Sec. 12-1.401.   Occupation without licenses.
   No person shall occupy real property for business purposes without a
business license issued pursuant to this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October
6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.402.   Occupation in violation of licenses.
   No person shall occupy real property in violation of the terms or conditions
of a business license issued pursuant to this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff.
October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.403.   Occupation in violation of Code provisions.
   No person shall occupy real property in violation of the provisions of this
Code. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.404.   Occupation in violation of standards.
   No person shall occupy real property for business purposes in violation of
the standards set forth in this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.405.   Occupation after revocation or suspension.
   No person shall occupy real property for business purposes after the
revocation or suspension of a license issued pursuant to this chapter therefor.
(§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.406.   Display of business licenses.
   No person shall occupy real property for business purposes without
displaying a valid business license in prominent public view. (§ 2, Ord. 960,
eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.407.   False statements.
   Repealed*. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983, * § 2, Ord. 1275, eff.
December 6, 2001)
Sec. 12-1.408.   Exemptions: Agricultural products sold by producers.
   No license shall be required for any business:
   (a)   Undertaken by an agricultural producer in the production of products
of cultivation of the soil and its fruits and raising and harvesting crops or
products for the rearing, feeding, and management of livestock; or
   (b)   Extending service to an agricultural producer which service is
normally accomplished by the producer in the production of agricultural
products. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1022,
eff. November 21, 1985)
Sec. 12-1.409.   Other Exemptions.
   No license shall be required for any business otherwise exempted under
Section 16100 et seq. of the California Business and Professional Code. (§ 2,
Ord. 1275, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 12-1.410.   Exemptions: Existing businesses after application.
   (a)   Any person otherwise required by this chapter to obtain a business
license and who has on the applicable operative date filed an application
therefor with the Business Licensing Officer accompanied by the appropriate
fee, any other person filing an initial application accompanied by the
appropriate fee after fourteen (14) business days following filing, and any
person filing a renewal application accompanied by the appropriate fee shall be
exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter until an order of the
Business Licensing Officer granting or denying the license has become final.
   (b)   The exemptions provided by this section shall terminate on each annual
anniversary of the filing of the application, unless a renewal application
accompanied by the appropriate filing fee is filed with the Business Licensing
Officer.
   (c)   The exemptions provided by this section shall terminate upon the
issuance of an order for suspension pending a hearing pursuant to Section
12-1.522 of Article 5 of this chapter.
   (d)   The exemptions granted by this section shall not exempt any person
from regulations imposed by law, including those imposed by this Code or this
title. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1275, eff.
December 6, 2001)
Article 5.
Licenses
Sec. 12-1.501.   Applications.
   Any person required to apply for and obtain a Permit under the provisions of
this Chapter shall prepare and submit to the Business Licensing Officer an
application for such Permit on forms provided for such purpose by the County.
In addition to any other information required by the County, the application
shall indicate whether the applicant sells or intends to sell any Tobacco
Product or Tobacco Paraphernalia as those terms are defined in Chapter 15 of
Title 6 of this Code. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983, amended by § 3,
Ord. 1350, eff. June 15, 2006)
Sec. 12-1.502.   Licenses required.
   Every person subject to the licensing provisions of this chapter, at the
time of the effective date of said provisions, shall make an application
therefor on or before the effective date of the ordinance enacting the
licensing provisions. All other persons required by this chapter to have a
license shall make an application before the commencement of any activity for
which a license is required. The license shall authorize the person obtaining
it to conduct the license activities for the period named in the license. (§ 2,
Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.503.   Different locations.
   If the same type of business is carried on at more than one location, a
separate license shall be required for each location. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff.
October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.504.   Businesses confined to locations specified.
   When a license specifies the location of the business license, the licensee
may conduct such business only at the location specified in the license. (§ 2,
Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.505.   Fictitious names.
   A license may be issued pursuant to this title to a corporation duly
authorized to transact business in the State, or to a person operating under a
fictitious name, who has complied with the provisions of Chapter 5 of Part 3 of
Division 7 of the Business and Professions Code of the State (commencing with
Section 17900) or any statute superseding or taking the place of such
provisions; otherwise, all such licenses shall be issued in the true name of
the person applying therefor. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no
business so licensed may operate under any false or fictitious name. (§ 2, Ord.
960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.506.   Illegal occupations.
   Licenses granted pursuant to this chapter shall not permit any occupation or
activity of any kind which is prohibited by this title or any other law or by
any statute, rule, order, decision, or regulation. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October
6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.507.   Undetected violations.
   Under certain circumstances, a new or renewal license may be issued in the
absence of affirmation or inspection by the various officers who identify
deficiencies or violations of laws to be enforced. Such circumstances are the
result of the time periods set to promote the expeditious processing of
applications and reduce delays to waiting applicants. For such reasons, a
license may be issued notwithstanding the existence of violations of the laws
sought to be enforced. Neither the issuance nor the receipt of a license shall
constitute evidence of compliance with the laws sought to be enforced or a
representation or assurance to the recipient upon which reliance is authorized
or intended by the County that the enterprise for which the license is issued
or the property or permits upon or in which the enterprise is located complies
with such laws. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.508.   Transfers.
   Unless otherwise specifically allowed by this title, no license issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred from one person to another
person, or from one location to another location, or from one type of business
to another. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.509.   Partnerships.
   If a license is issued to a partnership, and the partnership is changed by
the addition of new partners, the license may be transferred to the new
partnership if the new partnership makes an application for such transfer in
the same manner as for a new license and pays to the Business Licensing Officer
a transfer fee in the amount established by the Board of Supervisors by
resolution. Any new partner shall be fingerprinted if such is required of the
original applicant. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.510.   Applications: Investigations: Issuance: Denial.
   (a)   The Business Licensing Officer shall refer the application to the Code
Enforcement Officer, Building Official, the Fire Marshal, the Health Officer,
the Planning Director, and the Sheriff-Coroner, who shall cause such
investigations as they deem appropriate to be made of the facts stated in the
application and of the activity for which the application is made, and who
shall make a report thereon to the Business Licensing Officer. (§ 2, Ord. 1356,
eff. January 11, 2007)
   Business involving the application of pesticides and/or herbicides shall be
referred to the Agricultural Commissioner, who shall make a report to the
Business Licensing Officer regarding the application. Businesses involving the
sale of firearms shall comply with the Federal Firearms Code.
   (b)   If, based upon the application, the investigation, reports, or
supplements thereto, or any further investigation the Business Licensing
Officer may cause to be made, he finds that the applicant is in compliance with
the standards specified by this chapter, the Business Licensing Officer shall
order the issuance of the license.
   (c)   If he finds that compliance with such standards can be obtained by the
applicant, the Business Licensing Officer may issue a license subject to
reasonable conditions.
   (d)   If he finds that the applicant cannot comply with the standards
specified by this chapter, the Business Licensing Officer shall deny the
license. Applications for veterans or severely physically handicapped
exemptions shall be referred to the Emergency Services Coordinator of Social
Services who shall make an investigation and determination and report thereon.
   (e)   If the Business Licensing Officer fails to grant or deny an
application within ten (10) calendar days after filing, the application shall
be deemed granted; provided, however, this provision shall not apply to
applications required solely by the effective date of the ordinance enacting
the licensing provisions. If an application requires further review beyond the
10 calendar days it must be with the mutual consent of both the applicant and
County. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1275,
eff. December 6, 2001, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1356, eff. January 11, 2007)
Sec. 12-1.511.   Form.
   All applications for licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in
the form prescribed by the Business Licensing Officer. Such form shall require
the applicant to state whether or not hazardous materials in each of the
categories as defined in Section 12-2.201 of Article 2 of Chapter 2 of this
title are located on any premises to be occupied for business purposes and
whether or not a disclosure form is required by Chapter 2 of this title for
each of the categories. Such form shall also require the applicant to provide
information necessary to determine whether any permits are required from the
Yolo-Solano Air Quality Management District, or successor in interest. All
applications shall be executed under penalty of perjury.
   If employees (part or full-time) are listed on the business license,
business owners are required to provide proof of Workers’ Compensation
Insurance as provided for in Section 3700 of the Labor Code or evidence that
Workers’ Compensation Insurance is not required by law. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff.
October 6, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1275, eff. December 6, 2001, as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1356, eff. January 11, 2007)
Sec. 12-1.512.   Term.
   The term of a business license shall be one year. Every business license
issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate on January 31st of each year.
(§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 127, as amended
by § 2, Ord. 1275, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 12-1.513.   Applications: Fees.
   Each application and each appeal shall be accompanied by the fees prescribed
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. Such fees shall in no event exceed
the actual cost to the County to conduct the services required to satisfy the
requirements of this chapter. The submission of an application or an appeal
shall not be deemed to be complete until such fees are paid to the Business
Licensing Officer. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.514.   Applications: Appeals.
   Any order of the Business Licensing Officer issuing or denying a license may
be appealed by the applicant to the Business License Appeals Board. (§ 2, Ord.
960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.515.   Applications: Orders: Finality.
   The Business Licensing Officer shall make his order granting, granting with
conditions, or denying the application in writing and shall mail a copy thereof
to the applicant. The order shall become final on the fifteenth (15th) day
following such mailing, unless the applicant shall file an appeal. (§ 2, Ord.
960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.516.   Applications: Orders: Appeals: Procedures.
   Appeals from orders of the Business Licensing Officer shall be made in
writing, and shall specify and set forth the grounds for the appeal, and shall
be filed by the appellant with the Business Licensing Officer. The Business
Licensing Officer shall cause the matter to be set for a hearing before the
Business License Appeals Board within thirty (30) days after filing and shall
give the appellant no less than fifteen (15) days’ written notice of such date
of hearing. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.517.   Applications: Orders: Appeals: Hearings: Determinations.
   At the hearing upon an initial application, the appellant shall bear the
burden of proof. At the hearing upon a renewal application, the Business
Licensing Officer shall bear the burden of proof. Upon hearing the appeal, the
Business License Appeals Board shall grant the business license or grant the
business license upon conditions if it is found that the establishment,
business, or activity applied for meets the standards prescribed by this title.
In the event such establishment, business, or activity fails to meet the
standards prescribed by this chapter, the Business License Appeals Board shall
deny the application. The Business License Appeals Board for good cause shown
may impose other conditions or requirements for such business licenses. The
decision shall be made within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the
hearing. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.518.   Suspension or revocation.
   Any business license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or
revoked by the Business License Appeals Board upon a petition by the Business
Licensing Officer if the Business License Appeals Board finds that:
   (a)   A court of competent jurisdiction has determined that the
establishment, business, or activity has caused or become a public nuisance; or
   (b)   The licensee has violated a condition of the business license; or
   (c)   Due to a change in circumstances and conditions, the continuance of
the establishment, business, or activity is hazardous to the public health,
welfare, or safety; or
   (d)   The applicant for the permit made a material misrepresentation of
facts in the application or supporting statements; or
   (e)   The establishment, business, or activity is maintained in violation of
the standards prescribed by this title. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.519.   Suspension or revocation: Petitions.
   A petition to suspend or revoke a business license shall be filed with the
Business License Appeals Board by the Business Licensing Officer accompanied by
a statement of the grounds or reasons for such action. At the time of filing,
the Business Licensing Officer shall set the matter for a public hearing before
the Business License Appeals Board and shall serve the licensee with a notice
of the hearing and a copy of such petition by certified mail no less than
fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.520.   Suspension or revocation: Hearings: Determinations.
   At the hearing, the burden of proof shall lie with the Business Licensing
Officer. Upon hearing the petition of the Business Licensing Officer and the
response of the licensee at such public hearing, the Business License Appeals
Board may suspend or revoke the permit if it finds that any of the grounds set
forth in Section
12-1.518 of this article exist or have occurred. The Business License Appeals
Board shall deny the petition for a suspension or revocation if it finds that
none of such grounds for suspension or revocation exist or have occurred. (§ 2,
Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.521.   Judicial reviews.
   The provisions of Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State
shall apply to all determinations of the Business License Appeals Board, and
any petition for a writ of mandate pursuant to Section 1094.5 of said Code of
Civil Procedure shall be filed not later than the ninetieth (90th) day
following the date on which the determination becomes final. A determination of
the Business License Appeals Board shall become final upon the date a copy
thereof is mailed to the appellant by certified mail. Such a determination
shall provide notice that the time limit within which a judicial review shall
be sought is governed by Section 1094.6 of said Code of Civil Procedure. (§ 2,
Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.522.   Orders for suspension pending hearings.
   If the Business License Appeals Board finds, upon a verified application
setting forth the facts relied upon, that the suspension pending the effective
date of a final order of the Business License Appeals Board is required by an
immediate hazard to the public health, safety, or general welfare, the Business
License Appeals Board may issue:
   (a)   An order suspending a business license pending a hearing upon a
petition for suspension or revocation; or
   (b)   An order prohibiting the activity for which the license is sought upon
an appeal from an order denying a license. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6,
1983)
Sec. 12-1.523.   Orders granting or denying applications: Effective date.
   An order of the Business Licensing Officer granting or denying an
application shall not become effective until the expiration of the time for an
appeal, and, if an appeal is filed, such an order shall not become effective
until the appeal is dismissed or an order of the Business License Appeals Board
thereon becomes final. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Article 6.
Standards
Sec. 12-1.601.   Scope.
   Applications for the issuance of business licenses and petitions for the
revocation or suspension of business licenses shall be determined in accordance
with the standards prescribed in this article. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6,
1983)
Sec. 12-1.602.   Standards.
   Such standards shall consist of any enactment, statute, order, quarantine,
rule, or regulation lying within the enforcement authority of the County, or
any officer or employee thereof, including the provisions of this Code and this
title thereof. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.603.   Safe buildings.
   The occupation of real property for business purposes is governed by the
minimum standards for safe buildings set forth in the Uniform Housing Code
adopted by Chapter 6 of Title 6 of this Code. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6,
1983)
Sec. 12-1.604.   Building Codes.
   The occupation of real property for business purposes is governed by the
Building Codes adopted by Title 7 of this Code or enforced by the Building
Inspector and in particular, but not limited to, the provisions thereof for the
construction, alteration, or modification of premises. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff.
October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.605.   Zoning regulations.
   The occupation of real property for business purposes is governed by the
zoning regulations of the County, the General Plan of the County, and any
Specific Plans of the County. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-1.606.   Fire regulations.
   The occupation of real property for business purposes is governed by the
fire protection Code adopted by the Fire Protection District in which the
business lies and by any enactments, statutes, rules, or regulations the Fire
Marshal is authorized to enforce. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Article 7.
Violations: Penalties
Sec. 12-1.701.   Violations: Penalties.
   Any person willfully violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine of not more than Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or by
imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of this
chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person. (§ 2, Ord. 960,
eff. October 6, 1983)
Chapter 2
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS*
*   Chapter 2 entitled “Hazardous Materials”, consisting of Article 1 entitled
“Title, Authority, and Purpose”, consisting of Sections 12-2.101 through 12-
2.103, Article 2 entitled “Definitions”, consisting of Sections 12-2.201
through 12-2.221, and Article 3 entitled “Requirements”, consisting of Sections
12-2.301 through 12-2.308, codified from Ordinance No. 960, effective October
6, 1983, repealed by Section 1 of Ordinance No. 1075, effective May 26, 1988.
Sections:
   
12-2.01   Administering agency: Designation.
Sec. 12-2.01.   Administering agency: Designation.
   The Director of Emergency Services of the County is hereby designated
pursuant to Section 25502 of the Health and Safety Code of the State as the
administering agency responsible for administering and enforcing the provisions
of Chapter 6.95 of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code of the State
(commencing with Section 25500). (§ 2, Ord. 1075, eff. May 26, 1988)
Chapter 3
ITINERANT BUSINESS LICENSE
Sections:
Article 1. General Provisions
   
12-3.101   Title.
   
12-3.102   Purpose.
   
12-3.103   Authority.
   
12-3.104   Application of other provisions.
   
12-3.105   Applications.
   
12-3.106   Other licenses.
Article 2. Prohibitions
   
12-3.201   Itinerants without licenses.
   
12-3.202   Itinerants in violation of licenses.
   
12-3.203   Itinerants in violation of Code provisions.
   
12-3.204   Itinerants in violation of standards.
   
12-3.205   Itinerants after revocation or suspension.
   
12-3.206   False statements.
Article 3. Standards
   
12-3.301   Scope.
   
12-3.302   Occupying private property.
   
12-3.303   Business in public easements.
   
12-3.304   Personal qualifications. (Repealed)
Article 1.
General Provisions
Sec. 12-3.101.   Title.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
“Itinerant Business License Law of the County of Yolo”. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff.
October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-3.102.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of itinerant
businesses by licensing persons conducting businesses without a fixed place of
business who occupy private property or a public easement or right-of-way. (§
2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1275, eff. December
6, 2001)
Sec. 12-3.103.   Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by Section 7 of
Article 12 of the Constitution of the State and Chapter 2 of Part 1 of Division
7 of the Business and Professions Code of the State. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff.
October 6, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 127, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 12-3.104.   Application of other provisions.
   Except as provided in this chapter, the provisions of Article 2, Article 3,
Article 5, and Article 7 of Chapter 1 of this title shall apply to persons
regulated by this chapter and to proceedings for the application, review, grant
or denial, appeal therefrom, and suspension or revocation of a license issued
under this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-3.105.   Applications.
   An application for an itinerant business license shall set forth such facts
as to enable the Business Licensing Officer to determine whether or not the
applicant meets the standards of this chapter and shall be accompanied by the
written consent of the property owner or adjoining property owner. (§ 2, Ord.
960, eff. October 6, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1275, eff. December 6, 2001)
Sec. 12-3.106.   Other licenses.
   Certain types of persons required to obtain an itinerant business license
pursuant to this chapter may also be required to obtain other permits or
licenses under other provisions of this Code. The issuance of an itinerant
business license pursuant to this chapter shall not be deemed to excuse the
requirement for any other permit or license. The issuance of any other license
or permit shall not excuse the requirement for an itinerant business license.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be independently applicable to
each person to which the provisions of this chapter apply. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff.
October 6, 1983)
Article 2.
Prohibitions
Sec. 12-3.201.   Itinerants without licenses.
   No person shall engage in business without a fixed place of business
occupying private property or a public easement or right-of-way without an
itinerant business license issued pursuant to this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 960,
eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-3.202.   Itinerants in violation of licenses.
   No person shall engage in business without a fixed place of business
occupying private property or a public easement or right-of-way adjoining
private property in violation of the terms or conditions of an itinerant
business license issued pursuant to this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October
6, 1983)
Sec. 12-3.203.   Itinerants in violation of Code provisions.
   No person shall engage in business without a fixed place of business
occupying real property or a public easement or right-of-way adjoining private
property in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. (§ 2, Ord. 960,
eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-3.204.   Itinerants in violation of standards.
   No person shall engage in business without a fixed place of business and
occupying private property or a public easement or right-of-way in violation of
the standards set forth in this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-3.205.   Itinerants after revocation or suspension.
   No person shall engage in business without a fixed place of business
occupying private property or a public easement or right-of-way after the
revocation or suspension of an itinerant business license issued pursuant to
this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-3.206.   False statements.
   No person shall make a false statement in an application or other statement
for an itinerant business license issued pursuant to this chapter. (§ 2, Ord.
960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Article 3.
Standards
Sec. 12-3.301.   Scope.
   Applications for the issuance of an itinerant business license and petitions
for the revocation or suspension of itinerant business licenses shall be
determined in accordance with the standards prescribed by this article. (§ 2,
Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-3.302.   Occupying private property.
   Persons conducting business without a fixed place of business who occupy
private real property shall do so only with the written consent of the person
entitled to the possession of the premises. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6,
1983)
Sec. 12-3.303.   Business in public easements.
   Persons doing business without a fixed place of business in a public
easement or a right-of-way shall do so only with the written consent of the
person entitled to the possession of the adjoining private property. (§ 2, Ord.
960, eff. October 6, 1983)
Sec. 12-3.304.   Personal qualifications.
   Repealed*. (§ 2, Ord. 960, eff. October 6, 1983, * § 2, Ord. 1275, eff.
December 6, 2001)
Chapter 4
CANNABIS LICENSING
Sections:
   
12-04.01   Authority, title, purpose and intent.
   
12-04.02   Relationship to other laws.
   
12-04.03   Definitions.
   
12-04.04   Personal cultivation and use.
   
12-04.05   Eligibility for county cannabis license.
   
12-04.06   License application requirements.
   
12-04.07   Denial of license.
   
12-04.08   License limitations.
   
12-04.09   License requirements.
   
12-04.10   Change in ownership.
   
12-04.11   Notification of loss or diversion.
   
12-04.12   Inspections, investigations and audits.
   
12-04.13   Public nuisance.
   
12-04.14   Enforcement remedies.
   
12-04.15   Grounds for disciplinary action.
   
12-04.16   Violations.
   
12-04.17   Enforcement procedures.
   
12-04.18   Cannabis goods after termination of license.
   
12-04.19   Appeals.
   
12-04.20   Appeal hearing.
   
12-04.21   Enforcement of order.
   
12-04.22   Liability for abatement costs and/or administrative penalties;
interest.
   
12-04.23   Lien hearing.
   
12-04.24   Alternative hearing procedure.
   
12-04.25   Administrative penalties.
   
12-04.26   Summary abatement.
   
12-04.27   Non-exclusive remedy.
   
12-04.28   No vested or non-conforming rights.
   
12-04.29   Limitations on county’s liability.
Sec. 12-04.01.   Authority, title, purpose and intent.
   A.   Pursuant to its authority granted by Article XI Section 7 of the
California Constitution, Sections 65850 et seq., 25845 and 53069.4 of the
California Government Code, Section 11362.83 of the California Health and
Safety Code, and the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act
(“MAUCRSA”) (California Business & Professions Code Section 26000 et seq.), the
Board of Supervisors does enact this chapter.
   B.   This chapter is known and may be cited as the Cannabis Licensing
Ordinance.
   C.   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate commercial
cannabis activities in a manner that preserves the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Yolo County and the environment.
   D.   It is also the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide commercial
cannabis operators who are compliant with the State regulations, as well as
compliant with the Cannabis Land Use Ordinance enacted by Yolo County, an
opportunity to apply for a commercial cannabis license under this chapter.
   E.   It is also the purpose and intent of this chapter to develop reasonable
regulations for personal use cannabis cultivation protected under state law in
order to preserve the public peace, health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of Yolo County and the environment.
   F.   Any ambiguity in this chapter should be construed in whatever manner
best effectuates this intent. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.02.   Relationship to other laws.
   A.   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, this chapter
incorporates the requirements and procedures set forth in the Medicinal and
Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (“MAUCRSA”). In the event of any
conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of MAUCRSA
or any other applicable state or local law, the more restrictive provision
shall control.
   B.   All cannabis uses and operations under this chapter shall also be fully
compliant with the Cannabis Land Use Ordinance in
Article 14 of Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the Yolo County Code.
   C.   Pursuant to the Cannabis Land Use Ordinance, and subject to exceptions
expressly set forth therein, a Cannabis License cannot be issued until a
Cannabis Use Permit is obtained in accordance with the requirements thereof and
thereafter maintained in good standing.
   D.   Except as expressly stated in this chapter, cannabis operations (as
defined below) must comply with all other County codes and regulations. Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed as permitting a cannabis operation to
operate at any time in a manner that is in violation of other applicable state
and local laws.
   E.   The license requirement set forth in this chapter shall be in addition
to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed
by any other federal, state, or local law.
   F.   It is intended that the provisions of this chapter will supersede any
other provisions of the Yolo County Code found to be in conflict and shall
apply regardless of whether the activities existed or occurred prior to the
adoption of the Marijuana Cultivation Ordinance, initially codified at Chapter
20 of Title 5 of the Yolo County Code, effective August 23, 2018. (§ 2, Ord.
1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.03.   Definitions.
   As used in this ordinance the following definitions shall apply:
   A.   General. Unless otherwise defined in this chapter, the County adopts
the State definitions of various terms related to cannabis and cannabis
activities as used in this chapter. Other applicable definitions shall be as
provided in State law and other sections of County Code, as amended. Future
changes to applicable definitions in State law shall take effect locally ninety
(90) days after the change takes effect at the State level.
   B.   "Abatement costs" means and includes all costs, expenses, fines, and
fees, such as administrative expenses, administrative fines, civil fines,
penalties, staff time, variable costs, fixed costs, inspection costs,
investigation costs, enforcement costs, abatement costs, litigation fees,
litigation costs, hearing costs, attorneys' fees and costs, and all other costs
and expenses related to, arising out of, or incurred by the County relating to
any nuisance enforcement or abatement action to the fullest extent permitted by
law.
   C.   “Applicant” means a person or entity applying for a license pursuant to
this chapter.
   D.   “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant cannabis sativa Linnaeus,
cannabis indica, or cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds
thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the
plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the
separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis”
does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the
stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks
(except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized
seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this
chapter, “cannabis” does not mean “industrial hemp” as defined by Section
11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code.
   E.   “Cannabis good or cannabis goods” means cannabis, including dried
flower, and products containing cannabis, as defined in Section 15000 of Title
4, Div 19 of the California Code of Regulations.
   F.   “Cannabis concentrate” means cannabis that has undergone a process to
concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product’s
potency. For purposes of this division, “cannabis concentrate” includes, but is
not limited to, the separated resinous trichomes of cannabis, tinctures,
capsules, suppositories, extracts, vape cartridges, inhaled products (e.g.,
dab, shatter, and wax), and tablets, as defined in subsection (RR).
   G.   “Cannabis operation” means any activity that requires a license issued
by Yolo County pursuant to this chapter and the State of California pursuant to
the MAUCRSA.
   H.   “Cannabis use permit’ means a conditional use permit issued pursuant to
the Cannabis Land Use Ordinance.
   I.   “Canopy” means the aggregate area(s) of mature plants at a licensed
premises, except nurseries and processors, that contain mature plants at any
given time as follows:
   1.   Canopy shall be calculated in square feet, as measured by the outermost
perimeter of each separate and discrete area(s) of cannabis cultivation at the
drip line of the canopy expected at full maturity.
   2.   Canopy shall not exceed the allowed maximum pursuant to the CLUO and/or
any use permit and license issued for the site.
   J.   “Discrete area(s) of cultivation” means designated cultivation area(s)
identified on a premise map for a licensed premises, which may be noncontiguous
and may contain cannabis cultivation at any point in time that includes but is
not limited to, interior walls, shelves, greenhouse walls, hoop house walls,
garden benches, garden tables, hedgerows, fencing, garden beds or garden plots.
   1.   Each discrete area(s) of cultivation shall be identified by a physical
boundary that includes but is not limited to, interior walls, shelves,
greenhouse walls, hoop houses walls, garden benches, shelf or table surface
area, hedgerow, fencing, garden beds, garden plots or stakes delineating the
perimeter; and
   2.   If mature plants are being cultivated using a shelving system, the
surface area of each level shall be included in the total canopy calculation.
   K.   “Commercial cannabis activity” includes the cultivation, possession,
manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging,
labeling, transportation, delivery, or sale of cannabis or cannabis products as
provided for in this chapter.
   L.   “Courtesy notice” means an inspection report or letter of non-
compliance that notes the observation of non-compliance and a deadline to
correct the non-compliance.
   M.   “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, storing, trimming of cannabis.
   N.   “Cultivation site” means a location where commercial cannabis is
legally planted, grown, harvested, dried, cured, graded, trimmed, or stored, or
a location where any combinations of those activities occur.
   O.   “Distribution” means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis
and cannabis products between licensees.
   P.   “Dried flower” means all dead cannabis that has been harvested, dried,
cured, or otherwise processed, excluding leaves and stems.
   Q.   “Enforcing officer” shall mean any County officer or employee,
including his/her designee, with the authority to enforce this Code, its
adopted codes or applicable State codes.
   R.   “Entity” means any firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, syndicate, or any other group, entity or combination acting as a
unit, and the plural as well as the singular.
   S.   “Extraction” means a process by which cannabinoids are separated from
cannabis plant material through chemical or physical means.
   T.   “Final form” refers to cannabis and cannabis products that are packaged
and labeled as they will be sold at retail to a consumer.
   U.   “Flowering” means that a cannabis plant has formed a mass of pistils
measuring greater than one half inch wide at its widest point.
   V.   “Greenhouse” means a structure or thermally isolated area of a building
that maintains a specialized sunlit environment used for and essential to the
cultivation, protection, or maintenance of plants. For the purposes of this
chapter, cultivation in a greenhouse (including mixed light) is considered an
indoor use.
   W.   “Hoop house” means a shade cloth structure that is readily removable
and temporary in nature, without any equipment or utilities. The ends may be
covered or left open and the material covering the structural members is
readily removable and is typically removed and re-affixed frequently. For the
purposes of this chapter, cultivation in a hoop house is considered an outdoor
use.
   X.   “Immature plant” or “immature” means a cannabis plant that has a first
true leaf measuring greater than one half inch long from base to tip (if
started from seed) or a mass of roots measuring greater than one half inch wide
at its widest point (if vegetatively propagated), but which is not flowering.
   Y.   “Immature plant area” also known as the “vegging area” is the area
designated by the licensee to keep immature plants in order to promote
vegetative growth prior to flowering and shall be separate and distinct from
the canopy area and on-site nursery. All immature plants housed in the immature
plant area shall be no more than twenty- four (24) inches in height and not
flowering at any time they are located in the immature plant area. If immature
plants begin to flower while in the immature plant area, they shall be
immediately removed from the immature plant area and placed in the canopy area.
   Z.   “Infusion” means a process by which cannabis, cannabinoids, or cannabis
concentrates are directly incorporated into a product formulation to produce a
cannabis product.
   AA.   “Ingredient” means any substance that is used in the manufacture of a
cannabis product and that is intended to be present in the finished cannabis
product.
   BB.   “Kief” means the resinous trichomes of cannabis that have been
separated from the cannabis plant.
   CC.   “Labeling” means any label or other written, printed, or graphic
matter upon cannabis or a cannabis product, upon its container or wrapper, or
that accompanies any cannabis or cannabis product.
   DD.   "License" means a license issued by the County of Yolo pursuant to
this chapter to engage in a cannabis operation(s) in the unincorporated areas
of Yolo County.
   EE.   “Licensee” means any person or business entity holding a license under
this chapter to engage in cannabis operations.
   FF.   “Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise
make or prepare a cannabis product.
   (1)   The term “manufacture” includes the following processes:
   (A)   Extraction;
   (B)   Infusion;
   (C)   Packaging or repackaging of cannabis products;
   (D)   Labeling or relabeling the packages of cannabis products;
   (E)   Post-processing refinement of cannabis extract (“post-processing”);
and
   (F)   Remediation of failed harvest batches or cannabis product batches,
other than relabeling to correct cannabinoid content.
   GG.   “Manufacturing” or “manufacturing operation” means all aspects of the
extraction process, infusion process, post-processing, remediation, and
packaging and labeling processes, including processing, preparing, holding, and
storing of cannabis products. Manufacturing also includes any processing,
preparing, holding, or storing of components and ingredients.
   HH.   “Mature plant” or “mature” means a cannabis plant that is flowering.
   II.   “Microbusiness” means a licensee that is authorized to engage in
cannabis operations defined in subdivision (aj) of Section 26001 of the
Business and Professions Code.
   JJ.   “Mother plant” means a cannabis plant that is grown or maintained for
the purpose of generating clones, and that will not be used to produce plant
material for sale to a processor or dispensary.
   KK.   “Non-manufactured cannabis good” means final form items that contain
only cannabis.
   LL.   “Nursery” means a facility or area on a cultivation site that produces
only clones, Immature plants, seeds and other agricultural products used
specifically for the propagation and cultivation of cannabis.
   MM.   “Owner” means any of the following:
   1.   Any person with an aggregate ownership interest of twenty percent (20%)
or more in the person applying for a license, or the licensee, unless the
interest is solely a security, lien, or encumbrance;
   2.   The chief executive officer of an entity;
   3.   A member of the board of directors of a corporation; and/or
   4.   An individual who will be participating in the direction, control, or
management of the cannabis operation.
   NN.   “Person” means an individual.
   OO.   "Premises" means the designated structure or structures and land
specified in the license application that is owned, leased, or otherwise held
under the control of the applicant or licensee where the commercial cannabis
activity will be or is conducted. The premises shall be a contiguous area and
shall only be occupied by one licensee.
   PP.   “Processing” means the trimming, drying, curing, grading, storing,
packaging, and labeling of non-manufactured cannabis.
   QQ.   “Retail area” means a building, room, or other area that is open to
the public, upon the licensed retailer or licensed microbusiness premises
authorized to engage in retail sales in which cannabis goods are sold or
displayed.
   RR.   “State license” means a license issued by the State under MAUCRSA, or
subsequent legislation.
   SS.   “Tablet” means a solid preparation containing a single serving of THC
or other cannabinoid that is intended to be swallowed whole, not formulated to
be chewable, dispersible, effervescent, orally disintegrating, used as a
suspension, or consumed in a manner other than swallowed whole, and does not
contain any added natural or artificial flavor or sweetener.
   TT.   “Transport” means the physical movement of cannabis or cannabis
products from one licensed premises to another licensed premises. (§ 2, Ord.
1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.04.   Personal cultivation and use.
   A.   The personal cultivation of cannabis is limited to no more than six (6)
live cannabis plants, regardless of the following:
   1.   Whether the cannabis is medical or non-medical;
   2.   Whether the cannabis is grown inside the private residence or in an
accessory structure thereto or outdoors on the grounds of a residence;
   3.   The size or maturity of the plant(s); or
   4.   The number of non-medical users, medical users, or primary caregivers
residing together in the private residence.
   B.   Personal cultivation must comply with section
8-2.1408(CC) and (DD) of the CLUO.
   C.   Personal use of cannabis is permitted as described in Sections 113621.1
and 113621.2 of the Health and Safety Code and section
8-2.1408(GG) of the CLUO.
   D.   Indoor personal cannabis cultivation sites shall be in full compliance
with all other applicable requirements of the County Code, California Building
Standards Code, and applicable state laws and local fire district ordinances.
   E.   No cultivation is permitted within the common areas of a multi-family
dwelling, residential development, mobile home park, or similar residential
arrangement. Personal cultivation may only occur in or on a lot containing a
legal residential unit, with landlord’s permission pursuant to Section
8-2.1406(F), Personal Use Exemption, of the CLUO.
   F.   The cannabis plants and any cannabis produced by the plants shall be
kept in a space fully enclosed by security fencing or a structure, and securely
locked, using a child resistant lock, in a manner designed to reasonably
prevent access to the cannabis by trespassers and children. The plants shall
not be visible by normal unaided vision from a public place, as required by
Health & Safety Code section 11362.2.
   G.   There shall be at least one (1) dwelling on any parcel on which
personal cannabis is cultivated. Each person cultivating personal cannabis
shall maintain their principal place of residence in a dwelling on the parcel
on which the cultivation occurs.
   H.   Personal cultivation is restricted to medicinal and adult recreational
use only. Sales and non- cultivation activities are prohibited. (§ 2, Ord.
1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.05.   Eligibility for county cannabis license.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any cannabis operation
in the unincorporated areas of Yolo County without possessing a valid and
current license for such business.
   B.   Applicants must also possess a valid State license.
   C.   Applicants must have a valid cannabis use permit pursuant to the CLUO
and the regulatory transition periods set forth therein. If the Applicant is
not the permittee, the applicant must have a notarized written consent of the
permittee to apply for a license for the premises. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff.
January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.06.   License application requirements.
   A.   An applicant shall do all of the following:
   1.   Complete any application forms prescribed by the County and pay fees as
established by resolution and adopted by the Board of Supervisors, as amended
from time to time.
   2.   Provide a complete copy, including attachments, of the application
submitted to the State for the comparable license type.
   3.   Provide a street address capable of receiving mail and designate that
address and a contact for receipt of service of process for notices served
pursuant to this chapter.
   4.   Provide an emergency contact who can be reached on a 24/7 basis and who
can provide access to the premises in the event of an emergency.
   5.   If the applicant or property owner is an entity, adequate evidence that
the individual submitting an application and signing any related County forms
or documents has authority to bind the entity.
   6.   Provide a statement, signed by the Applicant under penalty of perjury,
that the information provided in the application is complete, true, and
accurate.
   7.   Provide a complete list of all Owners and, to the extent not included
in the list of owners, every other person with a financial interest in the
cannabis operation and all employees.
   8.   Each owner and the persons owning the property on which the cannabis
operation will be located must sign a written consent to on-site compliance
inspections of the premises and of all records and documents related to the
cannabis operation activities by the County pursuant to §
12-04.12.
   9.   Each owner and the persons owning the property on which the cannabis
operation will be located must execute an agreement to indemnify and hold
harmless the County of Yolo and its agents, officers, elected officials, and
employees for any claims, damages, or injuries brought by affected property
owners or other third parties due to the cultivation of cannabis and for any
claims brought by any person for problems, injuries, damages, or liabilities of
any kind that may arise out of the cultivation of cannabis in a form prescribed
by the County. The indemnification shall apply to any damages, costs of suit,
attorneys’ fees or other expenses awarded against the County, its agents,
officers and employees in connection with any such action. In addition, the
agreement shall release the County of Yolo, and its agents, officers, elected
officials, and employees from any injuries, damages, or liabilities of any kind
arising in connection with cannabis-related activity on the property.
   10.   Agree to reimburse the County for any court costs and attorneys’ fees
that the County may be required to pay as a result of any legal challenge
related to the County’s approval of a License. The County may, at its sole
discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such action,
but such participation shall not relieve the licensee of its obligation
hereunder.
   11.   Each owner must sign a statement under penalty of perjury in a form
prescribed by the County certifying that they will abide by the requirements of
this chapter and applicable state law.
   12.   Each owner must electronically submit to the Department of Justice
fingerprint images and related information required by the Department of
Justice for the purpose of obtaining information as to the existence and
content of a record of state or federal convictions and arrests, and
information as to the existence and content of a record of state or federal
convictions and arrests for which the Department of Justice establishes that
the person is free on bail or on their own recognizance, pending trial or
appeal.
   13.   Provide a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000)
furnished by a corporate surety authorized to do business in the State. Such
bond shall be in favor of the County and shall be approved by the County
Counsel. Such bond shall be conditioned upon full and faithful performance by
the licensee of all obligations under this chapter and any license issued
hereunder and shall be kept in full force and effect by the licensee throughout
the life of the license and all renewals thereof. The Board of Supervisors may
from time to time by resolution establish additional bond requirements as it
deems necessary. In the event that a licensee violates any of the provisions of
this chapter or any County rules or orders, such violation shall permit the
County at its option to resort to the bond to cover any abatement costs or
administrative penalties assessed. The bond may also be used to cover costs of
site restoration, if required, and not paid by the licensee.
   14.   The applicant must not be delinquent in paying any County taxes, fees,
or penalties due on any commercial cannabis activity within the County.
   15.   Provide a detailed description of the Applicant’s security protocols,
including compliance with section
8-2.1408(LL) of the CLUO (following use permit approval) and subdivision (j) of
Section 26070 of the California Business and Professions Code, which must be
reasonably designed to prevent unauthorized entrance into areas containing
cannabis or cannabis products and theft of cannabis or cannabis products from
the premises. If security guards are proposed in the security protocols, such
individuals shall be licensed and registered with the Bureau of Security and
Investigative Services (BSIS). These security measures shall be submitted to
the County for review and approval prior to the approval of the application.
   B.   An applicant shall meet one of the following requirements:
   1.   Own the property where the cannabis operation will operate; or
   2.   Have entered into a written agreement with the record owner of the
property and have obtained the written permission (including notarized
signatures) of the record owner(s) consenting to the cannabis operation
operating on the property.
   Evidence of lawful possession of the property consists of properly executed
deeds of trust, leases, evidence of ownership of the licensed property, or
other written documents acceptable to the County.
   The use for which the cannabis license is requested must be approved in the
cannabis use permit. A cannabis license shall not be issued for any activity or
use not explicitly authorized in the cannabis use permit.
   C.   Child support obligations.
   1.   Prior to the issuance of a license under this chapter, and at all times
while holding a license, all owners and employees shall be current with their
monthly child support obligations. If an owner or employee has an account with
past due child support arrears, that person must have that balance at zero or
have verification from the Department of Child Support Services that they have
been in and remain in compliance with a court ordered payment plan in order to
remain eligible for a license.
   2.   Licensees shall provide the Department of Child Support Services a
quarterly list of all employees employed by licensee at any time during the
quarter. Reports are due by the 15th of the month following the end of the
quarter (March, June, September, and December). The list shall include names,
addresses, phone numbers and social security numbers for all employees.
   3.   If licensee uses a payroll withholding process, licensee must comply
with any income withholding order for child support for any employee in
Licensee’s employ. In addition, if the income withholding order is for an owner
or part-owner of the business, the business shall also comply with the income
withholding order and provide necessary tax information if self-employed for
purposes of determining accurate child support orders. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff.
January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.07.   Denial of license.
   A.   The County need not accept nor process an application that is
incomplete or for which the requisite fees have not been paid.
   B.   The County shall deny an application if either the applicant, or the
premises for which a license is applied, do not qualify for licensure under
this chapter.
   C.   The County may deny an application for a licensure or issue a
conditional license as provided in §
12-04.15. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.08.   License limitations.
   A.   Canopy shall not exceed the maximum square footage allowed by the
cannabis use permit, or the maximum square footage allowed by the license,
whichever is less.
   B.   Licensees shall not sublet any portion of the premises for any purpose.
   C.   Licensees shall not commingle cannabis from other licensees, from
unlicensed cultivators, from the licensee’s other premises, or transfer or
receive any cannabis or non-manufactured cannabis products to or from other
licensees, unlicensed cultivators or licensee’s other premises. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, licensees are allowed to receive Immature plants or seeds from
licensed nurseries and to transfer cannabis and non-manufactured cannabis
products to licensed processors and distributors, or self-distribute pursuant
to Subsection D, below.
   D.   Self-distribution of cannabis.
   1.   A person or entity who receives a license from the County for self-
distribution under this chapter, and who also receives a state self-
distribution license as described in 4 C.C.R. §15315, may engage in the
activities allowed under the self-distribution license as issued by the County,
so long as these activities involve only that cannabis lawfully cultivated
pursuant to the licensee’s cultivation license.
   2.   The premises for which the state self-distribution license is obtained
shall be located on the same parcel for which a county license has been issued.
   3.   A licensee engaging in self-distribution activities as provided in this
subsection shall provide to the county all transport vehicle information to the
full extent that it must be provided to the state under 4 C.C.R. §15312.
   4.   A licensee engaging in self-distribution activities as provided in this
subsection shall comply with all transport personnel requirements of 4 C.C.R.
§15313 and with all shipping manifest requirements of 4 C.C.R. §15314.
   E.   A license constitutes a revocable privilege. Applicants and licensees
have the burden of proving its qualifications for a license at all times.
   F.   An annual license shall be valid for one (1) calendar year, or part
thereof, beginning April 1st of the year in which it is issued and shall expire
on March 31st of the following year. A seasonal license shall only be valid
upon issuance until December 15th of the year in which it was issued.
   G.   A license is issued to and covers only the licensee identified on the
license with respect to the premises identified in the application. The license
may be transferred to a successor-in-interest pursuant to §
12-04.10, and does not run with the land.
   H.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply after the expiration or
revocation of a license until such time as no cannabis in excess of the amount
allowed pursuant to Health & Safety Code section 11362.1 (Possession of
cannabis by persons 21 years of age or older) or 11362.2 (Personal cultivation)
remains on the property. Upon expiration or revocation of a County license, all
cannabis and cannabis goods must be removed from the property immediately,
including, but not limited to, cannabis being stored on the property unless the
County, in its sole discretion and upon a showing of good cause,
administratively allows limited storage and related activities pursuant to a
written agreement to ensure an orderly wind-down of a cannabis operation
following revocation. Absent the County choosing to exercise such discretion,
no cannabis or cannabis goods shall remain on the property following the
expiration or revocation of a County license.
   I.   No person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of
any property within the County shall cause, or allow such property to be used
for a cannabis operation or a cannabis related activity prohibited under State
law or in violation of this chapter. The property owner shall be responsible
and jointly liable for all violations of this chapter and applicable laws on
the property.
   J.   Premises for each cannabis operation is defined at the time the license
is issued. Licensees are not authorized to amend, reconfigure or change in any
way what constitutes the premises under the license without first filing a
change of location or modification of the license and obtaining approval from
the County. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.09.   License requirements.
   A.   Licensees shall enroll in and comply with all requirements of any track
and trace system required by the County to track the production and disposition
of cannabis. Licensees shall obtain and use unique identifiers from an approved
source, maintain them in a readable state, comply with all data entry
requirements, provide the County with access to its track and trace account and
pay any required track and trace fees.
   B.   Licensee shall post a copy of the license at the premises where it can
be viewed by County staff.
   C.   Licensee shall provide updated employee lists to the County within ten
(10) business days of any change in personnel.
   D.   The Director of Yolo County Community Services, or designee, is
authorized to establish procedures and guidelines to implement the licensing
program contemplated by this chapter.
   E.   Licensees shall comply with applicable requirements of the California
Cannabis Authority, as requested by County. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21,
2023)
Sec. 12-04.10.   Change in ownership.
   Licenses are non-transferable. Any and all new owners involved in a transfer
in ownership of the cannabis operation shall apply for a new license as per §
12-04.06. This requirement does not apply to other changes (e.g., addition of a
new partner in an LLC) that do not result in a transfer of cannabis operation
ownership. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.11.   Notification of loss or diversion.
   Licensees shall notify the County and law enforcement authorities within one
(1) business day upon discovery of any diversion, theft, loss of, or criminal
activity related to licensee’s cannabis. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21,
2023)
Sec. 12-04.12.   Inspections, investigations and audits.
   A.   All licensees, applicants, and permittees shall be subject to
inspection, investigation and audit of their premises and records by the County
to determine compliance with applicable laws and regulations, including any
license or use permit issued in connection with the premises.
   B.   The County may conduct an inspection, investigation, examination, or
audit for any of the following purposes:
   1.   To determine accuracy and completeness of the application prior to
issuing a license;
   2.   To determine compliance with the license or legal requirements;
   3.   To respond to a complaint(s) received by the County regarding the
cannabis operation or license;
   4.   To inspect incoming or outgoing shipments of cannabis and
nonmanufactured cannabis products; or
   5.   As otherwise may deemed necessary by the County.
   C.   Upon request by County, licensees shall allow County representative(s)
to be present during harvests and to observe all harvest activities and
associated recordkeeping.
   D.   Inspections, investigations, examinations, and audits of premises
occurring pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted at any time between 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m., or as otherwise agreed to by the County and the licensee or
its agents, employees, or representatives. Prior notice of inspection,
investigation, or examination is not required and the owner, occupant, or
person in charge of the premises shall permit the entry and inspection.
   E.   No applicant, licensee, permittee or any agent or employee shall
interfere with, obstruct, or impede the County’s inspection, investigation, or
audit. This includes, but is not limited to, the following actions:
   1.   Denying the County access to the premises or any locked structures or
enclosures on the premises;
   2.   Providing false or misleading statements;
   3.   Providing false, falsified, fraudulent, or misleading documents and
records; and
   4.   Failing to provide records, reports, and other supporting documents. (§
2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.13.   Public nuisance.
   A violation of or non-compliance with any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed to be a public nuisance. Any applicant, licensee, permitee, or agent
thereof, or any other person who causes, whether with or without knowledge or
intent, any condition on any premises to violate any provision of this chapter,
or permits such violation to continue or remain on the premises, is in
violation of this chapter and such violation shall constitute a public
nuisance. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.14.   Enforcement remedies.
   A.   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to
any other remedies available at law or in equity.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision, or to
fail to comply with any of the requirements, of this chapter. Any person
violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory
requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, except to the
extent state law may deem it a felony. No proof of knowledge, intent, or other
mental state is required to establish a violation.
   C.   The County or the District Attorney, on behalf of the people of the
State of California, may, in their discretion, enforce a violation of this
chapter by the prosecution of a civil action and/or civil penalties, including
an action for injunctive relief without first going through the administrative
procedures set forth in this chapter.
   D.   The County or the District Attorney, on behalf of the people of the
State of California, may also abate a violation of this chapter through the
abatement process established by Government Code section 25845, Chapter 5 of
Title 1 (Code Enforcement) of the County Code, or as set forth in this chapter.
   E.   Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a misdemeanor except to
the extent state law may deem it a felony. Violations of this chapter may, in
the discretion of the District Attorney, be prosecuted as infractions or
misdemeanors. Any violations of this chapter may be prosecuted civilly, except
such prosecution may be either civil or criminal or both where the violation is
determined to be a criminal violation.
   F.   Any person that violates this chapter shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, on which any violation of
any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by any such
person.
   G.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing on the Enforcing
Officer or the County any duty to issue any notice hereunder, or to abate any
unlawful cannabis activity, or to take any other action with regards to any
unlawful cannabis activity, and neither the Enforcing Officer nor the County
shall be held liable for failure to issue any notice hereunder, or for failure
to abate any unlawful cannabis activity, or for failure to take any other
action with regard to unlawful cannabis activity. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January
21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.15.   Grounds for disciplinary action.
   The County may impose administrative penalties, deny a license application,
issue a conditional license, suspend, revoke, place on probation with terms and
conditions, or otherwise discipline licensees and permittees (collectively
referred to as “disciplinary action”), for any of the following reasons:
   A.   Failure or inability to comply with one or more provisions of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Failure or inability to comply with any requirement of the Yolo County
Code.
   C.   Failure to comply with conditions or provisions of the applicable
cannabis use permit.
   D.   Failure to comply with any state or local law, ordinance, or regulation
including, but not limited to, the payment of taxes.
   E.   Failure to provide information required by County.
   F.   Failure to conduct past or current cannabis operation(s) in a manner
that ensures the security of the cannabis and safeguards against diversion for
illegal purposes.
   G.   Previous violation by an applicant, licensee or owner, or previous
violation at the proposed cultivation site, of any provision of the Yolo County
Code or state law related to a cannabis related activity.
   H.   Creating or maintaining a public nuisance where the licensee or
permittee has failed to comply with reasonable conditions to abate the
nuisance.
   I.   Failure to allow unannounced inspections of the premises by County
staff or law enforcement at any reasonable time, as required under this
chapter, without notice.
   J.   Discovery of untrue statement(s) or an omission of a material statement
in a license application.
   K.    Failure to comply with any state or local law, ordinance, or
regulation conferring worker protections or legal rights on the employees of a
licensee.
   L.   Failure to maintain safe conditions for inspection by the County.
   M.   Failure to enter information or the entry of false, misrepresented or
incomplete data or information into the track and trace system.
   N.   Failure to enter or the entry of false, misrepresented or incomplete
data or information as required to be submitted to the California Cannabis
Authority.
   O.   Failure to comply with any other requirement specified in law.
   P.   Except as otherwise expressly provided in state law, conviction of an
owner or employee of an offense that is substantially related to the
qualifications, functions, or duties of a cannabis operation. In determining
which offenses are substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or
duties of the business or profession for which the application is made, the
County shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   1.   A violent felony conviction, as specified in subdivision (c) of Section
667.5 of the Penal Code.
   2.   A serious felony conviction, as specified in subdivision (c) of Section
1192.7 of the Penal Code.
   3.   A felony conviction involving fraud, deceit, or embezzlement.
   4.   A felony conviction for hiring, employing, or using a minor in
transporting, carrying, selling, giving away, preparing for sale, or peddling,
any controlled substance to a minor; or selling, offering to sell, furnishing,
offering to furnish, administering, or giving any controlled substance to a
minor.
   5.   A felony conviction for drug trafficking.
   Q.   Except as provided in subsections (4) and (5) directly above, a prior
conviction, where the sentence, including any term of probation, incarceration,
or supervised release, is completed, for possession of, possession for sale,
sale, manufacture, transportation, or cultivation of a controlled substance is
not considered substantially related, and shall not be the sole ground for
denial of a license. Conviction for any controlled substance felony subsequent
to licensure shall be grounds for revocation of a license or denial of the
renewal of a license.
   R.   If any of the disqualifying convictions apply to an employee who is not
an owner, the conviction will not constitute a basis for disciplinary action if
the licensee promptly terminates the employment relationship.
   S.   An owner has been subject to fines, penalties, or otherwise been
sanctioned for cultivation or production of a controlled substance on public or
private lands pursuant to Section 12025 or 12025.1 of the Fish and Game Code.
   T.   An owner has been sanctioned by a licensing authority or a city,
county, or city and county for illegal cannabis activities or unauthorized
commercial cannabis activities, or has had a cannabis operations license
suspended or revoked in any jurisdiction in California in the three (3) years
immediately preceding the date the application is filed with the County.
   U.   Failure to hold the applicable cannabis license issued by the State of
California, or denial, suspension, lapse or revocation of the applicable
license issued by the State of California, or by any of its departments or
divisions, shall immediately suspend the ability of a cannabis business to
operate within the County, until the State of California, or its respective
department or division, reinstates or issues a State license. Should the State
of California, or any of its departments or divisions, revoke or terminate the
license of a cannabis business, such revocation or termination shall also
revoke or terminate the ability of a cannabis business to operate within the
County of Yolo.
   V.   The County may recover the costs of investigation and enforcement of
disciplinary action following the procedures set forth in this chapter.
   W.   The County may take disciplinary action against a licensee when the
violation was committed by an owner, the licensee’s officers, directors,
agents, independent contractors or employees while acting on behalf of the
licensee or engaged in cannabis-related activity.
   X.   Upon the occurrence of three (3) final and conclusive notices of
violation (“Notice” or “NOV”) of any provision of this chapter within a two (2)
year period, all licenses held by the licensee or owner shall be automatically
deemed terminated and revoked. For purposes of this section, a NOV is deemed
final and conclusive upon the expiration of the time period set forth to appeal
the notice in §
12-04.19 or upon a hearing officer’s determination of a violation.
   Y.   Upon termination, or revocation of a license, the licensee shall remain
ineligible for a license for a minimum of two (2) years. The County, in its
discretion, may extend the ineligibility time period up to, but not in excess
of ten (10) years, depending on the egregious nature of the violation(s). (§ 2,
Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.16.   Violations.
   All violations observed during an inspection shall be written on a courtesy
notice and a copy of the notice shall be supplied to the licensee. The
violations in subsections A-C are considered to be more serious in nature and
may require additional steps of enforcement.
   A.   Canopy.
   1.   In the event canopy exceeds the maximum square footage allowed by the
license, the Enforcing Officer may issue a courtesy notice. If the licensee
fails to abate the over canopy amount identified in a courtesy notice within
the deadline provided to correct the violation, a NOV may be issued for the
violation pursuant to §
12-04.19, below.
   2.   The courtesy notice shall identify the licensee, the premises, the
allowed or licensed maximum canopy, the actual canopy as measured by the
Enforcing Officer, the date the courtesy notice was provided and the
administrative penalty the licensee is subject to, as outlined in §
12-04.25(A).
   3.   Issuance of a warning shall not be a requirement prior to enforcement
of this section.
   4.   The licensee may request the Director of Environmental Health to review
the courtesy notice. The Director of Environmental Health may conduct an
inspection as part of the review. The determination of the Director of
Environmental Health is final and is not subject to appeal.
   5.   Depending on the severity or repetition of the violation, the Enforcing
Officer has discretion to enforce a canopy violation with a courtesy notice or
with the notice of violation enforcement procedures set forth in §
12-04.19. A licensee, permittee or any other person is not entitled to a
courtesy notice prior to a notice of violation being issued.
   B.   Odor. In the event odor has been determined to be a public nuisance, as
outlined in Section
8-2.1408(CC)(1-3) of the CLUO, the enforcement officer shall follow Section
8-2.1408(CC) (4-6) as it pertains to disciplinary actions.
   C.   Track and trace. If a pattern or history of repeated non-compliances
for track and trace are observed, the following disciplinary actions may be
taken by the enforcing officer:
   a.   Upon the occurrence of three repeated violations with track and trace
within a twelve (12)-month period, the Enforcing Officer may note on the
courtesy notice a final warning is being given and upon the occurrence of a
fourth non-compliance of track and trace within a twelve (12)-month period a
notice of violation may be issued to the licensee.
   b.   If the violation is corrected pursuant to the most recent courtesy
notice but the same conduct is committed within sixty (60) days of the
correction, the violation will be deemed continuing and a notice of violation
may be issued to the licensee. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.17.   Enforcement procedures.
   A.   Notice of violation.
   1.   In addition to the enforcement provisions provided for in §
12.04-16, above, the County may issue a notice of violation (“Notice” or “NOV”)
to any person that is in violation of any provision of this chapter or other
applicable statutes or regulations.
   2.   A notice of violation shall be in writing and include the following:
   a.   Licensee and the property owner(s), as listed on the application for
the cannabis operation license;
   b.   If applicable, name(s) listed as designated recipients for service of
process, as identified on the application and, if different, as named on the
Secretary of State Statement of Information;
   c.   The address of the violation if known, otherwise the approximate
location;
   d.   A general description of the violation;
   e.   A statement of whether the violation is correctable and, if so, that
the violation shall be corrected within three (3) calendar days of the date of
the notice of violation;
   f.   The amount of the administrative penalty pursuant to §
12-04.25 and, if the violation is correctable, notice that the administrative
penalty will accrue for each day that the violation continues to exist after
the expiration of the three (3)-day time frame in which to correct the
violation;
   g.   The date of the notice;
   h.   A statement that the violation determination may, within five (5)
calendar days after the date the notice was deemed served pursuant to §
12-04.18(A)(3), be appealed by providing the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
with a request in writing for a hearing to appeal the determination of the
Enforcing Officer, setting forth the detailed factual and/or legal basis, as
applicable, for the appeal, with payment of any applicable appeal fee; and
   i.   A statement that unless an appeal hearing is requested within the time
prescribed in the notice, the Enforcing Officer can abate or otherwise correct
the nuisance at the expense of the property owner and/or the licensee. It shall
also state that the abatement costs and the administrative penalty may be made
a special assessment added to the county assessment roll and become a lien on
the real property where the violation has occurred, on the real property owned
by those persons violating this chapter, or be placed on the unsecured roll.
   3.   Service of notices.
   a.   A notice issued by the Enforcing Officer shall be served upon the
licensee and the property owner (if different from licensee) in one of the
following manners:
   i.   By delivering it personally; and/or
   ii.   By first class mail, postage pre-paid, or overnight mail addressed to
(i) the property owner at the address shown on the last equalized assessment
roll or as otherwise known to the Enforcing Officer, and (ii) the street
address designated by the licensee in the application for receipt of service of
process; and/or
   b.   Date of service shall be deemed to be the date of personal service, or
five (5) days after notice is deposited in the United States mail, or one (1)
day after notice is delivered to a location or deposited in a box maintained by
an overnight delivery service, as applicable.
   c.   In the event that, after reasonable effort, the Enforcing Officer is
unable to serve the notice as set forth above, service shall be accomplished by
posting a copy of such Notice conspicuously along the frontage of the real
property subject to the Notice, or if the property has no frontage, upon any
street, highway, or road then upon the portion of the property nearest to a
street, highway, or road, or most likely to give actual notice to the licensee
and any person known by the Enforcing Officer to be in possession of the
property. Service shall be deemed to have been completed upon posting.
   d.   If the notice is properly and timely served, the failure of any
property owner or licensee to receive such notice shall not affect the validity
of the proceedings conducted herein and shall not affect the validity of
service or the validity of any administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this
chapter upon any person.
   B.   Recordation of notices.
   1.   The Enforcing Officer may record a notice of violation with the Yolo
County Recorder on the property which is the subject of the notice of violation
upon expiration of the time limit for compliance if the violation has not been
cured within the time limit (if not required immediately) set for compliance,
or the property owner and/or licensee fail to provide sufficient evidence to
establish reasonable doubt that a violation exists.
   2.   In those cases where the violation is related to a requirement to
secure permits, the recorded notice shall identify the property and shall
further set forth the fact that the building, structure or work does not have
the required permit(s) and is in violation of County codes and that the
property owner has been so notified. This may be done in addition to any other
legal remedy that the County may employ.
   3.   If a notice is recorded, the Enforcing Officer shall serve and record a
removal of notice of violation when the violation no longer exists or all
required work to correct the violation has been completed. The removal of
notice of violation need not be issued until outstanding administrative
penalties have been paid or a lien for those administrative penalties has been
recorded. A fee shall be paid by the property owner and/or licensee for
processing the removal of notice of violation. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January
21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.18.   Cannabis goods after termination of license.
   A.   In the event a license is terminated for any reason while cannabis
goods remain on the premises, the following actions may be taken at the sole
cost and expense of the licensee:
   1.   The cannabis goods may be destroyed by the licensee;
   2.   At the licensee’s request, the cannabis goods may be destroyed by the
County; or
   3.   The licensee can arrange for the removal of all cannabis goods from the
premise by a licensed distributor. The cannabis goods shall be removed from the
premises within fourteen (14) calendar days of the termination of the license.
(§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.19.   Appeals.
   A.   A notice of violation may be appealed by providing the Clerk of the
Board of Supervisors with a request in writing for a hearing to appeal the
determination of the Enforcing Officer.
   B.   The appeal must be filed within five (5) calendar days after the date
the notice was deemed served pursuant to §
12-04.18(A)(3).
   C.   The appeal shall set forth the detailed factual and/or legal basis, as
applicable, for the appeal, with payment of any applicable appeal fee. An
appeal hearing shall not be granted without payment of an appeal fee.
   D.   The County may deny an appeal hearing and summarily dismiss any appeal
for failure to file an appeal in the time and manner required under this
chapter, failure to provide detailed factual and/or legal basis for the appeal,
or for the failure to attend the appeal hearing, and the notice will become
final and conclusive upon the summary dismissal.
   E.   Absent timely appeal, the notice shall be deemed final and conclusive
and the Enforcing Officer may take the disciplinary action set forth in the
notice and/or enter upon the property and abate the nuisance by county
personnel, or by private contractor under the direction of the Enforcing
Officer. The Enforcing Officer may, but need not, apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction for a warrant authorizing entry upon the property for purposes of
undertaking the work, if necessary in the sole discretion of the Enforcing
Officer. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.20.   Appeal hearing.
   A.   In order to hear appeals or other hearings brought under this chapter,
the Board of Supervisors authorizes the use of a hearing officer appointed
pursuant to Yolo County Code §
1-5.09.
   B.   The hearing officer may continue the appeal hearing from time to time
for good cause.
   C.   The hearing officer shall consider the matter de novo.
   D.   The appellant shall be given an opportunity at the hearing to present
and elicit testimony (including by cross-examination) and other evidence
regarding whether the violation(s) listed on the Notice constitute a violation
of this chapter, and/or to contest the proposed amount of administrative
penalty. Failure of the appellant to appear and present evidence at the hearing
shall be deemed a withdrawal of the request for hearing and shall constitute a
failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
   E.   The appellant may choose to be represented by an attorney; however,
formal rules of evidence or procedure shall not apply, including rules relating
to evidence, witnesses and hearsay. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if
it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely
in the conduct of serious affairs regardless of the existence of any common law
or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of the evidence over
objection in civil actions. The hearing officer has discretion to exclude
evidence if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the probability
that its admission will necessitate undue consumption of time.
   F.   The standard of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence and
the burden of proof to establish the existence of the violation shall be borne
by the County. The burden of proof that the violation has been corrected shall
be borne by the appellant.
   G.   The hearing shall be conducted in the English language. The proponent
of any testimony by a witness who does not proficiently speak the English
language shall provide an interpreter, at its sole cost, who has been certified
as an interpreter by either the State of California or the County of Yolo.
   H.   After the hearing, the hearing officer shall render their written
decision affirming, reversing or modifying the determination made by the
Enforcing Officer about the alleged violation. If the violation is affirmed,
the decision shall include a statement that the County is entitled to recover
its abatement costs and administrative penalties. If the hearing officer
determines that the violation continues to exist, the decision shall also order
that the owner of the property and/or the Licensee correct the violation within
the timeframe required by the hearing officer.
   I.   A copy of the decision shall be served on the parties upon whom the
Notice was served pursuant to §
12-04.18(A)(3) or in the manner agreed upon by the parties. The decision shall
be final and conclusive when signed by the hearing officer and served as
provided by this subsection.
   J.   Payment of abatement costs and an administrative penalty specified in
the hearing officer’s decision shall be made to the County within twenty (20)
calendar days of the decision, unless timely appealed to the Superior Court in
accordance with Government Code section 53069.4, subdivision (b). (§ 2, Ord.
1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.21.   Enforcement of order.
   A.   Any property owner or licensee may correct the violation or cause it to
be corrected at any time prior to commencement of correction by, or at the
direction of, the Enforcing Officer. A property owner or licensee abating
unlawful cannabis cultivation hereunder, or correcting some other violation
hereunder, shall perform such correction in the presence of the Enforcing
Officer unless the Enforcing Officer waives the right to be present. Abatement
involving illegal cultivation and/or canopy overage shall not be deemed
completed until the unlawful cannabis has been completely removed from the
property and destroyed and approval of such has been provided by the Enforcing
Officer. Such abatement by any property owner or occupant shall not impair the
Enforcing Officer’s ability to impose an administrative penalty accrued prior
to such abatement.
   B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever the Enforcing Officer becomes
aware that a property owner or licensee has failed to abate any unlawful
cannabis cultivation and/or canopy overage within two (2) calendar days of the
date of service of the decision of the hearing officer requiring such
abatement, the Enforcing Officer may enter upon the property and abate the
nuisance by county personnel, or by private contractor under the direction of
the Enforcing Officer. The Enforcing Officer may, but need not, apply to a
court of competent jurisdiction for a warrant authorizing entry upon the
property for purposes of undertaking the work, if necessary in their sole
discretion.
   C.   The property owner and/or Licensee shall be responsible for paying all
of the County's abatement costs. Each department performing abatement
activities shall, upon completion of the activity, report abatement costs to
the Enforcing Officer. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.22.   Liability for abatement costs and/or administrative penalties;
interest.
   A.   No person or entity owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or
possession of any property within the unincorporated area of the County of Yolo
shall cause, permit, maintain, conduct or otherwise suffer or allow a public
nuisance as defined in this chapter to exist. It shall be the duty of every
owner, occupant, and person that controls any land or interest therein within
the unincorporated area of the County of Yolo to remove, abate, and prevent the
reoccurrence of the public nuisance upon such land. Such duty of an owner shall
exist regardless of whether the owner is in actual possession of their real
property, and may include an obligation to take action to evict or otherwise
remove an occupier who creates a public nuisance upon the owner's property.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to authorize or permit any activity
that violates any provision of State or federal law.
   B.   In any enforcement action brought pursuant to this chapter, whether by
administrative proceedings, judicial proceedings, or summary abatement, each
person who causes, permits, suffers, or maintains the nuisance to exist shall
be personally liable for:
   1.   All costs incurred by the County, including, but not limited to,
abatement costs and any and all costs incurred to undertake, or to cause or
compel any responsible party to undertake, any abatement action in compliance
with the requirements of this chapter, whether those costs are incurred prior
to, during, or following enactment of this chapter.
   2.   Any administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter. In the
event that an administrative penalty is imposed on two (2) or more persons for
the same violation, all such persons shall be jointly and severally liable for
the full amount of the administrative penalty imposed. Payment of
administrative penalties does not excuse or discharge any continuation or
repeated occurrence of the violation that is the subject of the notice. Payment
of the administrative penalty does not bar the County from taking any other
enforcement action regarding a violation that is not corrected.
   C.   Interest shall accrue on all amounts due under this chapter, from the
effective date of the decision to the date paid pursuant to the laws applicable
to civil money judgments.
   D.   At such time as the information becomes known, the Enforcing Officer
shall make a demand for abatement costs and/or accrued administrative penalty
by issuing an invoice to the licensee and/or the owner of the property subject
to enforcement action.
   E.   Whenever the amount of abatement costs incurred by the County to abate
the nuisance, or the amount of any administrative penalty imposed pursuant to
this chapter has not been satisfied in full within ninety (90) calendar days
after service of the invoice, and/or has not been timely appealed to the
Superior Court in accordance with Government Code section 53069.4, subdivision
(b), or if appealed, such appeal has been dismissed or denied, all or any part
of this obligation may constitute a lien against the real property on which the
violation occurred.
   F.   In addition to any other remedy, including but not limited to
recovering amounts due under this chapter from the bond required by §
12-04.06, the County may prosecute a civil action through the Office of the
County Counsel to collect any abatement costs and/or any administrative penalty
imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   G.   Issuance of a warning shall not be a requirement prior to enforcement
of any provision of this chapter. Cultivation of cannabis in violation of this
chapter and any code violation that exists to facilitate the cultivation of
cannabis in violation of this chapter may be subject to the immediate
imposition of penalties in accordance with §
12-04.25(A). Citations for cannabis related code violations shall be served
concurrently with citations for cannabis cultivation in accordance with §
12-04.25 et seq. of the County Code. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.23.   Lien hearing.
   At such time as abatement costs and/or administrative penalties due and
owing have not timely been paid or recovered in full from the bond required by
this chapter:
   A.   The Enforcing Officer shall prepare and file a written report of
abatement costs and/or administrative penalties (“report”), itemized by
property, with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors stating, as applicable:
   1.   For each abatement carried out, the amount of all accrued abatement
costs, and/or
   2.   For each accrued administrative penalty, the amount of delinquent
administrative penalty.
   B.   Upon receipt of the report, the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall
serve a written notice of hearing on report of abatement costs and/or
administrative penalties to the licensee and property owner as listed on the
license application.
   C.   At the time and date set for the lien hearing, the Board of Supervisors
shall review and consider the report and any protests or objections to it.
   D.   At the conclusion of the lien hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall
make such modifications to the report as it deems necessary and thereafter
shall adopt a resolution confirming, modifying, or discharging the lien amount.
As part of the resolution, the Board of Supervisors may order that all or any
part of the administrative penalty and the cost to correct the violation
pursuant to this chapter, including the abatement costs, as confirmed by the
Board of Supervisors, be placed upon the county tax roll by the County Auditor
as special assessments against the respective parcels of land, or placed on the
unsecured roll, pursuant to section 25845 of the Government Code; provided,
however, that the costs, including the cost of administration, as finally
determined shall not be placed on the tax roll if paid in full prior to entry
of said costs on the tax roll.
   E.   The liens provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded
with the County Recorder. The Board of Supervisors may cause notices of
abatement lien and/or notices of administrative penalty lien to be recorded
against the respective parcels of real property pursuant to section 25845 of
the Government Code. Upon recordation, the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
shall serve, in the manner set forth in §
12-04.18(A)(3), a copy of the recorded notice(s).
   F.   Within thirty (30) calendar days following the Board of Supervisors’
adoption of a resolution imposing a lien, the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
will file same as a judgment lien in the Yolo County Recorder's Office.
   G.   Once recorded, any costs or penalties not specially assessed by the
Board of Supervisors pursuant to this section shall have the same force and
effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions of Code of
Civil Procedure section 697.340, and may be extended as provided in Code of
Civil Procedure sections 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive.
   H.   Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of any lien remaining
unsatisfied at the rate set forth in Civil Code section 685.010.
   I.   Once the County receives full payment for outstanding principal,
penalties, and costs, the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors will record a
notice of satisfaction. A fee shall be paid by the owner(s) and/or occupant(s)
for processing the notice of satisfaction. This notice of satisfaction will
cancel the County's lien under this section.
   J.   The lien may be foreclosed and the real property sold by the filing of
a complaint for foreclosure in a court of competent jurisdiction, and the
issuance of a judgment to foreclose. There shall be no right to trial by jury.
The County shall be entitled to its attorneys’ fees and costs. (§ 2, Ord. 1557,
eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.24.   Alternative hearing procedure.
   If a hearing officer has been appointed in accordance with §
12-04.20 of this chapter, the hearing officer is authorized to conduct the lien
hearing required under §
12-04.23 and shall prepare a recommended decision and resolution for the Board
of Supervisors pursuant to Government Code sections 25845 and 27721. The
recommended decision and resolution shall include any proposed modifications to
the report. The hearing officer shall promptly submit that recommendation and
the administrative record to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors. The Board
of Supervisors may adopt the recommended decision and resolution without
further notice of hearing, or may set the matter for a de novo hearing before
the Board of Supervisors. In the event that the Board of Supervisors sets the
matter for de novo hearing, such hearing shall be held in accordance with the
provisions of §
12-04.23. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.25.   Administrative penalties.
   A.   In addition to any other remedies provided by County Code or state law,
and all other costs, fees, penalties and expenses which may be assessed or
imposed as a result of violation of this chapter, any person who violates any
provision of this chapter, including the owner of the real property on which
the premises are located, shall be liable and responsible for, and shall pay to
the County “administrative penalties,” as set forth below, determined by the
Enforcing Officer.
   Administrative Penalties Schedule
 
Violation           First Offense       Second Offense      Third Offense
Exceedance of
Allowed or Licensed $20 per square foot $30 per square foot $50 per square foot
Cultivation Area
Non-compliance with
Standard or         $1,000              $2,500              $10,000
Requirement
Unlicensed
Commercial Cannabis $10,000             $25,000             $50,000
Activity
 
   1.   For cultivation in exceedance of the allowed or licensed canopy, no
more than twenty dollars ($20.00) per square foot per day for the first
violation; no more than thirty dollars ($30.00) per square foot per day for the
second violation within two (2) years; and no more than fifty dollars ($50.00)
per square foot per day for the third violation within two (2) years.
   2.   For each violation of a standard or condition of the license, use
permit or County Code, no more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) per day for
the first violation; no more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500)
per day for a second violation within two (2) years; and no more than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000) per day for each additional violation within two (2)
years.
   3.   For each unlicensed cannabis activity, no more than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000) per day for the first violation; no more than twenty- five
thousand dollars ($25,000) per day for the second violation within two (2)
years; and no more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) per day for the third
violation within two (2) years.
   4.   In the event that the use or structure in violation may be permitted
with an appropriate permit, up to a maximum of five (5) times the amount of the
standard fee for each required application, approval, review, and permit.
   B.   Each act, omission or condition may be cited as a separate violation
and each violation that continues, exists or occurs on more than one (1) day
may constitute a separate violation on each day.
   C.   Administrative penalties shall begin accruing immediately if a courtesy
notice is issued for a canopy violation, pursuant to §
12-04.16. Administrative penalties shall begin accruing after the expiration of
the three (3) days provided for correction in the notice of violation and
continue for each day that the violation continues. For unlicensed commercial
cultivation, administrative penalties shall begin accruing on the day the
violation was observed.
   D.   The administrative penalty may be imposed via the administrative
process set forth in this chapter, as provided in Government Code Section
53069.4, or may be imposed by the court if the violation requires court
enforcement without an administrative process.
   E.   All administrative penalties collected pursuant to this section shall
be deposited into a special account that shall be expended to fund the
activities of the cannabis licensing program in enforcing this chapter. (§ 2,
Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.26.   Summary abatement.
   Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, when any unlawful
cannabis cultivation constitutes an immediate threat to the public health or
safety, and where the procedures set forth in §
12-04.18 would not result in abatement of that nuisance within a short enough
time period to avoid that threat, the Enforcing Officer may direct any officer
or employee of the County to summarily abate the nuisance. The Enforcing
Officer shall make reasonable efforts to notify the persons identified in §
12-04.18(A)(3) but the formal notice and hearing procedures set forth in this
chapter shall not apply. The County may recover its costs for abating that
nuisance in the manner set forth in this chapter. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January
21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.27.   Non-exclusive remedy.
   This chapter is cumulative to all other remedies now or hereafter available
to abate or otherwise regulate or prevent public nuisances. (§ 2, Ord. 1557,
eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.28.   No vested or non-conforming rights.
   Neither this chapter nor any other provision of this code, or action,
failure to act, statement, representation, certificate, approval, or license
issued by the County or its departments, or their respective representatives,
agents, employees, attorneys or assigns, shall create, confer, or convey any
vested or nonconforming right or benefit regarding any personal or commercial
cannabis activity. (§ 2, Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Sec. 12-04.29.   Limitations on County’s liability.
   A.   To the fullest extent permitted by law, the County shall not assume any
liability whatsoever with respect to approving any License pursuant to this
chapter or the operation of any cannabis operation approved pursuant to this
chapter.
   B.   Under no circumstances shall a cause of action for monetary damages be
allowed against the County of Yolo or any County employee as a result of a
denial or a revocation of a License, or any other disciplinary action. (§ 2,
Ord. 1557, eff. January 21, 2023)
Parallel Reference Table
The following table lists ordinances that have been incorporated into the Yolo
County Code beginning in 2013 when American Legal Publishing began updating the
code.
Ordinance Number Effective Date Code Section
Ordinance Effective Code Section
Number    Date
1426      2-28-2013 8-2.299.38, 8- 2.404, 8- 2.404.5, 8- 2.504, 8- 2.504.5, 8-2.604, 8-2.604.5, 8-
                    2.614, 8- 2.614.5, 8-2.1914, 8-2.1914.5, 8-2.1922, 8-2.1922.5, Title 10, Chapter 10
1428      6-6-2013  8-2.2804
1429      6-20-2013 2-2.102, 2- 2.103, 2-2.104, 2-2.107
1430      7-4-2013  10-11.01
1431      7-4-2013  4-6.216, 4- 6.234, 4-6.235
1433      9-5-2013  4-3.203 - 4-3.205.1
1434      10-24-    8-2.2422—8-2.2 422.6, 8-2.2423—8-2.2 423.3, 8-2.2424—8-2.2 424.11
          2013
1435      11-21-    2-2.3302
          2013
1436      12-5-2013 2-5.116
1437      1-2-2014  10-11.01
1438      1-2-2014  8-2.2419
1440      5-29-2014 3-10.205
1441      6-12-2014 10-6.401—10-6. 407
1442      6-26-2014 7-1.00—7-1.14, 7-2.01—7-2.07, 7-3.00—7-3.04
1444      7-15-2014 2-5.305, 2-5.701, 2-5.1701—2-5.1 705
                    8-14-2014   8-1.101—8-1.105, 8-1.201, 8-1.301—8-1.311, 8-1.401—8-1.407, 8-1.501—8-
                    1.511, 8-1.601—8-1.609, 8-1.701—8-1.704, 8-1.801—8-1.808, 8-1.901—8-1.905, 8-
                    2.101—8-2.1104, 8-2.1106—8-2.115, 8-2.201—8-2.227, 8-2.301—8-2.307, 8-2.401—8-
                    2.407, 8-2.501—8-2.507, 8-2.601—8-2.607, 8-2.701—8-2.707, 8-2.801—8-2.807, 8-
                    2.901—8-2.907, 8-2.1001—8-2.1014, 8-2.1101—8-2.1106, 8-2.1201—8-2.1209, 8-2.1301—8-
1445      8-14-2014 2.1314, 8-3.101—8-3.110, 8-4.101—8-4.103, 8-4.201, 8-4.301—8-4.306, 8-4.401—8-
                    4.406, 8-4.501—8-4.506, 8-4.601—8-4.604, 8-5.101—8-5.106, 8-5.201—8-5.206, 8-
                    5.301—8-5.304, 8-5.401, 8-5.402, 8-5.501—8-5.503, 8-5.601—8-5.604, 8-5.701, 8-
                    6.101—8-6.107, 8-7.101—8-7.104, 8-7.201—8-7.204, 8-9.101—8-9.106, 8-10.101—8-
                    10.109, 8-11.101—8-11.119, 8-12.101—8-12.111, 8-13.101—8-13.109, 8-14.101, 8-
                    14.102, 10-11.01—10-11.14
1448      10-23-    4-3.203.1, 4-3.204
          2014
1449      11-6-2014 8-2.1104
1450      1-5-2015  2-2.3801—2-2.3806, 2-5.112—2-5.114.1, 2-5.305, 2-5.2001—2-5.2004
1451      1-1-2015  8-8.101—8-1.13 3
1452      1-15-2015 8-1.606, 8-2.401, 8-2.403
1453      4-9-2015  8-2.903
1454      8-6-2015  8-2.1104
1455      8-27-2015 2-5.2101—2-5.2 104
1456      8-27-2015 8-2.404
681.299   10-29-    8-1.310, 8-2.305, 8-2.306, 8-2.505, 8-2.506, 8-2.605, 8-2.606, 8-2.705, 8-2.706, 8-
          2015      2.805, 8-2.806, 8-2.906, 8-4.403, 8-5.301
1459      10-29-    4-3.204
          2015
1461      11-12-    6-18.001—6-18. 014
          2015
1465      2-25-2016 10-12.101—10- 12.106
                    8-1.101, 8-1.102, 8-1.201, 8-1.306—8-1.31 0, 8-1.403, 8-1.501, 8-1.505, 8-1.508, 8-
                    1.603, 8-1.606, 8-1.609, 8-1.802, 8-1.901—8-1.90 7, 8-2.212.5, 8-2.225, 8-2.304, 8-
1466      3-24-2016 2.306, 8-2.307, 8-2.402, 8-2.503—8-2.50 7, 8-2.604, 8-2.704, 8-2.804—8-2.80 6, 8-
                    2.905, 8-2.906, 8-2.1004, 8-2.1007, 8-2.1015, 8-2.1104, 8-2.1106, 8-2.1202, 8-
                    2.1203, 8-2.1207, 8-2.1208, 8-3.101—8-3.10 3, 8-3.107—8-3.11 0, 8-4.604, 8-6.104,
                    8-7.202
1468      5-13-2016 8-1.301, 8-1.303 - 8-1.313, 8-2.306, 8-2.404, 8-2.405
                    6-19.101, 6-19.201, 6-19.301, 6-19.401—6-19. 480, 6-19.501, 6-19.502, 6-19.601—6-
1469      7-14-2016 19. 624, 6-19.701—6-19. .703, 6-19.801—6-19. 804, 6-19.901, 6-19.1001, 6-19.1101,
                    6-19.1201, 6-19.1301, 6-19.1302, 6-19.1401—6-1 9.1403, 6-19.1501—6-1 9.1505, 6-
                    19.1601, 6-19.1701
                    6-5.101—5.132, 6-5.201—6-5.21 1, 6-5.301—6-5.31 2, 6-5.401—6-5.40 8, 6-5.501—6-5.51
1470      7-14-2016 1, 6-5.701—6-5.70 3, 6-8.101, 6-8.102, 6-8.201, 6-8.301, 6-8.302, 6-8.401—6-8.42 3,
                    6-8.501—6-8.50 8, 6-8.601—6-8.60 6, 6-8.701—6-8.70 6, 6-8.801—6-8.81 5, 6-8.901, 6-
                    8.902, 6-8.1001—6-8.1 012, 6-8.1201, 6-8.1202, 6-8.1301
1471      10-13-    2-2.3801, 2-2.3804—2.38 06
          2016
1472      11-10-    8-2.1104
          2016
1473      11-24-    5-20.01—5-20.1 5
          2016
1474      5-1-2017  6-15.02, 6-15.04, 6-15.10
1475      12-8-2016 2-10.01
1476      12-22-    9-1.12, 9-1.18, 9-6.01—9-6.14
          2016
1477      12-22-    6-15.10
          2016
1479      1-12-2017 2-2.1602
1480      1-12-2017 6-3.01—6-3.09
1481      1-12-2017 2-5.901—2-5.90 3, 2-5.2103, 2-5.2104
1482      1-12-2017 2-5.117
1486      3-23-2017 8-2.404, 8-2.902, 8-2.903
1487      4-6-2017  10-4.412
1489      5-25-2017 4-3.204, 4-3.205
1490      8-17-2017 8-2.107, 8-2.902—8-2.90 6
1491      8-17-2017 4-5.601
1492      1-1-2019  6-18.003
1494      1-11-2018 8-2.303, 8-2.304, 8-2.306, 8-2.307, 8-2.504
1496      7-1-2018  3-18.01—3-18.3 1
                    8-1.313, 8-2.109, 8-2.219, 8-2.225, 8-2.306, 8-2.307, 8-2.401, 8-2.402, 8-2.502—8-
1497      6-7-2018  2.50 7, 8-2.605, 8-2.702—8-2.70 5, 8-2.805, 8-2.903, 8-2.906, 8-2.1002, 8-2.1008,
                    8-2.1102—8-2.1 104, 8-2.1202, 8-2.1207, 8-2.1301, 8-2.1304, 8-2.1306
1498      6-21-2018 2-2.3701 - 2-2.3705, 2-2.3709, 2-2.3712
1499      7-5-2018  10-13.1—10-13. 10
1500      7-26-2018 8-4.101—8-4.10 4, 8-4.201, 8-4.302, 8-4.401—8-4.40 6, 8-4.501—8-4.50 6, 8-4.601—8-
                    4.60 3
1501      8-23-2018 8-2.306, 8-2.307, 10-10.301—10- 10.303, 10-10.501
1503      11-8-2018 3-1.05
1504      11-8-2018 7-3.03
1506      2-28-2019 1-4.05, 8-2.225
1507      3-21-2019 2-2.3702, 2-2.3705
1510      4-25-2019 2-2.102, 2-2.106, 2-2.108, 2-2.109
1512      8-8-2019  6-15.04
1513      10-24-    9-6.02—9-6.14
          2019
1514      12-5-2019 6-20.01—6-20.1 0
                    4-6.101—4-6.10 4, 4-6.201, 4-6.301—4-6.31 5, 4-6.401, 4-6.402, 4-6.501—4-6.50 6, 4-
          12-19-    6.601—4-6.61 1, 4-6.701—4-6.70 3, 4-6.801, 4-6.802, 4-6.901—4-6.90 3, 4-6.1001, 4-
1515      2019      6.1002, 4-6.1101, 4-6.1102, 4-6.1201, 4-6.1301, 4-6.1401—4-6.1 406, 4-6.1501—4-6.1
                    503, 4-6.1601—4-6.1 604, 4-6.1701—4-6.1 707, 4-6.1801, 4-6.1901, 4-6.2001—4-6.2
                    005, 4-6.2101—4-6.2 106, 4-6.2201, 4-6.2301
                    8-4.201, 8-4.404. 10-3.101—10-3. 103, 10-3.201—10-3. 210, 10-3.301—10-3. 304, 10-
                    3.401—10-3. 419, 10-3.501—10-3. 507, 10-3.601—10-3. 605, 10-3.701, 10-3.702, 10-
                    3.801, 10-3.901, 10-3.1001—10- 3.1010, 10-4.101—10-4. 103, 10-4.201—10-4. 228, 10-
1518      2-13-2020 4.301—10-4. 305, 10-4.401—10-4. 441, 10-4.501—10-4. 510, 10-4.601—10-4. 605, 10-
                    4.701—10-4. 703, 10-4.801—10-4. 804, 10-4.901, 10-4.1001—10- 4.1007, 10-4.1101—10-
                    4.1110, 10-5.101—10-5. 103, 10-5.201—10-5. 231, 10-5.301—10-5. 305, 10-5.501—10-5.
                    534, 10-5.601—10-5. 611, 10-5.701—10-5.712, 10-5.801—10-5.814, 10-5.901—10-5.905,
                    10-5.1001, 10-5.1002, 10-5.1101—10-5.1108, 10-5.1201—10-5.1211, 10-11.01—10-11.14
1519      4-9-2020  10-14.01—10-1 4.06
1521      6-18-2020 7-1.00—7-1.13, 7-2.01—7-2.07, 7-3.00—7-3.04, 7-4.101—7-4.10 6
1522      8-6-2020  8-2.304, 8-2.503—8-2.507, 8-2.604, 8-2.704, 8-2.804, 8-2.1103, 8-2.1104, 8-14.102
1523      7-7-2020  6-21.01—6-21.1 0
1526      10-29-    1-5.01—1-5.18
          2020
1527      11-5-2020 10-11.01
1529      11-19-    6-17.101, 6-17.102, 6-17.201, 6-17.301—6-17. 307, 6-17.401—6-17. 404, 6-17.501—6-
          2020      17. 507
1530      1-14-2021 2-2.3901—2-2.3 903
1531      12-15-    6-22.101, 6-22.201—6-22. 212, 6-22.301—6-22. 313
          2020
1532      1-14-2021 10-14.01—10-1 4.06
1533      2-11-2021 3-14.01—3-14.0 8
1534      5-6-2021  3-4.02
1535      8-12-2021 2-5.2103
1536      8-12-2021 2-2.401—2-2.40 3
1537      8-26-2021 10-12.101—10- 12.103, 10-12.106, 10-12.107
1540      9-14-2021 6-8.1101—6-8.1 111
1541      10-14-    8-2.1401—8-2.1 413
          2021
1542      10-14-    8-1.802
          2021
1543      10-14-    8-2.217
          2021
1544      1-6-2022  2-1.401
1545      1-6-2022  8-2.303—2.306, 8-2.401, 8-2.504, 8-2.603—2.605, 8-2.703—2.705, 8-2.804, 8-2.1404,
                    8-2.1407, 8-2.1408, 8-2.1410
1547      3-10-2022 8-1.302, 8-2.502 - 8-2.507
1548      3-24-2022 10-12.101 - 10-12.107
1551      9-29-2022 2-5.1001 - 2-5.1012, 2-7.102, 2-9.01 - 2-9.05
1552      10-13-    5-10.06, 5-10.07
          2022
1553      10-27-    2-5.1001, 2-5.2002
          2022
1554      11-24-    8-2.1404
          2022
1556      12-22-    5-10.06
          2022
1557      1-23-2023 12-04.01 - 12-04.29
1558      12-22-    8-2.1404
          2022
1559      12-22-    6-15.02, 6-15.10 - 6-15.17
          2022
681.236   12-22-    8-2.1102, 8-2.1104, 8-2.1105
          2022
1561      4-6-2023  4-1.01 - 4-1.11
1564      12-21-    8-2.1403, 8-2.1404, 8-2.1408, 8-2.1410
          2023
1565      2-22-2024 2-2.3401 - 2-2.3408
1566      3-28-2024 2-2.1303
1567      5-9-2024  2-5.1201 - 2-5.1203
1568      7-25-2024 4-1.01 - 4-1.11
1570      12-5-2024 4-4.01 - 4-4.12
1571      3-13-2025 6-15.02, 6-15.03, 6-15.12
1573      5-8-2025  2-2.1301 - 2-2.1308, 2-5.2103, 2-5.2104, 4-1.03
1574      7-3-2025  4-2.101, 4-2.102, 4-2.104, 4-2.105, 4-2.201, 4-2.401, 4-2.402, 4- 2.405, 4-2.406,
                    4-2.409 - 4-2.411, 4-2.413, 4-2.414, 4-2.501 - 4-2.504, 4-2.601, 4-2.603
1579      12-4-2025 6-8.422, 6-8.802.2, 6-8.804, 6-8.806 - 6-8.810, 6-8.812, 6-8.1004, 6-8.1005, 6-
                    8.1012, 6-8.1013
1581      12-18-    9-3.101, 9-3.102, 9-3.201 - 9-3.221, 9-3.301 - 9-3.307
          2025
1582      1-8-2026  2-2.4001 - 2-2.4005
                   
 
