Comprehensive Ordinance List
Publisher's Note: The following table lists all ordinances passed by the City
of Elkins beginning in July 2020. The table includes links to the ordinances
(as maintained in PDF format) and to the code sections affected (where
applicable). For other legislation, including ordinances passed prior to July
2020, please contact the City of Elkins.
 
Ordinances that amend the Municipal Code and are not yet effective have their
identifiying information highlighted in yellow. Changes made by those
ordinances are not incorporated into the text of the Code until the amending
ordinances are effective. Ordinances that do not affect the code have been
grayed out and are not available in a PDF format for viewing.
 
Jump to:
2020 Ordinances
2021 Ordinances
2022 Ordinances
2023 Ordinances
2024 Ordinances
2025 Ordinances
2026 Ordinances
2020 Ordinances
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Eff. Date  Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                    Plan administration fees
272      7-16-2020   
                    Amended:
                    37.32
273      9-3-2020   Sewer revenue bonds
                    Adopting Code
274      8-20-2020   
                    Amended:
                    ADO
                    Building Codes
275      8-6-2020    
                    Amended:
                    150.035
                    Charter amendments
276      11-19-2020  
                    Amended:
                    Charter
                    Deed transfer
278      12-3-2020   
                    Amended:
                    TSO VII
                    Deed transfer
279      12-3-2020   
                    Amended:
                    TSO VII
 
 
2021 Ordinances
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Eff. Date  Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                    Floodplain Regulations
280      3-4-2021    
                    Amended:
                    Chapter 151
                    Creation of Water Board
281      3-17-2021   
                    Amended:
                    33.125—33.133
                    Repealing Enforcement Agency
282      6-10-2021   
                    Amended:
                    Repealing 150.065 - 150.070
                    Elkins Tree Board
284      7-1-2021    
                    Amended:
                    93.093 - 93.102
                    Street and Alley Abandonment Procedures
285      7-1-2021    
                    Amended:
                    93.070 - 93.076
                    Nuisance Properties
286      7-1-2021    
                    Amended:
                    130.085, 130.086, 130.999
                    Amending Adopting Code Ordinance
287      7-1-2021    
                    Amended:
                    ADO
                    Reducing Speed Limit
288      9-2-2021    
                    Amended:
                    Ch. 75, Sch. III
                    City Owned Property: Phil Gainer Community Center
289      9-16-2021   
                    Amended:
                    111.080, 111.081, 111.083, 111.084
                    Closing Wilmoth Avenue between Yokum Street and Main Street
                    and part of Main Street intersecting with Wilmoth Avenue
290      11-18-2021  
                    Amended:
                    TSO IV
291      12-2-2021  Amending Municipal Home Rule
                    Amending Parking Offenses
292      12-2-2021   
                    Amended:
                    71.99
                    Board of Zoning Appeals Meetings
293      12-2-2021   
                    Amended:
                    152.245
                    Closing public right of way between Lot 25 Block C of the
                    first section of the Hillside addition and Lot 26 Block D
294      12-16-2021 of the second section of the Hillside addition
                     
                    Amended:
                    TSO IV
 
 
2022 Ordinances
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                   Closing public rights of way of an unopened alley known as
                   Coke Lane, located behind the Randolph County Housing
                   Authority property Riverside Place Apartments, formally
295      2-17-2022 known as Allegheny Apartments, located on S. Davis Avenue
                    
                   Amended:
                   TSO IV
                   Outdoor Fires
296      3-3-2022   
                   Amended:
                   92.020
                   Annexation
297      3-17-2022  
                   Amended:
                   TSO II
                   Stopping, Standing and Parking Concerning Parking in Alleys
298      5-5-2022   
                   Amended:
                   Adding 71.52, 71.53, 71.99
                   State Building Code
299      7-28-2022  
                   Amended:
                   150.035
                   Streets, Sidewalks, and Public Places
                    
300      7-28-2022 Amended:
                   Adding 93.115, 93.116, 93.117, 93.118, 93.119, 93.120,
                   93.121, 93.199
                   Zoning Code
301      8-18-2022  
                   Amended:
                   Chapter 152
                   Water Rates, Rules and Regulations
302      9-15-2022  
                   Amended:
                   Chapter 51
                   Vacate, abandon, close public right-of-way
303      9-15-2022  
                   Amended:
                   TSO IV
                   Municipal Court Administrative Fee
304      9-15-2022  
                   Amended:
                   Adding 37.13
                   Municipal Court Technology and Maintainence Fee
305      9-15-2022  
                   Amended:
                   37.10
                   Fire Prevention
306      9-15-2022  
                   Amended:
                   92.037
                   Barking and Howling
307      11-3-2022  
                   Amended:
                   90.30
                   Zoning Code
308      11-3-2022  
                   Amended:
                   Chapter 152
 
 
2023 Ordinances
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                   Elections
310      1-19-2023  
                   Amended:
                   Chapter 35
                   Zoning Map
311      3-2-2023   
                   Amended:
                   Chapter 152
312      4-20-2023 Amending and reenacting rates, rules and regulations for
                   furnishing sewer service
313      4-20-2023 Abandoning section of Riverbend Road to West Virginia
                   Division of Highways
                   Sewers and Sewage
314      5-4-2023   
                   Amended:
                   Chapter 52
315      5-18-2023 Creating Tax Increment Financing District
                   Animals
316      7-6-2023   
                   Amended:
                   Chapter 90
                   Amending Ch 152: Zoning
317      12-7-2023  
                   Amended:
                   152.068
                   Sign Regulations
318      8-17-2023  
                   Amended:
                   152.224, 152.230
                  
 
 
2024 Ordinances
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. Eff. Short Title and Code Sections Affected
No.  Date
     1-   Competitive Bidding
319  18-   
     2024 Amended:
          30.20
     3-   Authorizing the issuance of sewer revenue bonds in an amount not to exceed
320  21-  $250,000 to finance the cost of design, acquisition, construction and
     2024 equipping of additions, betterments and extensions to the City’s sanitary
          sewer system
          Authorizes (i) the design, acquisition, construction and equipping of a
          Sanitation Department Garage (the “Project”), (ii) the leasing of certain
     3-   real property and all project improvements and appurtenances thereto by the
321  21-  City from the Elkins Municipal Building Commission, and (iii) the issuance by
     2024 the Elkins Municipal Building Commission of its Lease Revenue Bonds in an
          amount not to exceed $2,000,000 for the purpose of financing the Project and
          matters relating thereto.
          Amending Chapter 152 Zoning related to electronic message display signs and
     3-7- multi-tenant signs
322  2024  
          Amended:
          152.056, 152.224
          Elimination of solicitor permits
323  3-7-  
     2024 Amended:
          Repealing 112.15 - 112.19
     3-   Amending §31.02 (Meetings Generally)
324  21-   
     2024 Amended:
          31.02
          Amending §152.025 concerning meeting frequency for the Board of Zoning
     3-   Appeals
325  21-   
     2024 Amended:
          152.025
     3-   Amending §33.036 concerning meeting frequency for the Planning Commission
326  21-   
     2024 Amended:
          33.036
     4-
327  16-  Establishing a TIF Advisory Committee
     2024
          Vacating, abandoning and closing a portion of public right of way known as
     5-   Coke Alley of the Valley Improvement Company South Elkins addition between
328  16-  Tenth Street and Eleventh Street
     2024  
          Amended:
          TSO IV
          Amending Chapter 152, Zoning Regarding Use Definitions (museum, coworking
     5-   space, conference center)
329  16-   
     2024 Amended:
          152.056, 152.092, 152.111, 152.121, 152.131
          Amending Charter regarding legislative branch composition, elegibility,
     8-1- election and terms
337  2024  
          Amended:
          Charter 2.02
     11-  Amending city officers
339  21-   
     2024 Amended:
          Adding 32.02
 
 
2025 Ordinances
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Eff. Date  Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                    Amending code regarding operating skateboards,
                    rollerblades, etc. Amending code regarding animals or
340      1-23-2025  bicycles on sidewalks.
                     
                    Amended:
                    71.46, 93.004, repealing 93.005
                    Amending code regarding signs for single family residential
                    (R-1) and city residential (R-2) districts
341      1-23-2025   
                    Amended:
                    152.228
                    Amending code regarding candidate filing period
342      1-23-2025   
                    Amended:
                    35.06
                    Amending code regarding flood damage prevention
343      1-23-2025   
                    Amended:
                    151.015, 151.062
                    Incorporating a de minimus exemption for certain small
                    businesses and independent contractos
344      6-26-2025   
                    Amended:
                    110.057, 110.058, 110.069A, 110.072
                    Amending garbage rates
345      6-26-2025   
                    Amended:
                    50.05
                    Authorizing public sale and transfer by deed to the
                    successful bidder of parcel
346      7-10-2025   
                    Amended:
                    TSO VII
                    Amending code concerning conditional uses in City
                    Residential (R-2)
347      7-24-2025   
                    Amended:
                    152.090, 152.092
                    Prohibiting discrimination in Employment, Housing and
                    Public Accommodations
348      10-16-2025  
                    Amended:
                    Adding 30.07
 
2026 Ordinances
 
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                   Reducing speed limit to fifteen (15) miles per hour on all
                   streets and alleys bounded by Sycamore Street, Randolph
349      1-8-2026  Avenue, Diamond Street, and City's eastern boundary
                    
                   Amended:
                   Ch. 75, Sch. III
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
 
 
 
ELKINS, WEST VIRGINIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 348, passed 1-8-2026
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 274
      AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF ELKINS,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF ELKINS, WEST VIRGINIA, DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED
IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES
      
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Elkins,
West Virginia are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of West Virginia empower
and authorize the City of Elkins, West Virginia to revise, amend, restate,
codify and compile any existing ordinances into one Ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, the Common Council of the City of Elkins, West Virginia has
authorized a general compilation, revision, and codification of the ordinances
of the City of Elkins of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
Ordinances in book form; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate reservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ELKINS,
WEST VIRGINIA.
   Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Elkins, West Virginia as
revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby
adopted as and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Elkins,
West Virginia".
   Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 Shall consist
of the following Titles:
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
            10.      General Provisions
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
            30.      General Provisions
            31.      Council
            32.      City Officers
            33.      City Organizations
            34.      Police
            35.      Elections
            36.      Taxation and Finance
            37.      Municipal Court
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
            50.      Garbage
            51.      Water
            52.      Sewers and Sewage
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
            70.      General Provisions
            71.      Stopping, Standing and Parking
            72.      Operation of Vehicles
            73.      Bicycles and Recreational Vehicles
            74.      Pedestrians
            75.      Traffic Schedules
            76.      Parking Schedules
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
            90.      Animals
            91.      Nuisances
            92.      Fire Prevention
            93.      Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
            110.   Business Licenses, Regulations and Taxes
            111.   Alcoholic Beverages
            112.   Solicitors and Canvassers
            113.   Farmers' Market
            114.   Sexually Oriented Businesses
   TITLE XV: GENERAL OFFENSES
            130.   General Offenses
            131.   Minors
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
            150.   Buildings
            151.   Flood Damage Preventions
            152.   Zoning
   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
            I.      Agreements
            II.      Annexations
            III.      Franchises
            IV.      Vacations
            V.      Zoning
            VI.      Renaming of Streets and Alleys
            VII.   Property Transactions
            VIII.   Easements
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
   References to West Virginia Code
   References to 1991 Code
   References to Ordinances
   Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinances except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase of sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinances of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the code.
   Section 4.   Such code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Common Council of the City of Elkins, West
Virginia is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the City Clerk.
   Section 5.   Such code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places
of the Ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations
therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly
signed, attested. recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and
notices thereof as required by law have been given.
   If any portion of this Ordinance shall, for any reason, be declared invalid
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not effect the
remaining provisions hereof and the Common Council determines that it would
have adopted this Ordinance without the invalid provision.
   This ordinance shall become effective upon passage.
PASSED AND AROVED ON FIRST READING: 6th day of August, 2020.
PASSED AND APPROVED ON SECOND AND FINAL READING THE 20th day of August, 2020.
      CITY OF ELKINS, WEST VIRGINIA
                  Van T. Broughton /s/
                  Van T. Broughton, Mayor
Attest:
Jessica R. Sutton /s/
Jessica R. Sutton, City Clerk
ORDINANCE 287
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ELKINS, WEST VIRGINIA
AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING ORDINANCE 274 KNOW AT THE ADOPTING ORDINANCE FOR THE
CODIFIED VERSION OF THE ELKINS CITY CODE AS OF AUGUST 2, 2020
 
   WHEREAS, the City of Elkins has recently updated and codified its ordinances
for publication as the Code of Ordinances of the City of Elkins, West Virginia;
and
   WHEREAS, following codification, the Common Council passed Ordinance 274
known as the Adopting Ordinance for the updated codification; and
   WHEREAS, at the time of the final passage of Ordinance 274 on August 20,
2020, the provisions of the City Code establishing the Sanitary Board, § 52.25
through § 52.30, had been advertently omitted by the publisher; and
   WHEREAS, the Common Council has been determined that Ordinance 274 shall be
amended and supplemented to include the adoption of the omitted provisions of
the City Code;
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY
OF ELKINS THAT ELKINS CITY CODE § 52.25 THROUGH 52.30 BE ADOPTED AND SHALL
CONSTITUTE PROVISIONS OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF ELKINS, WEST
VIRGINIA AS WAS PROVIDED FOR IN ORDINANCE 274, ADOPTING ORDINANCE.
   If any portion of this Ordinance shall, for any reason, be declared invalid
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the
remaining provisions hereof and Common Council determines that it would have
adopted this Ordinance without the invalid provision.
   This Ordinance shall become effective upon the date of its final adoption.
PASSED AND APPROVED ON THE FIRST READING: June 17, 2021.
PASSED AND APPROVED ON THE SECOND AND FINAL READING THIS 1ST DAY OF July, 2021.
                                              /s/
                                               Jerry A. Marco, Mayor
Attest:
/s/
Jessica R. Sutton, City Clerk
CHARTER
Editor’s note:
This Charter was adopted by Ordinance 276, passed November 19, 2020 and shall
become effective as of April 1, 2021.
Section
ARTICLE I: POWERS OF THE CITY
   
1.01   Incorporation
   
1.02   Powers of the City
   
1.03   Construction
   
1.04   Form of government
   
1.05   Intergovernmental relations
   
1.06   Residency and resident voter
   
1.07   Wards designated and described
   
1.08   Elections
   
1.09   Open Government
ARTICLE II: LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
   
2.01   Powers and duties of City Council
   
2.02   Composition, eligibility, election and terms
   
2.03   Compensation; expenses
   
2.04   Ethics and prohibitions
   
2.05   Judge of qualifications
   
2.06   Inquiries and investigations
   
2.07   Independent audit
   
2.08   Conduct of business
   
2.09   Standing committees
   
2.10   Ad-hoc committees
   
2.11   Action requiring an ordinance
   
2.12   Ordinances in general
   
2.13   Emergency ordinances
   
2.14   Franchises
   
2.15   Codification and printing
ARTICLE III: EXECUTIVE BRANCH
   
3.01   Appointment, powers and duties of the Mayor
   
3.02   Qualification of Mayor
   
3.03   Compensation of Mayor
   
3.04   Public ethics and prohibitions
   
3.05   Vacancies; forfeiture of office; removal from office; filling of
vacancies
   
3.06   City Clerk
   
3.07   Appointment, powers and duties of the City Treasurer
ARTICLE IV: FINANCIAL PROCEDURES
   
4.01   Fiscal year
   
4.02   Submission of budget and budget message
   
4.03   Budget message
   
4.04   Budget
   
4.05   Capital program
   
4.06   Council action on budget
   
4.07   Council action on capital program
   
4.08   Public records
   
4.09   Amendments after adoption
   
4.10   Lapse of appropriations
   
4.11   Administration of budget
ARTICLE V: PLANNING AND ZONING
   
5.01   Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals
   
5.02   Comprehensive Plan
   
5.03   Membership and vacancies in office
ARTICLE VI: NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
   
6.01   City elections
   
6.02   Nominations and certification of candidates
   
6.03   Ballots
   
6.04   Determination of election results
ARTICLE VII: PROHIBITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
7.01   Prohibitions
   
7.02   Gifts
   
7.03   Holding two offices
   
7.04   Oaths and bonding of officers and employees
ARTICLE I: POWERS OF THE CITY
SECTION 1.01. INCORPORATION.
   The inhabitants of the portion of the County of Randolph, the State of West
Virginia, within the geographic and political limits of the City of Elkins as
they now exist, or as they may hereafter be, shall be and continue a body
politic and corporate in perpetuity by the name and style of "The City of
Elkins."
SECTION 1.02. POWERS OF THE CITY.
   The City shall have all the powers specifically provided for in this Charter
and shall also have all the powers now or hereafter granted to municipal
corporations and to cities of its class by the Constitution and general laws of
the State, together with all the implied powers necessary and proper to carry
into execution the powers so granted. The enumeration herein of particular
powers shall not be deemed exclusive, but the City shall have and may exercise
all the powers which under the Constitution and laws of the State it is
possible for a City to have, as fully and completely as though they were
specifically enumerated in this Charter.
SECTION 1.03. CONSTRUCTION.
   The powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed liberally in
favor of the Citizens of the City, by and through their duly elected officials,
and the specific mention of particular powers in the Charter shall not be
construed as limiting in any way the general power stated in this Article.
SECTION 1.04 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   A "Mayor-Council Plan", set forth as "Plan I" in Section 2 of Article 3 of
Chapter 8 of the West Virginia Code 1931 as amended, is established as the form
of government for the City of Elkins. There shall be a Council elected by ward
by the qualified voters of each ward and a Mayor elected at large by the
qualified voters of the city; the Mayor shall serve as the presiding officer of
the Council. The Council and Mayor shall be the governing body and the
administrative authority.
SECTION 1.05 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS.
   The City may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and
may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise, with the State of West Virginia and any of its
subdivisions and agencies, or with the United States government or any agency
thereof, or with another of the United States.
SECTION 1.06. RESIDENCY AND RESIDENT VOTER.
   As used throughout this Charter, the term "resident of the City" shall mean
a person having declared and maintaining a primary residence located within the
political boundaries of the City of Elkins such that the West Virginia
Secretary of State, as chief election official, recognizes that location as the
voter's legal residence. The term "resident voter" shall mean a resident of the
City who is qualified to vote by the Constitution and the laws of the State of
West Virginia.
SECTION 1.07. WARDS DESIGNATED AND DESCRIBED.
   The territory of said City shall be divided into wards of approximately
equal population as follows:
   First ward. Beginning at the beginning point of the corporate boundary, at
Bridge Number two, and running thence down the Tygarts Valley River, with the
meanders thereof, to the point where said river crosses the western boundary of
said city and with said western boundary to the place of beginning.
   Second ward. Beginning at the point where the second corporate boundary line
crosses the Beverly and Fairmont Pike, near the residence of W. H. Head and
running thence with said Beverly and Fairmont Pike to the point where it
intersects the Buffalo and Leading Creek Pike; thence with said last mentioned
pike to the point where it crosses Cravens Run on the corporate boundary and
shall include all the territory lying between said two pikes and the eastern
boundary of the city.
   Third ward. Beginning at the point where the boundary of the First Ward
crosses the West Virginia Central and Pittsburgh Railway, in the Tygarts Valley
River, at Bridge Number one, near the intersection of Railroad Avenue and First
Street, and running thence down said river with the meanders thereof to the
point where the said river crosses the northern boundary of the city, thence
with said northern boundary, in a northern direction to the point where said
boundary line crosses said railroad, near Maplewood Cemetery, thence with said
railroad to the place of beginning.
   Fourth ward. Beginning on the West Virginia Central and Pittsburgh Railway
at the junction of Railroad Avenue and Second Street and running thence with
Second Street to John Street; thence with John Street to Randolph Avenue,
thence with Randolph Avenue to the junction of said avenue with Buffalo Street
(a point in the boundary of the second ward) and shall include all the
territory lying west and south of the streets just named which is not embraced
in the First and Second Wards as above bounded.
   Fifth ward. Shall include all the territory within the corporate boundary
lying north of the fourth ward, between the Second and Third Wards as above
bounded.
   The number and boundary of the wards of said city may be changed at any time
by the council thereof, but the number of wards shall not be reduced below
three or increased above seven in number and shall be made as nearly equal in
population as practical; provided, however, that no change in number or
boundary of said wards shall be made nearer than sixty days before any general
or special election to be held in said city; and provided, further, that no
such change shall be made until public notice is given for at least thirty
days, such notice to be posted at City Hall and at five or more public places
in said city at least one of which notices shall be posted in each ward.
SECTION 1.08. ELECTIONS.
   All City elections shall be nonpartisan. Except as otherwise provided
herein, the provisions of general law with respect to the method and time for
the filing of certificates of candidacy, conducting elections, and determining
and certifying the results of such elections, shall apply to City elections.
SECTION 1.09. OPEN GOVERNMENT.
   All records and documents of every office, department, division, board,
commission or agency of which the City is custodian of shall be open to
inspection by any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm or association
at all reasonable times and under reasonable regulations established by
Council; provided, however, records and documents authorized to be excluded
from public disclosure under the West Virginia Code or other applicable law
shall not be subject to the requirements of this section.
(Amendment approved on 3-2-2021)
ARTICLE II: LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
SECTION 2.01 POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY COUNCIL.
   All powers of the City shall be vested in the Council and Mayor together as
the Governing Body of the City, except as otherwise provided by law or this
Charter, and the Council and Mayor shall provide for the exercise thereof and
for the performance of all rights, duties and obligations allowed or imposed on
the City by law. Council and the Mayor shall and may only act in all matters as
a body, and only act upon a quorum vote in a duly noticed public meeting.
Council members may not, without authority delegated by public vote of a quorum
of Council, seek to influence or otherwise interfere with the authorized
official acts of any officer or employee of the City.
SECTION 2.02. COMPOSITION, ELIGIBILITY, ELECTION AND TERMS.
   (a)   Composition. There shall be a City Council of ten members. Two
Councilors shall reside in and represent each of the five wards of the City.
   (b)   Eligibility. Only resident voters of the City, as defined by this
Charter, shall be eligible to hold the office of Councilor. Councilors shall
reside in the Ward to be represented at the time of nomination and throughout
the term of office. There shall be no other eligibility requirements. Council
shall be the final arbiter of the eligibility of any prospective candidate and
the continued eligibility of an elected Councilor.
   (c)   Nomination. Any person who is eligible to hold office as a Councilor
may file for election in compliance with West Virginia and City law.
   (d)   Election. Councilors shall be elected by the qualified voters of the
wards they reside in and represent. One member of the council for each ward
shall be elected at each City election.
   (e)   Term. Councilmembers shall serve a term of four (4) years, beginning
on the first day of July immediately following the election of that member, and
until the successor in office is elected and qualified.
   (f)   Special Elections. Special elections for any purpose must be
authorized by a two-thirds majority public vote of a quorum of the Council and
called by the Mayor. Notices of all special elections must be given by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation, published in the City of
Elkins.
   (g)   Canvas. The Council shall sit as the Board of Election Canvassers in
compliance with State and City law. In the case of a tie vote for any office,
Council shall by majority vote determine the winning candidate.
   (h)   Vacancy. The office of a Councilmember shall become vacant upon death,
resignation, or forfeiture or removal from office in any manner authorized by
law or by this Charter. A vacancy shall also exist whenever a Councilmember
shall remove from the ward from which the nomination to serve was made. The
vacancy shall be filled by appointment of a qualified person by Council. The
office shall be placed on the next election for service of the remainder of the
vacated term or for a new term, whichever is appropriate.
Note: See W. Va. Code §§ 3-1-2, 3-1-3
   (i)   Forfeiture of Office. A Councilmember shall automatically and by
operation of law forfeit office if that Councilor:
      (1)   Lacks at any time during term of office any qualification for the
office prescribed by this Charter or by law; or,
      (2)   Violates any express provision of this Charter; or,
      (3)   Is found by a two-thirds majority public vote of a quorum of the
Council to have violated the conflict of interest provisions at section
nineteen, article five, chapter eight of the West Virginia Code; or,
      (4)   Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Council
without prior notice to Council of the absences.
      (5)   Members subject to forfeiture of office shall be notified by
resolution of Council of said forfeiture. Forfeiting member’s not voluntarily
relinquishing office shall be removed by action of a court of competent
jurisdiction in accordance with West Virginia law.
(Ord. 337, passed 8-1-2024)
SECTION 2.03. COMPENSATION; EXPENSES.
   Councilors. shall receive compensation as determined by Council and shall be
reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of
duties. No ordinance increasing such compensation shall become effective until
the first day of July following the next regular election, provided that such
election follows the adoption of such ordinance by at least six months. The
compensation of any member of Council shall not be diminished during an active
term of office.
SECTION 2.04. ETHICS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   Public Ethics. Councilors shall openly, competently, and impartially
conduct public business to the highest ethical standards and in strict
compliance with West Virginia law. Officials found by a competent Court or
Commission to have acted in violation of the West Virginia Governmental Ethics
Act, the Open Governmental Proceedings Act, the Freedom of Information Act, or
the United States, West Virginia or City of Elkins Criminal Code may be subject
to sanction by Council, including forfeiture of office, as authorized by this
Charter and West Virginia law.
   (b)   Holding Other Office. During a term of office, no Councilor shall hold
any other elected public office, nor shall be employed by the City in any other
capacity.
SECTION 2.05. JUDGE OF QUALIFICATIONS.
   Council shall be the judge of the eligibility of candidates for election and
continuing qualifications of its members and of the grounds for forfeiture of
their office and for that purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses,
administer oaths and require the production of evidence as authorized by West
Virginia law. A member charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture
of office shall, upon request, be entitled to a public hearing. Notice of such
hearings shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in
the City at least one week in advance of the hearing. Decisions made by the
Council under this section shall be subject to judicial review in accordance
with West Virginia law.
SECTION 2.06. INQUIRIES OR INVESTIGATIONS.
   The Council may make or cause to be made inquiries or investigations into
the affairs of the City and the conduct of any City department, office or
agency and for this purpose may invite or subpoena witnesses, administer oaths,
take testimony and require the production of evidence as authorized by West
Virginia law.
   A written report of the findings of fact shall be made or endorsed by the
Council within a reasonable time of the conclusion of any inquiry or
investigation conducted under this section, which reports shall be made a
public record, subject to West Virginia law and/or an Order of Court
restricting disclosure.
   Inquiries or investigations under this section shall be conducted only at a
duly noticed public meeting called especially for the purpose of conducting an
inquiry or investigation.
   Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the
exercise of these powers by Council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punishable by a fine as established by council from time to time.
SECTION 2.07. INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
   Council shall provide for an annual independent audit of all City accounts
and may provide for such more frequent audits as it deems necessary. Such
audits shall be made by a licensed certified public accountant or firm of such
accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal
affairs of the City government or any of its officers. Audits shall be
conducted in accordance with West Virginia law and regulation, and with
guidelines promulgated by the West Virginia State Auditor.
SECTION 2.08. CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
   (a)   Meetings. The Council shall meet regularly at such time and place as
the Council may prescribe by rule. Special meetings shall be held upon the
written petition of two or more Members of Council or the call of the Mayor.
All meetings shall be public; however, the Council may recess for the purpose
of discussing, in a closed executive session, any matter which is permitted by
the West Virginia Code to be discussed in a closed or executive session;
provided that the announcement and conduct of the executive session conform to
the requirements of West Virginia law.
   (b)   Rules and Journal. The Council shall determine its own rules and order
of business and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings. This
journal shall be a public record.
   (c)   Voting. Voting, except as may be otherwise directed by the Mayor,
shall be by oral ayes and nays, the final resolution of which shall be recorded
in the journal. Six members of the Council, not including the Mayor, shall
constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may meet from time to time and may
compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and subject to the
penalties that may be
prescribed by the rules of the Council. No action of the Council, except as
otherwise provided in this Charter, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by
the affirmative public vote of a quorum of the Council.
SECTION 2.09. STANDING COMMITTEES.
   (a)   Committees. There shall be standing committees of Council comprised of
members of Council appointed by the Mayor and governed by rules adopted by
Council. The Mayor shall appoint Chairs of the standing committees whose work
will be supported by appropriate members of the City Staff. The standing
committees shall include no fewer than three (3) and no more than five (5)
Councilors. The missions of these committees are:
      (1)   Finance Committee: Recommend an annual budget to Council. Supervise
budget management and make reports to Council. Review and propose to Council
municipal debt instruments and grants. Make fiscal forecasts and report same to
Council.
      (2)   Rules and Ordinances: Consider and propose to Council new and
amended ordinances, rules, and policies.
      (3)   Municipal Properties: Monitor and report to Council on the
condition of and proposed plans for city buildings, real estate, and rights-of-
way. Review and propose to Council capital investment in buildings, real
estate, and associated infrastructure.
      (4)   Public Safety: Monitor and report to council on the activities of,
condition of and proposed plans for municipal public safety assets, including
police, fire, and emergency services. Review and propose to Council capital
investment in public safety equipment and infrastructure.
      (5)   Personnel: Review and propose to Council employment policies,
including employee compensation and benefits and an employee handbook. Review
applications for primary staff positions recommended by the Mayor and make
hiring recommendations to Council.
SECTION 2.10. AD-HOC COMMITTEES.
   There may be one or more Ad-hoc committees of Council assigned a mission or
missions by Council or the Mayor and comprised of members of Council appointed
by the Mayor. The Mayor shall appoint Chairs of the Ad-hoc committee and direct
support from appropriate members of the City Staff.
SECTION 2.11. ACTION REQUIRING AN ORDINANCE.
   In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of this
Charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the City Council shall be by
ordinance which:
   (a)   Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish, alter, or abolish
any City department, office, agency, board or commission;
   (b)   Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation
for violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed;
   (c)   Levy taxes and provide for the collection of fees of any lawful kind;
   (d)   Grant, renew or extend a franchise;
   (e)   Regulate the rate charged for its services by a public utility, to the
extent permitted by law;
   (f)   Authorize the borrowing of money;
   (g)   Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands from
the City or to the City;
   (h)   Require a license to do business;
   (i)   Provide for a public improvement;
   (j)   Lay out or vacate a public street, avenue, road, alley or way;
   (k)   Change ward boundaries; and,
   (l)   Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted.
SECTION 2.12. ORDINANCES IN GENERAL.
   (a)   Form. Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in
the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain more than one
subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title. The enacting clause
shall be "The City of Elkins hereby ordains ... ". Any ordinance which repeals
or amends an existing ordinance or part of the City code shall set out in full
the ordinance, sections or subsections to be repealed or amended, and shall
indicate matter to be omitted by enclosing it in brackets or by strikeout type
and shall indicate new matter by underscoring or by italics.
   (b)   Procedure. Ordinances shall be adopted in accordance with the
following requirements, except where different or additional requirements are
specified by law, in which event such other different or additional
requirements shall be applicable. The Council may by ordinance specify other
additional requirements for the enactment of ordinances or may prescribe a
procedure for the enactment of ordinances in greater detail than prescribed by
this Charter, but the Council shall not, except in an emergency as specified in
this Charter or as otherwise provided by law, lessen or reduce the requirements
of this Charter.
      (1)   An ordinance may be introduced by the Mayor or any Member at any
regular or special meeting of the Council. Upon introduction of any ordinance,
the City Clerk shall distribute a copy to the Mayor and each Council Member and
shall maintain electronic and written copies to be made readily available to
the public.
      (2)   A proposed ordinance shall be read by title at two meetings of
Council, unless a member or a City resident demands that the ordinance be read
in full, or in part, at one or both meetings. If such demand is made, the
ordinance shall be read as demanded.
      (3)   At least five days before the meeting at which a proposed
ordinance, the principal object of which is the raising of revenue for the
municipality, is to be finally adopted, the Council shall cause notice of the
proposed ordinance to be published as a Class I legal advertisement in
compliance with the provisions of article three chapter fifty-nine of the West
Virginia Code, and the publication area for such publication shall be the
municipality. The notice shall state the subject matter and the general title
or titles of such proposed ordinance; the date, time, and place of the proposed
final vote on adoption; and the place or places within the City or on-line
where such proposed ordinance may be inspected by the public. A reasonable
number of copies of the proposed ordinance shall be kept at such place or
places and be made available for public inspection. Said notice shall also
advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard with
respect to the proposed ordinance.
      (4)   The affirmative public vote of a quorum of Council shall be
required for the adoption of an ordinance.
      (5)   A proposed ordinance shall not be materially amended at the same
meeting at which finally adopted. Upon challenge, a majority vote of Council
shall determine whether a proposed amendment substantially amends the purpose
or effect of the proposed ordinance. If so finding, the Mayor or other
presiding officer shall disallow Council action on the proposed amendment.
   (c)   The Council may adopt, by ordinance, standard building codes, housing
codes, plumbing codes, sanitary codes, electrical codes, fire prevention codes,
or any other code of technical regulations dealing with general public health,
safety or welfare, or a combination of the same, or a comprehensive code of
ordinances. Before any such ordinance shall be adopted, the proposed code shall
be presented in a readable form to the Council at a regular meeting, and copies
of such code shall be made available for public inspection. The ordinance
adopting such code shall not set out said code in full but shall merely
identify the same. The vote on adoption of said ordinance shall be the same as
on any other ordinance. After adoption, such code or codes shall be filed as a
permanent record in the office of the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall not be
required to transcribe and record the same in the ordinance book as other
ordinances are transcribed and recorded. It shall not be necessary that any
such ordinance, either as proposed or after adoption, be published in any
newspaper, and it shall not be necessary that the code itself be so published.
SECTION 2.13. EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   The City may enact an ordinance without complying with the rules prescribed
in Section
2.12 only in the case of a pressing public emergency making procedure in
accordance with the provisions of said section dangerous to the public health,
safety or morals, and as certified by affirmative vote of two-thirds of the
Members elected to the governing body; or, when otherwise provided by law. The
nature of any such qualifying emergency or exemption shall be set out in full
in the ordinance. The enacted emergency ordinance shall be placed on the agenda
of the first regular meeting following the emergency for review and
ratification.
SECTION 2.14. FRANCHISES.
   (a)   Franchises or permits granting the right of public service and/or the
occupancy of any portion of public property shall be granted only by ordinance.
   (b)   No grant of franchise shall be made without, at the time of making it,
providing that the grantee shall indemnify the city against all damages caused
by construction, maintenance, or operation of such works and/or services.
Additional provisions and conditions shall be made for the protection of the
public against damage or inconvenience by reason of the construction,
maintenance, or operation thereof.
SECTION 2.15. CODIFICATION AND PRINTING.
   To the extent that it has not already done so, within three years after
adoption of this Charter and at least every ten years thereafter, the Council
shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all City
ordinances and resolutions having the force and effect of law. The general
codification shall be adopted by the Council by ordinance and shall be
published promptly in bound or loose-leaf form and electronically, together
with the Charter and any amendments thereto. This compilation shall be known
and cited officially as the Elkins City Code. Copies of the code shall be
furnished to City officers, placed in the City library, in the City Clerk's
office and on an on-line hosting service for free public reference.
ARTICLE III: EXECUTIVE BRANCH
SECTION 3.01. APPOINTMENT, POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall be elected at large by the qualified voters of the City, and
shall serve a term of four years, beginning on the first day of July following
election.
   (a)   The Mayor shall be recognized as the chief executive officer and head
of government of the City. The Mayor shall exercise all powers and perform all
duties vested in or imposed by this Charter, ordinance, general law, or rule
necessarily implied therefrom to carry out the functions of the office.
   (b)   The Mayor shall nominate for service officers and members of
independent boards, agencies or commissions, the City Clerk, Police Chief, the
Fire Chief, City Treasurer, the City Attorney, the Judge of the Municipal Court
and the Operations Manager, which nominations shall be subject to review by the
Personnel Committee of Council and the final approval of Council.
   (c)   The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the Council, and, as such,
shall be bound by all attendance regulations governing Councilmembers.
   (d)   The Mayor may vote on a matter before Council only upon a tie vote of
Council.
   (e)   In the event of the temporary absence of the Mayor, the City Clerk
shall serve as the Acting Mayor. In the event of an extended absence of the
Mayor, Council shall by public vote select one of their number to serve as
Acting Mayor. The Acting Mayor shall exercise the powers and duties of the
Mayor as described in this Article.
   (f)   The Mayor shall see that all laws, ordinances and provisions of this
Charter and acts of the Council, subject to enforcement by the City, are
faithfully executed and enforced.
(Amendment approved on 3-2-2021)
SECTION 3.02. QUALIFICATIONS OF MAYOR.
   Prior to election and throughout a term of office the Mayor shall be a
resident voter of the City of Elkins.
SECTION 3.03. COMPENSATION OF MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall receive compensation as determined by Council and shall be
reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of
duties. No ordinance increasing such compensation shall become effective until
the first day of July following the next regular election, provided that such
election follows the adoption of such ordinance by at least six months. The
compensation of the Mayor shall not be diminished during an active term of
office.
SECTION 3.04. PUBLIC ETHICS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   Public Ethics. The Mayor shall openly, competently, and impartially
conduct public business to the highest ethical standards and in strict
compliance with West Virginia law. If found by competent Court or Commission to
have acted in violation of the West Virginia Governmental Ethics Act, the Open
Governmental Proceedings Act, the Freedom of Information Act, or the United
States, West Virginia or City of Elkins Criminal Code, the Mayor may be subject
to sanction by Council, including forfeiture of office as authorized by this
Charter and West Virginia law.
   (b)   Holding Other Office. During term of office, the Mayor shall hold no
other elected public office nor be employed by the City in any other capacity.
SECTION 3.05. VACANCIES; FORFEITURE OF OFFICE; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; FILLING OF
VACANCIES.
   (a)   Vacancies. The office of a Mayor shall become vacant upon death,
resignation, or forfeiture or removal from office in any manner authorized by
law or by this Charter. A vacancy shall also exist whenever a qualified person
has not been elected to a position of Mayor under the provisions of this
Charter.
   (b)   Forfeiture of Office. A Mayor shall automatically and by operation of
law forfeit office if the Mayor:
      (1)   Lacks at any time during term of office any qualification for the
office prescribed by this Charter or by law; or,
      (2)   Violates any express prohibition of this Charter; or,
      (3)   Is found by two-thirds majority public vote of Council to have
violated the conflict of interest provisions at section nineteen, article five,
chapter eight of the West Virginia Code; or,
      (4)   Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Council
without prior written notice to Council of the absence.
      (5)   If the Mayor is subject to forfeiture, the Mayor shall be notified
by resolution of Council of said forfeiture. A forfeiting Mayor not voluntarily
relinquishing office shall be removed by action of a court or competent
jurisdiction in accordance with West Virginia law.
   (c)   Filling of Vacancies. The filling of a vacancy in the Office of Mayor
shall be by a qualified person appointed by majority vote of a quorum of
Council within 60 (sixty) days after the occurrence of the vacancy. The office
shall be placed on the next election for service of the remainder of the
vacated term or for a new term, whichever is appropriate.
Note: See W. Va. Code §§ 3-1-2, 3-1-3
SECTION 3.06 CITY CLERK.
   Council may, upon nomination by the Mayor and review by the Personnel
Committee, appoint an individual to serve as City Clerk at the will and
pleasure of the Council. Compensation for the City Clerk shall be fixed by the
City Council. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter and subject to the
supervision of the administrative authority of the city as identified in
Section
1.04, the Clerk shall:
   (a)   Be the chief custodian of all Municipal documents and records of the
City, except as otherwise specified in this Charter.
   (b)   Act as the certifying officer of the City with respect to all official
documents requiring such certification and shall be the custodian of the
corporate seal of the City.
   (c)   Serve as the Chief Election Officer of the City, and, in that
capacity, plan for and administer City elections and the Board of Canvas in
accordance with the law.
   (d)   Establish and maintain an orderly system for filing and archiving City
records in secure containers.
   (e)   Prepare City letters, correspondence, and other official documents of
the City.
   (f)   Give notice of and attend all meetings of Council, keep the journal of
its proceedings, authenticate by signature and record in full in a book kept
for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions of the Council, prepare and keep
up to date an index of all such ordinances and resolutions, and keep all such
records available for public inspection.
   (g)   Make and certify copies of any ordinance, resolution, or order of
Council.
   (h)   Prepare and cause to be served all notices required to be given to any
person, firm, or corporation, and after the proper service and return of any
notice, to file and preserve the same.
   (i)   Perform such other duties as may be required by this Charter, by
general law, or by City ordinance or lawful order of the Mayor.
SECTION 3.07 APPOINTMENT, POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY TREASURER.
   Council may, upon nomination by the Mayor and review by the Personnel
Committee, appoint an individual to serve as City Treasurer at the will and
pleasure of the Council. Compensation for the City Treasurer shall be fixed by
the City Council. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter and subject to
the supervision of the administrative authority of the city as identified in
Section
1.04, the Treasurer shall:
   (a)   Administer the fiscal affairs of the City under the direction of the
governing body and supervision of the administrative authority and shall
competently and fairly exercise the power and duties described in this section.
      (1)   Maintain lawful, accurate and timely financial records of the City.
      (2)   In collaboration with the administrative authority, prepare the
annual and capital program.
      (3)   Propose to the governing body official acts of the City, including
ordinances and policies, to ensure and document the lawful management of City
funds.
      (4)   The City Treasurer, in collaboration with their supervisor, monthly
submit to the Council and make available to the public complete reports on the
finances and administrative activities of the City. These reports shall be made
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles for municipal
governments and agencies.
      (5)   The City Treasurer, in collaboration with their supervisor, prepare
and make available to the public reports on the finances and administrative
activities of the City as of the end of each fiscal year. The report on
finances shall be made in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles for municipal governments and agencies.
      (6)   Perform such other duties as may be required by this Charter, by
general law, or by City ordinance or lawful order of the Mayor.
ARTICLE IV: FINANCIAL PROCEDURES
SECTION 4.01. FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of July and end on
the last day of June.
SECTION 4.02. SUBMISSION OF BUDGET AND BUDGET MESSAGE.
   On or before the 15th day of March of each year, the Finance Committee shall
submit to the Mayor and Council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an
accompanying budget message.
SECTION 4.03. BUDGET MESSAGE.
   The Finance Committee budget message shall explain the budget both in fiscal
terms and in terms of the work programs. It shall outline the proposed
financial policies of the City for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the
important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current
year in fmancial policies, expenditures, and revenues together with the reasons
for such changes, summarize the City's debt position and include such other
material as the Finance Committee deems desirable.
SECTION 4.04. BUDGET.
   The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all City funds and
activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law or this
Charter, shall be made in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles for municipal governments and agencies. In organizing the budget,
the Treasurer shall utilize the most feasible combination of expenditure
classification by fund, organization unit, program, purpose or activity, and
object. It shall begin with a clear general summary of its contents; shall show
in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and
all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year;
and shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and
estimated income and expenditures of the current fiscal year and actual income
and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. It shall indicate in separate
sections:
   (a)   Proposed expenditures for current operations during the ensuing fiscal
year, detailed by offices, departments, and agencies in terms of their
respective work programs, and the method of financing such expenditures.
   (b)   Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed
by offices, departments, and agencies when practicable, and the proposed method
of financing each such capital expenditure.
   (c)   Anticipated net surplus or deficit for the ensuing fiscal year of each
utility or other facility owned or operated by the City and the proposed method
of its disposition; subsidiary budgets for each such utility or facility giving
detailed income and expenditure information shall be attached as appendices to
the budget. The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of
estimated income.
SECTION 4.05. CAPITAL PROGRAM.
   (a)   Submission to Council. The administrative authority of the City, as
described in Section
1.04 , shall prepare, and submit to Council a five-year capital program at
least three weeks prior to the final date for submission of the budget.
   (b)   Contents. The capital program shall include:
      (1)   A clear general summary of its contents;
      (2)   A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be
undertaken during the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate
supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements;
      (3)   Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedule
for each such improvement; and,
      (4)   The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the
facilities to be constructed or acquired.
   The above information shall be revised and extended each year with regard to
capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or
acquisition.
SECTION 4.06. COUNCIL ACTION ON BUDGET.
   (a)   Notice and Hearing. The Council shall publish in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the City the general summary of the
budget.
   (b)   Amendment Before Adoption. After public hearing, the Council may adopt
the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or
increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or
amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for
estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase
the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated
income.
   (c)   Adoption. The Council shall adopt the budget on or before the 28th day
of March of the fiscal year currently ending. Adoption of the budget shall
constitute appropriations of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from
the funds indicated.
SECTION 4.07. COUNCIL ACTION ON CAPITAL PROGRAM.
   (a)   Notice and Hearing. The Council shall publish in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the City the general summary of the
capital program.
   (b)   Adoption. The Council by resolution shall adopt the capital program
with or without amendment after the public hearing and on or before the 28th
day of March of the current fiscal year.
SECTION 4.08. PUBLIC RECORDS.
   Copies of the budget and the capital program as adopted shall be public
records and shall be made available to the public at suitable places in the
City.
SECTION 4.09. AMENDMENTS AFTER ADOPTION.
   (a)   Supplemental Appropriations. If during the fiscal year the Treasurer
certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of
those estimated in the budget, the Council by public vote may make supplemental
appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess.
   (b)   Emergency Appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting life,
health, property or the public peace, the Council may make emergency
appropriations and borrowings. Such appropriations or borrowings may be made by
ordinance in accordance with this Charter and West Virginia law.
   (c)   Reduction of Appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it
appears probable to the Treasurer that the revenues available will be
insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, the Treasurer shall report to the
Finance Committee without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the
deficit, any remedial action taken and recommendations as to any other steps to
be taken. The Committee shall then take such further action as it deems
necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit, and for that purpose may
recommend to council a public vote to reduce one or more appropriations.
   (d)   Transfer of Appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year and
upon request of the supervising administrative officer, the Treasurer may
transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs
within the supervised department, office, or agency, subject to approval by
Council.
   (e)   Limitations; Effective Date. No appropriation for debt service may be
reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount
required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the
unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental and emergency appropriations and
reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made
effective immediately upon adoption.
SECTION 4.10. LAPSE OF APPROPRIATIONS.
   Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure,
shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been
expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall
continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished
or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned
if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the
appropriation.
SECTION 4.11. ADMINISTRATION OF BUDGET.
   (a)   Payments and Obligations Prohibited. No payment shall be made or
obligation incurred against any allotment or appropriation except in accordance
with appropriations duly made, and unless the City Treasurer or designee first
certifies that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such allotment or
appropriation and that sufficient funds therefrom are or will be available to
cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable.
However, nothing in this Charter shall be construed to prevent the making or
authorizing of payments or making of contracts for capital improvements to be
financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds or to prevent the making of
any contract or lease providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year,
provided that such action is made or approved by ordinance.
ARTICLE V: PLANNING AND ZONING
SECTION 5.01. PLANNING COMMISSION AND BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   The Council may, by ordinance, create a Planning Commission and a Board of
Zoning Appeals, and such other administrative bodies as it now is, or may
hereafter be, authorized to create pursuant to the provisions of the West
Virginia Code. The Mayor shall nominate, and Council shall, by majority vote,
appoint members of said bodies and establish all rules and regulations
pertaining thereto.
SECTION 5.02. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The Planning Commission shall recommend to Council a comprehensive plan in
accordance with the provisions of article three, chapter eight-A of the West
Virginia Code. Upon adoption by Council, the Planning Commission shall ensure
that the plan be used as a guide to accomplish the coordinated and compatible
development of land within the City. The Planning Commission shall, from time
to time, review the plan and make recommendations on any matter to be
considered by Council regarding the plan or its ongoing implementation.
SECTION 5.03. MEMBERSHIP AND VACANCIES IN OFFICE.
   Members of the Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
resident voters of the City. The office of a member of the Planning Commission
and the office of a member of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall become vacant
upon death, resignation, removal from office, or failure to attend three
consecutive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission or by the
Board, as the case may be, either before or after such failure of attendance.
Upon such vacancy, Council shall, by majority vote, appoint a qualified
successor to fill that vacancy.
ARTICLE VI: NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
SECTION 6.01. CITY ELECTIONS.
   (a)   Regular Elections. The regular City election shall be held on the
second Tuesday in June in each odd-numbered year beginning in the year 2023.
   (b)   Qualified Voters. All citizens residing within the City as defined by
the Charter and otherwise qualified by the Constitution and laws of the State
of West Virginia to vote in the City shall be qualified voters of the City
within the meaning of this Charter.
   (c)   Conduct of Elections. The City Clerk is the Chief Election Officer of
the City, and is responsible for the free, fair, and lawful conduct of City
elections. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the provisions of the
general election laws of the State of West Virginia shall apply to elections
held under this Charter. To the extent that it has not already done so, the
Council shall adopt by ordinance all election-related regulations which it
considers desirable, consistent with law and this Charter.
SECTION 6.02. NOMINATIONS AND CERTIFICATION OF CANDIDATES.
   (a)   The conduct of all municipal elections shall be integrated with the
system of "permanent registration of voters," and those provisions of Chapter
Three of the West Virginia Code that integrate county-state elections with the
"permanent registration system" are hereby incorporated by reference, to the
extent reasonably applicable.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of general law
with respect to the method and time for the filing of certificates of
candidacy, conducting elections, and determining and certifying the results of
such elections, shall apply to City elections.
   (c)   All City elections shall be nonpartisan. Any person who is eligible to
hold and seeks to hold the office of Mayor or member of Council shall comply
with the requirements of West Virginia law.
   (d)   Withdrawal of Candidacy. Any candidate wishing to withdraw candidacy
shall notify the City Clerk in writing of the same in accordance with the
requirements of general statutory law.
   (e)   Write-In Candidates. A write-in candidate's certificate of
announcement of candidacy shall be in accordance with the requirements of
general statutory law.
SECTION 6.03. BALLOTS.
   (a)   Names on Ballots.
      (1)   The names of all candidates nominated for elective office, except
those who have withdrawn, died, or become ineligible, shall be placed on the
official ballots in accordance with general statutory law.
      (2)   If two or more candidates for the same office have the same surname
or surnames so similar as to be likely to cause confusion, their residence
addresses shall be placed with their names on the ballot.
      (3)   The position of names on the ballots shall be in accordance with
the requirements of general statutory law.
SECTION 6.04. DETERMINATION OF ELECTION RESULTS.
   (a)   Number of Votes. Every qualified voter shall be entitled to cast one
vote for a nominated candidate.
   (b)   The candidates who receive the greatest number of the total votes cast
by the qualified voters of the City at large, as determined by the City Clerk,
shall be declared by the City Clerk to be elected.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the provisions of
general law with respect to the method and time for the filing of certificates
of candidacy, nominating candidates, conducting regular and special Municipal
elections, and determining and certifying the results of such elections, so far
as applicable, shall apply to elections held under this Charter.
ARTICLE VII: PROHIBITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 7.01. PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way favored
or discriminated against with respect to any City elective or appointive
position because of race, sex (including gender, pregnancy, gender identity and
sexual orientation), disability, age, political or religious opinions or
affiliations, or any other non-merit based factor.
   (b)   No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any City
position or appointive City administrative office shall directly or indirectly
give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person
for or in connection with any test, appointment, proposed appointment,
promotion or proposed promotion.
   (c)   No person, group, organization, or corporation shall orally, by letter
or otherwise solicit or assist in soliciting any assessment, subscription or
contribution for any City election from any person holding any compensated
appointive City position.
   (d)   No person who holds any compensated appointive City position shall
make, solicit or receive any contribution to the campaign funds for City
elections of any political party or any candidate for City office or take any
part in management, affairs or political campaign for City elections of any
political party, but every person may exercise rights as a citizen to express
opinions and to vote.
SECTION 7.02. GIFTS.
   No person, firm or corporation shall give or offer to any City officer,
employee or agent, nor shall any City officer, employee or agent be permitted
to accept, receive or solicit from any person, firm or corporation, any free
pass or free transportation or free gift of the same, for himself or other
person, or any free gift of any water, light or heat, or any other thing of
value, from any person, firm or corporation having any franchise or contract
from, under or with said City, or from any other officer, agent or employee of
said City, or from any other person whatsoever, who may in any way or manner,
be affected by the performance or non-performance of any official duty or
obligation by such officer, employee or agent of said City, and the acceptance
or solicitation of anything herein forbidden, shall be absolute ground of
removal or dismissal from office, by the Council in the case of an elective
office, and by the appointing power in the case' of any appointive office.
SECTION 7.03. HOLDING TWO OFFICES.
   No officer of the city shall hold two offices with the city at the same time
or be employed by the city in any other capacity.
SECTION 7.04. OATHS AND BONDING OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   very person elected or appointed to any office, before proceeding to
exercise the authority, or discharge the duties thereof, shall take the oath or
affirmation prescribed by the Constitution of this State.
   (b)   The Mayor, City Clerk, City Treasurer, Municipal Court Judge, Police
Chief, Fire Chief and other officer or employee of the City designated by
Council with sole or shared authority to authorize dispersal of public funds
shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, give an
official bond conditioned for the faithful performance of such duties as are
prescribed by law, in an amount as required by Council and at the expense of
the City.
   (c)   The City Treasurer shall record and maintain said bonds, which shall
be open to public inspection.
   (d)   ll bonds, obligations or other writings taken in pursuance of any
provisions of this Charter shall be made payable to "the City of Elkins."
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   How code designated and cited
   
10.02   Definitions and rules of construction
   
10.03   Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances
   
10.04   Catchlines and headings of portions of code
   
10.05   Severability of parts of this code, and of codes and other regulations
adopted by reference
   
10.06   Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance
   
10.08   Grades and elevations; official city base established
   
10.09   Grades and elevations; primal bench mark located
   
10.10   Grades and elevations; elevations to be described in relation to
official base
   
10.11   Grades and elevations; fixing property elevations; cross-section of
pavement when street is paved
   
10.12   Grades and elevations; determination of street grade
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances contained in this title and the following titles, chapters
and sections shall constitute and be designated the “Code of the City of
Elkins, West Virginia”, and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited
as the “Elkins City Code”, “city code” or “code of ordinances”.
(1991 Code, § 1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to adopt a comprehensive code of ordinances, see W.Va.
Code § 8-11-4(b)
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this code and of all other ordinances and resolutions
of the Council, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be
observed, unless it shall be expressly provided otherwise by any section,
ordinance or resolution, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
   AUTHORITY OF OFFICERS. Whenever authority is conferred on or an act is
required to be performed by a city officer, such authority may be exercised or
performed, at the instance of such officer, by a deputy, agent or subordinate,
unless such authority cannot lawfully be deputed.
   CHARTER; THE CITY CHARTER. The Charter of the City of Elkins, West Virginia,
as amended and currently in effect.
   CITY. The City of Elkins, West Virginia.
   CITY CODE; THIS CODE. The Code of the City of Elkins, West Virginia, as
amended and currently in effect.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME; REASONABLE TIME. The time within which an act is to be
done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last; or,
if the last day be Sunday or a holiday, it shall also be excluded; but this
provision shall not be deemed to change any rule of law applicable to bills of
exchange or negotiable instruments; provided, that if time is expressed in
hours, the whole of any Sunday or holiday shall be excluded, unless the clear
intent of the Council is to the contrary. In all cases where provision is made
for an act to be done or notice to be given within a REASONABLE TIME, it shall
be construed to mean only such time as may be necessary, under the
circumstances then and there existing, for the prompt performance of such act
or the giving of such notice.
   COUNCIL; THE COUNCIL. The Council of the City of Elkins, West Virginia.
   COUNTY. The County of Randolph, West Virginia.
   GENDER. A word importing the masculine gender only may be construed to
include the feminine and neuter as well as the masculine.
   GENERAL RULE. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions shall
be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Council
may be fully carried out. Words and phrases shall be taken in their usual
sense, but technical words having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law
shall be understood according to their technical import.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more persons
or officers shall be construed as giving such JOINT AUTHORITY to a majority of
such persons or officers, and not to any lesser number.
   MONTH; YEAR; FISCAL YEAR. The word MONTH shall mean a calendar month; the
word YEAR shall mean a calendar year; the word YEAR alone shall be equivalent
to the expression YEAR OF OUR LORD. The FISCAL YEAR for the city and all bodies
or officers collecting or disbursing funds shall begin on July 1 and expire
with the expiration of the next following June 30.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Elkins, West Virginia.
   NUMBER. A word importing the singular number only may be applied to several
persons or things, as well as to one person or thing; a word importing the
plural number only may be applied to one person or thing as well as to several.
   OATH; SWORN. A solemn affirmation shall be the equivalent to an oath in all
cases, unless otherwise expressly provided, and the word OATH shall be deemed
to include an affirmation and the word SWEAR or SWORN to be complied with if
the person referred to makes solemn affirmation.
   OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS AND THE LIKE. Officers, departments, boards,
commissions and employees referred to in this code shall mean officers,
departments, boards, commissions and employees of the City of Elkins, unless
the content clearly indicates otherwise.
   OWNER. As applied to any property, any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the
whole or of a part of such property.
   PERSON. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, society, club or any
other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual, unless restricted
within the context.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Goods, chattels, real and personal, money, credits,
investments and the evidence thereof.
   PRECEDING; FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PREMISES. When used as applicable to real property, shall include land and
buildings.
   PROPERTY. Real, personal and mixed property.
   REAL PROPERTY; REAL ESTATE; LAND; LANDS. Lands, buildings, tenements and
hereditaments and all rights thereto and interests therein, except chattel
interests.
   SHALL; MAY. The word SHALL is mandatory; the word MAY is permissive.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb line or, where there is
no curb, the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians. If there is no public area between the
lateral lines of the roadway and the abutting property line, then that area
immediately abutting the street line shall be considered SIDEWALK AREA.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK. A mark made by a signer or subscriber who
cannot write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by
a witness who shall write his or her own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s
name.
   STATE. The State of West Virginia.
   STATE CODE REFERENCES. References to the West Virginia Code shall be to the
Official Code of West Virginia, 1931, as amended and currently in effect.
   STREET. Alley, avenue, boulevard, highway, road, lane, viaduct, bridge and
approaches thereto, and all other public thoroughfares in the city, and the
entire width thereof between abutting property lines; also a sidewalk or
footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the intent of the Council.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, any person holding a
written or oral lease to or who occupies the whole or part of such building or
land, either alone or with others.
   TENSES. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; the future
includes the present.
   WRITING. Includes any form of recorded message comprehensible by ordinary
visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or
authorized by this code or other ordinance or resolution of the city, it shall
be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided
otherwise.
(1991 Code, § 1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Acts by agent or deputy, see W.Va. Code § 2-2-5
   Computation of time, see W.Va. Code § 2-2-3
   Construction of statutes, see W.Va. Code §§ 2-2-10, 2-2-10(a), 2-2-10(b), 2-
2-10(d)
   Corresponding state law relating to construction of statutes, see W.Va. Code
§ 2-2-10(c)
   Definition of “personal property” relating to construction of statutes, see
W.Va. Code § 2-2-10(q)
   Definition of “property” relating to the construction of statutes, see W.Va.
Code § 2-2-10(r)
   Definition of “real property” relating to the construction of statutes, see
W.Va. Code § 2-2-10(p)
   Definition of “writing” relating to the construction of statutes, see W.Va.
Code § 2-2-10(c)
   Definitions of “person” relating to the construction of statutes, see W.Va.
Code § 2-2-10(i)
   Definitions of words and phrases in the Municipal Code of West Virginia, see
W.Va. Code §§ 8-1-1, 8-1-2
   Month; year; fiscal year, see W.Va. Code § 2-2-4
   Oath; sworn, see W.Va. Code § 2-2-7
§ 10.03 PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions appearing in this code, insofar as they are substantially the
same as those of ordinances in effect immediately preceding the effective date
of this code and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof
and not as new enactments.
(1991 Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.04 CATCHLINES AND HEADINGS OF PORTIONS OF CODE.
   The chapter, article, division and section headings of this code are
intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents thereof and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles thereof, nor as any part thereof; nor, unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such chapters,
articles, divisions or sections, including the headings or catchlines, are
amended or reenacted.
(1991 Code, § 1-4)
Statutory reference:
   Construction of statutes, see W.Va. Code §§ 2-2-10(z), 2-2-12
§ 10.05 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF THIS CODE, AND OF CODES AND OTHER REGULATIONS
ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections,
divisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code and of each
of the technical codes and other regulations herein adopted by reference are
severable, and that if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection or
section of this code or of any such technical code or other regulations shall
be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall
not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs,
divisions and sections thereof, since they would have been enacted by the
Council without the incorporation therein of any such unconstitutional or
invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, division or section.
(1991 Code, § 1-5)
§ 10.06 EFFECT OF REPEAL OR EXPIRATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The repeal of an ordinance or its expiration, by virtue of any
provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense
committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced
before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.
   (B)   When any ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed,
the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that
effect.
(1991 Code, § 1-6)
Cross-reference:
   Ordinance procedures of the Council, see §§
31.20 to
31.22
Statutory reference:
   Effect of repeal or expiration of statutes, see W.Va. Code § 2-2-8
   Repeal of an act repealing a statute, see W.Va. Code § 2-2-9
§ 10.08 GRADES AND ELEVATIONS; OFFICIAL CITY BASE ESTABLISHED.
   The official city base, or plane of reference for elevations in the city, is
hereby fixed at an elevation of 1,809.895 feet above sea level, as determined
by the United States coast and geodetic survey, in the adjustment made in 1903.
(1991 Code, § 1-8)
Cross-reference:
   Applications to have sidewalk grades and lines established, see §
93.034
§ 10.09 GRADES AND ELEVATIONS; PRIMAL BENCH MARK LOCATED.
   The upper horizontal surface of the United States geodetic survey bench
mark, a bronze tablet placed in the stone step of the west entrance of the
W.M.R.R. office building standing on the northeast corner of Railroad Avenue
and Third Street “1903 A. D. J. 1903”, is hereby declared to be the primal
bench mark of the city, and the elevation thereof is 120 feet above the city
base.
(1991 Code, § 1-9)
§ 10.10 GRADES AND ELEVATIONS; ELEVATIONS TO BE DESCRIBED IN RELATION TO
OFFICIAL BASE.
   All official elevations hereafter established in the city shall be
described, with reference to their elevations, as compared with the official
base, in feet and decimal parts of a foot. No grade of official elevation shall
be established other than by ordinance and in the manner described in §§
10.08 and
10.09.
(1991 Code, § 1-10)
§ 10.11 GRADES AND ELEVATIONS; FIXING PROPERTY ELEVATIONS; CROSS- SECTION OF
PAVEMENT WHEN STREET IS PAVED.
   All elevations established shall be fixed at the property lines, sidewalks
and curb lines; but the cross- section of the pavement, when a street shall be
paved, shall be determined so as to conform with the nature of the material
used in paving.
(1991 Code, § 1-11)
§ 10.12 GRADES AND ELEVATIONS; DETERMINATION OF STREET GRADE.
   The grade of the street shall be on straight lines connecting the points
where the elevations are fixed as provided by this chapter; except, that where
the grade breaks in a block between intersecting streets, the sidewalks and
curbs shall be on vertical curves; however, the grades of such curves shall be
established in conformance to §§
10.08 through this section.
(1991 Code, § 1-12)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Wherever in this code or in any ordinance or resolution of the Council or in
any rule, regulation, notice or order promulgated by any officer or agency of
the city under authority duly vested in him, her or it, any act is prohibited
or is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or the doing of
any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or
an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided for the
violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this code or of any
such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation, notice or order shall be punished
by a reasonable fine, not exceeding an amount set by Council from time to time
or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day any violation of this code or of any such ordinance,
resolution, rule, regulation, notice or order shall continue shall constitute,
except where otherwise provided, a separate offense.
(1991 Code, § 1-7)
Charter reference:
   Penalties for violations of election laws, see Char. §
11
   Penalty for violating W.Va. Code § 61-7-1, and duty of county prosecuting
attorney to prosecute if requested by Mayor, see Char. §
28, subsec. (43)
   Sentences by Mayor to imprisonment being limited to 30 days, see Char. §
20
Cross-reference:
   Deferred payment of fines and costs, see §§
37.25 to
37.29
Statutory reference:
   State law as to penalties authorized to be imposed, subject to certain
limitations, for violations of municipal ordinances and means available to
municipalities for the recovery thereof, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-11-1, 8-12-5(55)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   COUNCIL
      
32.   CITY OFFICERS
      
33.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
34.   POLICE
      
35.   ELECTIONS
      
36.   TAXATION AND FINANCE
      
37.   MUNICIPAL COURT
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Official bonds
   
30.02   Compensation of city officers and employees
   
30.03   Federal Social Security
   
30.04   City to be participating public employer; state employees’ retirement
system adopted
   
30.05   Indemnification of certain officers and employees
   
30.06   No smoking policy in Council chambers
   
30.07   Unlawful discrimination
Competitive Bidding
   
30.20   When required; publication of notice
   
30.21   [Reserved]
 
   
30.99   Penalty
Charter reference:
    Corporate name and powers of city, see Char. Sections
1.01,
1.02
   General powers and duties of the Council, see
Char. Article II
Cross-reference:
   Administration and enforcement of the Building Code, see §
150.036
   Animal humane officer, see §
90.13
   Board of Zoning Appeals, see §§
152.210 through
152.217,
152.230 through
152.232 and
152.245 through
152.251
   Department of sanitation’s duties with respect to garbage collection, see §
50.02
   Elections generally, see
Ch. 35
   Fire Chief generally, see §§
92.035,
92.036
   Fire Department, see §§
92.035 through
92.041
   Firefighter’s Civil Service Commission, see §
92.037
   Firefighter’s Pension and Relief Fund, see §§
92.055 and
92.056
   Interference with city personnel generally, see §
130.010
   Municipal Court, see
Ch. 37
   Office of Building Official generally, see §
150.002
   Police Civil Service Commission, see §
34.01
   Police generally, see
Ch. 34
   Police Pension and Relief Fund, see §§
34.15,
34.16
   Powers and duties of nuisance abatement and enforcement officer, see §§
91.080,
91.081
   Public utility service tax, see
Ch. 36
   Sanitary Board, see
Ch. 52
   Water Committee, see §
51.02
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to cities, towns and villages generally, being the
Municipal Code of West Virginia, see W.Va. Code Ch. 8
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 OFFICIAL BONDS.
   (A)   Every officer, employee or agent of the city who, in the course of his
or her official duties, receives, handles or has custody of or control of city
funds over more than an amount set by Council from time to time, negotiable
instruments or securities at any time shall, before entering upon his or her
duties as such officer, employee or agent and within ten days of his or her
election or appointment, give bond, payable to the city, with corporate surety,
in an amount no less than an amount set by Council from time to time,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties and a true
accounting of all city funds, negotiable instruments and securities received or
handled by him or her or coming within his or her custody or under his or her
control, and payment thereof to the city; provided that the bond of the City
Collector and Treasurer shall be in an amount no less than an amount set by
Council from time to time; the bond of the City Clerk shall be no less than an
amount set by Council from time to time; and provided further, that during any
period when two or more positions are held by the same person, the bond for
such person shall be in an amount no less than the highest amount required for
any one of such positions.
   (B)   The Council may adopt a system of blanket faithful performance and
honesty bonding as an alternative to the individual bonds provided by division
(A) above; provided, that the minimum amounts specified in division (A) above
for the positions named therein shall remain the same as therein specified.
   (C)   All persons hired by the city to work during the Forest Festival
shall, when required by the Council, give bond, payable to the city with
corporate surety, in an amount no less than an amount set by Council from time
to time, as may be specified by the Council and conditioned upon the faithful
performance of their duties and the payment of any judgment or decree rendered
against them for the negligent or unlawful performance of those duties.
   (D)   All regularly appointed police officers and all officers, employees
and agents of the city who, in line of duty, are required or authorized to
carry firearms, shall give bond, payable to the city, with corporate surety, in
an amount no less than an amount set by Council from time to time, as may be
specified by the Council, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of
their respective duties and the payment of any judgment or decree which may be
rendered against them for the negligent or unlawful use or handling of such
firearms and shall save the city harmless from all claims and demands
whatsoever for the negligent or unlawful use or handling of such firearm.
   (E)   The City Attorney shall approve all bonds required by this section
with respect to their form and legality, and the premiums thereon shall be paid
by the city. The Council shall approve all bonds required by this section with
respect to their sufficiency. All bonds required by this section shall be in
the custody of the City Clerk; except, that the bond of the City Clerk shall be
in the custody of the Mayor. Certified copies of all such bonds shall be filed
in the County Clerk’s office.
   (F)   The Council shall have authority to increase the penalty of the bonds
at any time it may deem necessary, and a failure by any city office, employee
or agent to comply with the requirements of the Council within a reasonable
time shall be sufficient reason for declaring the office or position vacant and
the Council may proceed to fill such vacancy.
(1991 Code, § 2-1)
Charter reference:
   For Charter provisions as to official bonds of officers, see Char. Section
7.04
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to require bonds of its officers, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5
(46)
   Bonds of public officers generally, see W.Va. Code §§ 6-2-1 et seq.
   Bonds required of police officers, see W.Va. Code § 61-7-5
   Requirement that municipal officers who handle public funds give bond, see
W.Va. Code § 6-2-11
§ 30.02 COMPENSATION OF CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The Mayor, Council members and other city officers and employees shall
receive such salaries and wages as may be provided for them, from time to time,
by the Council in the annual budget or other ordinances; provided, that the
salary of no city officer shall be increased or diminished during his or her
term.
   (B)   The Council may prescribe compensation, in addition to the
compensation paid Council members, to the Chairperson of any standing or
special committee when such Chairperson has arduous duties to perform, beyond
those expected of a Council member; when such services are performed upon any
project for which a bond issue is in force, such additional compensation may be
paid from the proceeds of the bond issue, unless prohibited by state law.
   (C)   Except as may be provided otherwise in this code or other ordinance,
all fees paid to city officers and employees shall be deemed to be moneys
belonging to the city, and shall be paid over to the City Collector and
Treasurer, or other officer designated by this code or other ordinance, by the
recipients thereof, no less frequently than once each week.
   (D)   Members of Council and the Mayor may, in a writing directed to the
City Treasurer, at the beginning of the terms of their offices but prior to
being sworn in, elect to receive less than the maximum compensation which is
provided for at the beginning of said term. This written election as to
compensation may be reviewed and revised by the individual requesting it for
each subsequent term for which he or she has been elected to serve, if he or
she shall serve more than one term, provided that such revision occurs at the
beginning of the new term but before being sworn into said office.
(1991 Code, § 2-2) (Ord. 165, passed 3-21-2013; Ord. 188, passed 2-5-2015)
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to fix compensation, see Char. Section
2.03
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council, by ordinance, to fix the compensation of city officers
and employees, notwithstanding any Charter provision to the contrary, see W.Va.
Code § 8-5-12
§ 30.03 FEDERAL SOCIAL SECURITY.
   (A)   This section is adopted pursuant to the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch.
5, Art. 7, and shall be construed to render it in conformance with that article
and the applicable federal law and agreement mentioned in W.Va. Code § 5-7-3.
   (B)   All services which constitute employment, as defined by W.Va. Code §
5-7-2, and which are performed in the employ of the city in a nonproprietary
capacity and, in addition, in a proprietary capacity for the operation and
maintenance of the city waterworks, a municipally owned public utility, and the
Department of Sanitation, a municipally owned project, shall be covered by this
plan.
   (C)   It is a further purpose of this section to obtain the coverage of a
Federal Old Age and Survivors’ Insurance, commonly called Social Security, for
both the nonproprietary employees of the city and the proprietary employees of
the city who engage in the operation and maintenance of the city waterworks, a
municipally owned public utility and the Department of Sanitation, a
municipally owned project, and another municipally owned project, the city
municipal airport, subject to the approval of the state agency, as defined by
W.Va. Code § 5-7-2, to be effective hereby from January 1, 1951; except the
city municipal airport, which is to be effective January 1, 1953, and
thereafter as a regular part of the city budget for which levy is made and as a
regular part of the expenditures of the city waterworks, Department of
Sanitation and the city municipal airport, to be derived from its revenue.
   (D)   The Council hereby declares that the plans for extending these federal
Social Security benefits to all eligible city officers and employees, as
heretofore submitted to and approved by the State Auditor in his or her
capacity as the “state agency”, shall continue in full force and effect and
that the city shall conform to all applicable provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 5-7-
1 through 5-7-10.
   (E)   The Mayor, the City Clerk and the City Collector and Treasurer shall
be, ex officio, the Social Security Committee, which Committee shall administer
the plan in such methods as may be found by the “state agency”, as defined by
W.Va. Code § 5-7-2(d), to be necessary for the proper and efficient
administration of the plan.
   (F)   The city shall make such reports, in such form and containing such
information, as the state agency may, from time to time, require, and shall
comply with such provisions as the state agency or as the federal agency,
mentioned in W.Va. Code § 5-7-5(a)(5), may, from time to time, find necessary
to ensure the correctness and veracity of such reports.
   (G)   The city agrees to pay into the contribution fund, as defined by W.Va.
Code § 5-7-6, such amounts as are required to be paid by W.Va. Code § 5-7-5(c)
and (d).
   (H)   The “state agency” is authorized to terminate this plan in its
entirety, if it finds that there has been a failure to comply substantially
with any provisions contained in this plan or any provisions of W.Va. Code Ch.
5, Art. 1, and necessary federal laws and regulations, such termination to take
effect at the expiration of such notice and on such conditions as may be
provided by regulations of the state agency and consistent with applicable
federal law.
(1991 Code, § 2-5) (Ord. passed 11-29-1950; Ord. passed 4-16-1953)
Editor’s note:
   The plans herein referred to are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 30.04 CITY TO BE PARTICIPATING PUBLIC EMPLOYER; STATE EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT
SYSTEM ADOPTED.
   The Council, having elected on July 1, 1961, by vote of three-fifths of its
members, to have the city become a participating public employer and thereby
include its eligible officers and employees in the membership of the state
employees’ retirement system, hereby declares that the city shall continue to
be a participating public employer and shall conform to all applicable
provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 5-10-1 through 5-10-51.
(1991 Code, § 2-6)
Cross-reference:
   Firefighter’s Pension and Relief Fund, see §§
92.055,
92.056
   Police Pension and Relief Fund, see §§
34.15,
34.16
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to municipalities becoming participating public employers
within state public employees retirement system, see W.Va. Code §§ 5-10-16, 8-
22-1
§ 30.05 INDEMNIFICATION OF CERTAIN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to provide authority for the Mayor
with the concurrence of Council by resolution or motion, to indemnify with city
funds or provide liability insurance for any officer, agent or employee of the
city.
      (2)   It is the intent of this section to provide indemnification and
liability insurance coverage as extensive as permitted by W.Va. Code § 8-12-7,
as amended unless otherwise restricted or limited by this section.
   (B)   Indemnification.
      (1)   The city shall indemnify all of its elected or appointed officers,
agents or employees against any and all legal liability, including, not limited
to, expenses, costs, damages, judgments, fines, settlements, court costs,
reasonable attorney fees and any other amounts actually and personally incurred
in connection with, arising from, growing out of, by reason of or in any way
connected with, any acts or omission of the city, or its officers, agents or
employees while acting within the scope of their official duties.
      (2)   Such indemnification shall extend to any officer, agent or employee
of the city who was or is a party, or is threatened to be made a party, to any
proceeding by reason of the fact that such person is or was an officer, agent
or employee of the city, without regard to the period of time in which such
official duties were performed, and without regard to the fact that the
performance of such official duties may have been professional in nature.
      (3)   Such indemnification shall be provided to the officers, agents or
employees of the city by the purchase of insurance as provided in division (C)
below, or by the expenditure of funds from the General Fund of the city as
provided in division (C) below.
   (C)   Insurance. The Mayor, with the concurrence of Council, shall have
plenary power and authority to contract and expend public funds for the
purchase of one of more policies of public liability insurance, which may
include professional liability insurance, providing the city and its officers,
against and employees, insurance coverage for any and all legal liability,
including, but not limited to, expenses, costs, damages, judgments, fines,
settlements, court costs, reasonable attorney fees, and any other amounts
actually and personally incurred in connection with, arising from, growing out
of, by reason of or in any way connected with, any acts or omissions of the
city, or its officers, agents or employees while acting within the scope of
their official duties.
   (D)   Expenditures from General Fund. If the insurance coverage provided
pursuant to division (C) above is deemed to exclude an act or omission of the
city or any of its officers, agents or employees, or if an insurance carrier
refuses to provide coverage for city or any of its officers, agents or
employees for any reason, expenditures from the city’s General Fund shall be
made for payment of any and all of the legal liability contemplated by division
(B) above.
   (E)   Exclusions. No indemnification shall be made under this section to any
officer, agent or employee of the city for any conversion or diversion of
public funds; any criminal act as defined by the laws of the United States, any
state, municipality or other governmental body; any criminal act which could or
does result in civil liability to any third party or the city; any act or
omission committed by such officer, agent or employee while the same was insane
or mentally incompetent; any amounts in settling or otherwise disposing of a
threatened or pending proceeding without approval of the city; any expenses
incurred in defending a threatened or pending proceeding which is settled or
otherwise disposed of without approval of the city; provided however, none of
the exclusions contained herein shall be interpreted to inure to the benefit of
any liability or other insurance carrier of the city, unless specifically
contained in the contract of insurance by between the city and such carrier.
   (F)   Indemnification by independent agencies. Any of the independent
agencies of the city, such as the Sanitary Board and the city’s Parks and
Recreation Commission, shall likewise have plenary power and authority to adopt
a resolution at a regular or special meeting called for that purpose providing
for the expenditure of the public funds of such agency to indemnify its elected
or appointed officers, agents or employees for any acts or omissions while
acting within the scope of their official duties in the manner and to the
extent provided in this section.
(1991 Code, § 2-6.1) (Ord. 229, passed 2-16-2017)
§ 30.06 NO SMOKING POLICY IN COUNCIL CHAMBERS.
   No person shall smoke any form of tobacco, including, but not limited to,
cigarettes, pipes and cigars in the Council chamber.
(Ord. passed 1-16-1992) Penalty, see §
30.99
§ 30.07 UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of the Common Council
to protect and safeguard the right and opportunity of all persons to be free
from all forms of discrimination, including discrimination based on real or
perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity, age, disability, marital status, familial status, or veteran
status. The Common Council's purpose in enacting this section is to promote the
public health and welfare of all persons who live and work in the city. It is
important for the city to ensure that all persons within the city have equal
access to employment, housing, and public accommodations.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
      AGE. An individual's status as having obtained 40 or more years of age.
      CITY CONTRACTOR. Any person, corporation, or entity that has a contract
to do business with the city.
      DISCRIMINATE, DISCRIMINATION OR DISCRIMINATORY. Any act, policy or
practice that, regardless of intent, has the effect of subjecting any person to
differential treatment as a result of that person's real or perceived race,
color, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity,
age, disability, marital status, familial status, or veteran status.
      EMPLOYEE. Any individual employed by or seeking employment from an
employer, excluding any individual employed by his or her parents, spouse, or
child.
      EMPLOYER. A person who employs one or more employees in the city, or any
agent of such person. Employer shall include the city and any city contractor.
      FAMILIAL STATUS. An individual's past, current or prospective status as
parent or legal guardian to a child or children below the age of 18 who may or
may not reside with that individual.
      GENDER IDENTITY. The actual or perceived gender-related identity,
expression, appearance, or mannerisms, or other gender-related characteristics
of an individual, regardless of the individual's designated sex at birth.
      MARITAL STATUS. An individual's past, current, or prospective status as
single, married, domestically partnered, divorced, or widowed.
      NATIONAL ORIGIN. An individual's or his or her ancestor's place of
origin.
      PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. Any place, store, or other establishment, either
licensed or unlicensed, that supplies accommodations, goods, or services to the
general public, or that solicits or accepts the patronage or trade of the
general public, or that is supported directly or indirectly by government
funds. The term does not include any private club, bona fide membership
organization, or other establishment that are not in fact open to the public.
      RELIGION. All aspects of religious belief, observance, and practice.
      SEXUAL ORIENTATION. Actual or perceived homosexuality, heterosexuality,
or bisexuality.
      VETERAN STATUS. An individual's status as one who served in the active
military, naval or air service.
   (C)   Civil rights declared. The right of an otherwise qualified person to
be free from discrimination because of that person's real or perceived race,
color, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity,
age, disability, marital status, familial status, or veteran status is
recognized as and declared to be a civil right. This right shall include, but
not be limited to, all of the following:
      (1)   The right to obtain and hold employment and the benefits associated
therewith without discrimination.
      (2)   The right to the full enjoyment of any of the accommodations,
advantages, facilities, or privileges of any public accommodation without
discrimination.
      (3)   The right to engage in property transactions, including obtaining
housing for rental or sale and credit therefor, without discrimination.
      (4)   The right to exercise any right granted under this section without
suffering coercion or retaliation.
   (D)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following are not
discriminatory practices prohibited by this section:
      (1)   A religious corporation, association, or society that employs an
individual of a particular religion to perform work connected with the
performance of religious activities by the corporation, association, or
society.
      (2)   An employer observes the conditions of a bona fide affirmative
action plan or a bona fide seniority system which is not a pretext to evade the
purposes of this section of the city code.
   (E)   Enforcement. A violation of this section of the city code constitutes
a civil infraction and can be enforced by a private right of action.
      (1)   There is hereby established in the city a private right of action
for individuals who are aggrieved of any of the unlawful discriminatory
practices described in this section. The individual aggrieved may file a
complaint in Randolph County Circuit Court, in compliance with the relevant
rules of that Court, and must show through clear and convincing evidence that
the defendant committed an unlawful discriminatory practice as described in
this section.
   (F)   Other remedies. This section of the city code may not be construed to
limit any other remedies available under local, state, or federal law.
(Ord. 348, passed 10-16-2025)
COMPETITIVE BIDDING
§ 30.20 WHEN REQUIRED; PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.
   (A)   Every contract for the procurement of materials, supplies, equipment,
or services by the city, except as hereinafter provided, shall be by
competitive bidding and shall not be approved and let until after at least 14
days public notice made as 1) the public posting at City Hall of the notice for
bids, request for proposal, or other written solicitation by the city, 2) the
public posting of such notice, request, or solicitation on the city’s website
and social media accounts, and 3) a Class I legal advertisement in compliance
with the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 59-3-1 et seq., and after a public opening
for bids. Provided that the Council, or the Administrative Officer having
issued such request for competitive bidding, may reject all bids and advertise
again; further provided, that the above requirements shall not apply to any
contract for a gross amount of less than $25,000; further provided, that
purchases of materials, supplies, equipment, or services costing $25,000 or
more shall in all cases be memorialized by a contract, or other writing,
authorized by City Council prior to execution, even in the event that the above
requirements concerning competitive bidding are waived under the provisions of
division (B), below; further provided that the City Council may by motion
subsequently ratify purchases made by its employees or agents in the event of a
mistake of law or fact. Nothing in this section shall preclude the use by the
city of or be applicable to the purchasing of goods or services through the
State Director of the Purchasing Division of the State Department of Finance
and Administration as provided by the W.Va. Code § 5A-3-9.
   (B)   (1)   The provision of division (A) above, concerning competitive
bidding, shall not be applicable when the Council, by vote, finds that:
         (a)   Compliance therewith would be inimical to the public welfare;
         (b)   Procurement of the contemplated goods or services is of such
urgency as to brook no delay;
         (c)   Other circumstances exist which would render the interests of
the city better served by noncompliance than by compliance with division (A)
above;
         (d)   As a practical matter it is determined that there exists only
one supplier of the goods or services sought to be obtained;
         (e)   The goods or services sought to be obtained are for the purpose
of maintenance or repair of existing city goods or equipment; or
         (f)   No suppliers of goods or services sought to be obtained are
located within the general circulation area of any of the city newspapers.
      (2)   When the Council determines that the provisions of division (A)
above, concerning competitive bidding, are not applicable, the Council shall,
at the time of the approval of the contract for the procurement of goods and
services, refer to the applicable provision of this division (B) which is
relied upon for the waiver of the bidding process.
   (C)   (1)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this subchapter, in any
instance that a purchase of goods or services by the city is required under the
provisions of this subchapter to be made upon competitive bids, such purchase
shall be made from a vendor resident in the city if such bid does not exceed
the lowest qualified bid from a nonresident vendor by more than 2% of the
latter bid, and if such resident vendor has made written claim for such
preference at the time the bid was submitted.
      (2)   A vendor shall be deemed to be a resident of the city if such
vendor is an individual, partnership, association or corporation that maintains
an active, bona fide place of business within the city and maintains therein a
representative inventory of the commodities on which the bid is submitted and,
in the case of a corporation, is duly qualified to do business in the state as
is in good standing under the laws of the state and under the ordinances of the
city.
(1991 Code, § 2-3) (Ord. passed 11-1-1979; Ord. 175, passed 3-20-2014; Ord.
319, passed 1-18-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to require competitive bidding for purchases of supplies
and the like, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-10
   Availability to municipalities of facilities of state division of purchases,
see W.Va. Code § 5A-3-9
   Applicable state requirements concerning bid bonds and other details, see
W.Va. Code 5-22-1
§ 30.21 [RESERVED].
§ 30.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions
of §
10.99.
   (B)   No smoking policy.
      (1)   First offense. Any person who violates §
30.06 shall first be warned that smoking is not allowed in the Council chamber
and that any further violation will necessitate his or her removal from the
Council chamber.
      (2)   Second offense. Any person who violates §
30.06 after the first offense shall be excluded from the Council chamber.
(Ord. passed 1-16-1992)
CHAPTER 31: COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Clerk of the Council; records generally
   
31.02   Meetings generally
   
31.03   Rules
   
31.04   Chief of Police to attend meetings and preserve order; arrest of
persons for disobedience
   
31.05   Addressing the Council
   
31.06   Voting
   
31.07   Expenditure
Ordinances, Resolutions and Intergovernmental Agreements
   
31.20   Generally
   
31.21   Attestation; record of ordinances
   
31.22   Ordinances to repeal, amend or add to provisions of this code, and
records thereof
   
31.23   Resolutions and records thereof
   
31.24   Disposition of municipal property to non-profit organizations
   
31.25   Conveyance of city property without auction
   
31.26   Conveyance by sealed bid
   
31.27   Conveyance by auction
   
31.28   Intergovernmental agreements
Charter reference:
   Council, see Char. Sections
2.01 through
2.10
   Franchises, see Char. Section
2.14
   Ordinances, see Char. Sections
2.11 through
2.13,
2.15
Statutory reference:
   Compensation of officers, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-12
   Composition of municipal governing bodies and the qualifications and
election of Mayor, Council members and recorder, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-7
   Filling vacancies in office, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-10
   General and specific duties and the like of Council, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-12-
1 et seq.
   Oath of office, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-8
   Powers and duties of Council with respect to ordinances, see W.Va. Code §§
8-11-1 et seq.
   Terms of office, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-9
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 CLERK OF THE COUNCIL; RECORDS GENERALLY.
   The City Clerk shall be ex officio clerk of the Council and shall keep all
records of the Council, as required by the city’s Charter and general laws of
the state, as well as by this code and other ordinances, resolutions and orders
of the Council; and he or she shall, in general, perform for the Council such
duties as are normally performed by recording and corresponding secretaries.
(1991 Code, § 2-7)
Statutory reference:
   Duty of municipal recorders (clerks) to keep the records of governing
bodies, see W.Va. Code § 8-10-3
   Records required to be kept by municipal governing bodies; and requirement
for reading, correcting and authenticating minutes of meetings, see W.Va. Code
§ 8-9-3
§ 31.02 MEETINGS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Regular meetings. There shall be a regular meeting of the Council on
the first and third Thursday of each month, at 7:00 p.m.; provided that Council
may elect to meet at other times and may otherwise approve temporary changes to
this schedule from time to time.
   (B)   Special meetings. There may be a special meeting of the Council held
at any time fixed by the Council.
   (C)   Special called meetings. There may be special-called meetings of the
Council at any time fixed by the Mayor or by any three members of the Council.
Notification of the time, date, location and agenda of any special-called
meeting shall be provided in the same manner as for regular meetings, provided
that, in the event that the usual notification methods are judged insufficient,
every reasonable effort will be made using alternate methods to ensure timely
notification. Except under unusual circumstances, all members of staff who
customarily attend regular meetings shall be notified of any special-called
meeting in the same way that members of Council are notified.
   (D)   Place of meetings. All meetings of the Council shall be held in the
Council Chamber at City Hall; provided, that the Council may designate another
place, open to the public and within the city when, in the opinion of a
majority of the members, the Council Chambers would not be adequate to
accommodate the number of persons expected to be present for a meeting, or
when, for other good reason, the Council Chamber is not deemed suitable.
   (E)   Remote meetings.  Council may elect to meet using telephonic or
electronic tools and may under special circumstances elect to allow members to
join otherwise in-person meetings using such tools, provided that the use of
these tools must otherwise comply with all applicable requirements of city and
state code, especially including requirements concerning access by members of
the public.
   (F)   Open to public; exceptions. All meetings of the Council shall be open
to orderly members of the public; provided, that the Council may, during any
meeting, elect to enter executive session, as provided by W.Va. Code § 6-9A-4;
at which time, the Council may exclude from attendance any nonmembers whose
presence is not necessary for the consideration of the subject being considered
in executive session; and provided further, that no final decision shall be
made or vote or action taken upon any matter until the meeting has been
reopened to the public.
(1991 Code, § 2-8) (Ord. 324, passed 3-21-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Requirements for open meetings of governing bodies, with exceptions, see
W.Va. Code Ch. 6, Art. 9A
   Who presides at meetings of municipal governing bodies and what constitutes
a quorum, see W.Va. Code § 8-9-1
§ 31.03 RULES.
   (A)   (1)   The Council may, by resolution, adopt such rules as may be
deemed desirable for the conduct of its meetings, the transaction of its
business and the official conduct of its members, and may include therein
reasonable penalties for the violation thereof; but no such rule shall be
inconsistent with the state law, the Charter or this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Such rules may include, among other subjects, the following:
         (a)   The appointment, jurisdiction and duties of standing and special
committees of the Council;
         (b)   Attendance at meetings of the Council by members and by others;
         (c)   Investigations and hearings, the compulsory attendance thereat
of witnesses and the production of books and papers thereat as evidence;
         (d)   Parliamentary procedure;
         (e)   The preservation of order at meetings; and
         (f)   The manner and form of petitions, applications and other papers
intended for presentation to the Council, and procedures relating thereto.
   (B)   Until such time as the Council shall adopt rules pursuant to the
provisions of division (A) above, the rules of the Council in force immediately
preceding the effective date of this code and which are not codified herein or
in conflict herewith shall continue in full force and effect.
(1991 Code, § 2-9)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to investigate and inquire into all matters of concern
to the city and its inhabitants, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(48)
   Authority of Council to make all needful by-laws and rules to carry into
effect the authority granted to it by law, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-11-1, 8-12-5
(45), (55)
   Power of Council to compel attendance of witnesses and production of books
and papers, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-2(c)
§ 31.04 CHIEF OF POLICE TO ATTEND MEETINGS AND PRESERVE ORDER; ARREST OF
PERSONS FOR DISOBEDIENCE.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, or of some one of his or her
assistants to be designated by him or her, to attend all meetings of the
Council and to preserve order both in the Council chamber and in the vicinity
thereof, and to enforce all orders of the presiding officer by arresting,
without warrant, anyone who refuses to obey any order given by the presiding
officer; and the person so arrested shall be held in custody until such time as
he or she can be taken before a court having jurisdiction over the premises, to
then be dealt with according to law.
(1991 Code, § 2-10)
§ 31.05 ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   Privilege of citizens and taxpayers to be heard; limitation on time to
speak. Any citizen or taxpayer of the city may be heard either in person or by
counsel upon any matter introduced or pending before the Council; but no speech
or hearing shall exceed five minutes, except by the unanimous consent of the
Council. If a citizen or taxpayer of the city requests to be heard either in
person or by counsel upon any matter which is not introduced or pending before
the Council, said citizen or taxpayer of the city may be permitted to address
Council upon unanimous consent of the Council. Said speech or hearing shall not
exceed five minutes, except again by unanimous consent of the Council.
   (B)   Citizens or counsel to speak only once on one subject at any one
meeting. No citizen or taxpayer of the city or his or her counsel shall speak
more than once on one subject at any one meeting of the Council, except by
unanimous consent.
   (C)   Manner of addressing Council. Any person, before addressing the
Council, shall rise to his or her feet, respectfully address the presiding
officer and remain standing while delivering his or her address. The person
addressing Council shall state his or her name and address, and if the person
represents a group or is speaking on behalf of someone other than himself or
herself.
   (D)   Order of recognition. If two or more persons desire to address the
Council at the same time, the presiding officer shall recognize the person who
first addressed the chair, and the other person shall at once be seated.
   (E)   Acknowledgment. The Mayor or the presiding officer of the meeting
shall acknowledge the person addressing the Council. The Mayor or the presiding
officer may request that the matter being addressed in the public comment be
referred to the appropriate Council committee.
(1991 Code, § 2-11) (Ord. 133, passed 11-17-2011)
§ 31.06 VOTING.
   (A)   Method. All votes taken in the Council, except for the election of
city officers, shall be by yeas and nays; but, upon the demand of the Mayor,
any member made before such vote is taken, the roll shall be called and a
record made by the City Clerk of the vote of every member voting.
   (B)   Roll calls.
      (1)   All roll calls made for a vote in the Council shall be made in a
random order. The random order shall be determined by the City Clerk at the
beginning of each and every Council meeting for all roll call votes during that
meeting.
      (2)   Each member shall vote when his or her name is called, unless
personally interested in the matter being voted upon or excused from voting by
the Council.
   (C)   Council members to elect city officers by ballot. The city officers
who are appointed by the Council shall be elected by ballot, and no person
shall be declared elected unless he or she receives a majority of the votes
cast.
(1991 Code, § 2-12) (Ord. 167, passed 4-4-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Prohibiting member of municipal governing body from voting on any subject on
which he or she may be interested other than as a citizen, see W.Va. Code § 8-
9-1
   Requirement that yeas and nays be recorded upon call of any member, see
W.Va. Code § 8-9-3
§ 31.07 EXPENDITURE.
   The Council may expend funds, for the purpose of advertising the
municipality and the entertainment of visitors, to $1 per capita per annum,
including, but not limited to, the following manner of expenditure:
   (A)   Sponsorship for non-profit organizations, civic groups, cultural and
art events and sponsorship of special downtown events or programs;
   (B)   Local meetings with business and civic colleagues;
   (C)   Out-of-town travel to meet with prospective businesses and hosting
groups and visitors to the city; and
   (D)   Advertising the city through television, radio, newspapers and various
other media, including websites, magazines, brochures and social media.
(Ord. 258, passed 2-7-2019)
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
§ 31.20 GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall not be necessary, except where otherwise provided by state
law or by this code, for the Council to publish in a newspaper any proposed
ordinance prior to the adoption thereof or any enacted ordinance subsequent to
the adoption thereof; and any and all ordinances shall be adopted in accordance
with the following requirements, except where different or additional
requirements are specified in other provisions of state law or this code; in
which event, such other different or additional requirements shall be
applicable.
      (1)   A proposed ordinance shall be read by title at not fewer than two
meetings of the Council, with at least one week intervening between each
meeting, unless a member of the Council demands that the ordinance be read in
full at one or both meetings. If such demand is made, the ordinance shall be
read in full as demanded.
      (2)   At least five days before the meeting at which a proposed
ordinance, the principal object of which is the raising of revenue for the
city, is to be finally adopted, the Council shall cause notice of the proposed
adoption of such proposed ordinance to be published as a Class I-O legal
advertisement, in compliance with the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 59, Art. 3,
and the publication area for such publication shall be the city. The notice
shall state the subject matter and general title or titles of such proposed
ordinance, the date, time and place of the proposed final vote on adoption and
the place or places, within the city, where such proposed ordinance may be
inspected by the public. A reasonable number of copies of the proposed
ordinance shall be kept at such place or places and be made available for
public inspection. Such notice shall also advise that interested parties may
appear at the meeting and be heard with respect to the proposed ordinance.
      (3)   A proposed ordinance shall not be materially amended at the same
meeting at which finally adopted.
   (B)   The Council may adopt, by ordinance, building codes, housing codes,
plumbing codes, sanitary codes, electrical codes, fire prevention codes or any
other technical codes dealing with the general public health, safety or welfare
or a combination thereof, as the manner prescribed by this division (B). Before
any such ordinance shall be adopted, the code shall be either printed or
typewritten and shall be presented in pamphlet form to the Council at a regular
meeting, and copies of such code shall be made available for public inspection.
The ordinance adopting such code shall not set out such code in full, but shall
merely identify such code. The vote on the adoption of such ordinance shall be
as on any other ordinance. After the adoption of the ordinance, such code or
codes shall be certified by the Mayor and shall be filed as permanent records
in the office of the City Clerk, who shall not be required to transcribe and
record such code in the ordinance book as other ordinances are transcribed and
recorded. Consistent with the provisions of division (A) above, it shall not be
necessary that any such ordinance, either as proposed or after adopted, be
published in any newspaper, and it shall not be necessary that the code itself
be so published; but before final adoption of any such proposed ordinance,
notice of the proposed adoption of such ordinance and code shall be given by
publication, as herein provided for ordinances the principal object of which is
the raising of revenue for the city, which notice shall also state where,
within the city, the code or codes will be available for public inspection.
   (C)   (1)   The Council may enact an ordinance without complying with the
rules prescribed in this section only:
         (a)   In the case of a pressing public emergency, making procedure in
accordance with the provisions of this section dangerous to the public health,
safety or morals, and by affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members elected
to the Council; and
         (b)   When otherwise provided by state law.
      (2)   The nature of any such emergency enactment shall be set out in full
in the ordinance.
(1991 Code, § 2-13)
Charter reference:
   Ordinances, see Char. Sections
2.11 through
2.13,
2.15
Cross-reference:
   Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance, see §
10.06
Statutory reference:
   Ordinances and ordinance procedures, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-11-1 et seq.
   State law basis of this section, see W.Va. Code § 8-11-4
§ 31.21 ATTESTATION; RECORD OF ORDINANCES.
   Each ordinance, upon its final passage, shall be signed by the presiding
officer of the Council and attested to by the City Clerk, who shall then number
it consecutively in relation to other ordinances, and record it in the record
of ordinances.
(1991 Code, § 2-14)
§ 31.22 ORDINANCES TO REPEAL, AMEND OR ADD TO PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE, AND
RECORDS THEREOF.
   (A)   Each bill which proposes an ordinance to repeal, amend or add to any
portion of this code, and each bill which proposes an ordinance of a general
and permanent nature, suitable for inclusion in this code though constituting
new subject matter not therein contained, shall be so drafted as to specify the
specific section numbers, divisions and the like of this code of ordinances
which are to be repealed or amended and, with respect to additions and to new
subject matter, as to provide appropriate chapter, subchapter, section and the
like numbers therefor; and each amendment of and addition to this code shall be
set out in full, and appropriate chapter and subchapter headings and section
catchlines shall be included.
   (B)   Upon the adoption of an ordinance to repeal, amend or add to any
portion of this code or to include new subject matter in this code, the City
Clerk shall separate the several chapters, subchapters, sections and the like
of such ordinance and enter them in their proper places in each file copy of
this code, and shall remove therefrom any portion so repealed or amended and,
in the margin of each insertion in the file copies of this code, he or she
shall note and initial the date of passage, effective date and number of the
amending or repealing ordinance.
   (C)   Items removed from the file copies of this code, pursuant to division
(B) above, shall be maintained by the City Clerk in a separate, loose-leaf
volume, arranged properly according to their respective chapters, articles,
sections and the like, and each item so removed from the file copies of this
code shall, in the margin of each such item, be noted and initialed by the City
Clerk to show the effective date and the number of both the enacting and
repealing or amending ordinances. The volume in which such repealed and amended
items are to be included shall be known as the “Record of Repealed and Amended
Portions of the Code of the City of Elkins, West Virginia”, the purpose or
which shall be to enable city officers, and other persons interested, to
ascertain the status of this code at any given time in the past.
   (D)   The requirements of division (B) above are in addition to the
requirement that each ordinance, upon adoption, shall be included in the record
of ordinances.
(1991 Code, § 2-15)
§ 31.23 RESOLUTIONS AND RECORDS THEREOF.
   (A)   Each resolution shall, before its introduction, be reduced to writing
and, when adopted, shall be signed by the presiding officer and attested to by
the City Clerk, who shall then date and number it and file it in his or her
office in a book for that purpose, which shall be known as the record of
resolutions.
   (B)   Resolutions and portions of resolutions which are repealed or amended
by subsequent resolutions or ordinances shall be noted and initialed in the
margin thereof by the City Clerk, so as to show the date and number of the
repealing or amendatory ordinance or resolution, but shall not be removed from
the record of resolutions.
(1991 Code, § 2-16)
§ 31.24 DISPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY TO NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A) The city may lease or convey city property to non-profit organizations
for less than fair market value, and without public auction, when the non-
profit organization is providing services that benefit the public and are
services that the city could lawfully provide; provided that Council has made a
factual determination that:
      (1)   There is a lack of need for such property by the city in comparison
to the benefit to the city if property is leased or conveyed; and
      (2)   There is a demonstrable need for such property by the non-profit
organization to be able to perform the services benefitting the public.
   (B)   In the event the non-profit organization should cease to provide such
services to the public, the property shall by operation of law, revert to and
vest in the city, and such non-profit organization shall thereafter have no
right, title or interest therein or thereto.
   (C)   Any lease, deed or other instrument of property transfer executed
pursuant to this section shall contain the reversion wording in division (B)
above.
(Ord. 230, passed 3-2-2017)
§ 31.25 CONVEYANCE OF CITY PROPERTY WITHOUT AUCTION.
   (A)   The city may sell its real or personal property valued in excess of
$1,000 for fair market value, but without public auction, provided that Council
has made a factual determination that the property is to be used to facilitate
economic development projects and/or to provide a necessary and convenient
resource for the benefit of the citizenry.
   (B)   With respect to real property, fair market value may be determined by
a real estate appraiser licensed by the state.
   (C)   Any proposed conveyance of city property pursuant to this section
shall be published as a Class II legal advertisement in compliance with the
provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 59-3-1 et seq., and the publication area for the
publication shall be the city.
   (D)   Prior to the approval by the Council of any conveyance of city
property pursuant to this section, the Council shall be provided with
documentation evidencing that all project plans have been approved by all
necessary and relevant state and/or municipal committees and departments, all
necessary and relevant state and/or municipal permits are in place or are
approved subject to purchase of the property, and funding for the project is
secured.
   (E)   Any full- or part-time employee, elected official or their immediate
family members, business partners or associates, are expressly prohibited from
purchasing any public properly under this section except at public auction
unless otherwise prohibited by statute.
(Ord. 230, passed 3-2-2017)
§ 31.26 CONVEYANCE BY SEALED BID.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in §
31.24(A) or elsewhere in the city code, all municipal property, both real and
personal, shall be sold only after the receipt of sealed bids after the time
and place of the sale has been published as a Class II legal advertisement in
compliance with the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 59-3-1 et seq., and the
publication area for the publication shall be the city.
   (B)   The first publication is to be made at least 15 days before the date
when bids are to be received and opened.
   (C)   The property shall be sold to the highest bidder but the city shall
have the right to reject any and all bids for any reason.
   (D)   If the property is not sold pursuant to such advertisement, the city,
by resolution, may set a date for an open meeting of Council to be held within
60 days after the date when the bids were opened.
   (E)   At the meeting held pursuant to such resolution, the city may sell by
public auction the property for a consideration not less than the highest
sealed bid previously received pursuant to the advertisement.
   (F)   At the meeting, any interested party may bid for cash, certified check
or other surety that is acceptable to the city and the property shall be sold
to the highest bidder. The city shall have the right to reject any and all
bids.
   (G)   The city may require a written confirmation of bids received at such
called meeting before selling the property at auction, but it shall not be
necessary that sealed bids be received before conducting the auction.
(Ord. 230, passed 3-2-2017)
§ 31.27 CONVEYANCE BY AUCTION.
   The city may, at its election, continue to convey any city property, real or
personal, utilizing the procedure set out in W.Va. Code § 8-12-18(b). Under
this section and pursuant to authority granted under W.Va. Code § 8-1-5a, the
city is exempt from the auction requirement imposed by W.Va. Code § 8-12-18(b)
under the circumstances stated herein.
(Ord. 230, passed 3-2-2017)
§ 31.28 INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS.
   For any action providing for a contractual or other agreement with another
jurisdiction, the city may enter into such agreement by passage of a resolution
by the Council.
(Ord. 250, passed 2-1-2018)
CHAPTER 32: CITY OFFICERS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Requirements for appointive positions
   
32.02   Powers and duties of administrative officers
Specific Officers
   
32.15   Mayor
   
32.16   City Collector and Treasurer
   
32.17   Deputy City Treasurer
   
32.18   City Attorney
   
32.19   Public Works Director
   
32.20   City code editor
City Clerk
   
32.35   Election; term; qualifications
   
32.36   Powers and duties generally
   
32.37   Duties as to assessments, taxes, service charges and the like
Charter reference:
   City Clerk, see Char. Section
3.06
   City Treasurer, see Char. Section
3.07
   Mayor, see Char. Sections
3.01 through
3.05
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council, by ordinance, to determine and prescribe offices and
positions to be filled; the qualifications, powers, duties and the like of
those to be appointed or elected and the like, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-11
   Compensation of officers and employees, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-12
   Filling vacancies in elective offices, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-10
   Oath of office, see W.Va. Code §§ 6-1-3, 8-5-8
   Procedure for removal from office, see W.Va. Code § 6-6-7
   Public officers generally, see W.Va. Code Ch. 6
   Terms of office, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-9
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 REQUIREMENTS FOR APPOINTIVE POSITIONS.
   All appointive officers of the city to be appointed by the Council pursuant
to the Charter, including the Chief of Police, the City Attorney, the
Superintendent of Streets, the Commissioner of Waterworks, the City Collector
and Treasurer, the City Clerk, the City Engineer and other permanent officers
appointed in the city by the Council, shall be elected by the Council.
(1991 Code, § 2-17)
§ 32.02 POWERS AND DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.
   (A)   There shall be five administrative officers of the city (the City
Clerk, the City Treasurer, the Fire Chief, the Operations Manager, and the
Police Chief), nominated and appointed as described in Charter Section
3.01, sworn to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of this state, and mutually responsible for the conduct and
management of the affairs of the city in accordance with the Charter, this
code, general law, and the ordinances, resolutions, and orders of Council.
   (B)   In addition to specific provisions concerning these officers elsewhere
in the Charter and in this code, these officers shall hold administrative
authority over their respective departments and shall competently and fairly
exercise the power and duties described in this section over the personnel
assigned to their departments by Council. These officers shall:
      (1)   Exercise sole responsibility for the appointment, delegation of
authority, supervision, performance evaluation, and discipline, including
removal, of all city employees assigned by Council to their respective
departments, except as otherwise provided by law, or by rules adopted by
Council.
      (2)   Exercise sole responsibility for the direction, supervision, and
administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city falling
within their respective departments, except as otherwise provided by law, or by
rules adopted by Council.
      (3)   Serve as the point of contact between elected officials, when they
are acting in their capacity as elected officials, and the personnel assigned
to these officers’ departments. Individual elected officials shall not attempt
to influence or direct the work or actions of any employee, except as otherwise
specifically allowed by law, or by rules adopted by Council.
      (4)   Attend all meetings of Council, with the right to take part in any
discussion or deliberation. The administrative officers may not vote on issues
before Council.
      (5)   Ensure that all laws, ordinances, and provisions of the Charter,
code, and acts of the Council are faithfully executed and enforced.
      (6)   Collaborate to prepare and submit to the Finance Committee and
Council the annual budget and capital program.
      (7)   Propose to the Council official acts of the city, including
ordinances, policies, and rules, which Council may by ordinance or other action
adopt with or without amendment.
      (8)   Make such reports as the Council may require concerning the
operations of city departments, offices, and agencies.
      (9)   Keep the Council fully advised as to the condition and future needs
of the city and make recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of
the city.
      (10)    Devote all assigned working time to the performance of the duties
of their offices, and while occupying such offices are not to engage, directly
or indirectly, or be actively interested in any private business which would
conflict with the performance of duties concerning the affairs of the city.
      (11)    Propose annually to Council short- and long-term goals and
objectives to be accomplished in the performance of their duties.
      (12)    Perform such other duties as are specified in the Charter, this
code, or other acts of Council.
(Ord. 339, passed 11-21-2024)
SPECIFIC OFFICERS
§ 32.15 MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and the
head of the city government. He or she shall take care that all provisions of
this code and other ordinances, resolutions and orders of the Council are
faithfully executed; he or she shall faithfully perform the duties and exercise
the powers prescribed for the Mayor by the Charter; and he or she shall preside
over all meetings of the Council. The Mayor shall have such additional powers
and perform such additional duties as may be prescribed for mayors and other
chief executive officers of municipalities by applicable provisions of state
law, and as may be prescribed by this code and by other ordinances, resolutions
and orders of the Council.
   (B)   The Mayor, in such instances of the absence of the City Clerk from the
city, or the inability of the City Clerk to perform his or her duties, may
direct the City Treasurer to sign an attestation on an official city document
on behalf of the city so that the official business of the city may continue.
The Mayor may only request the City Treasurer to sign the official city
document if he or she deems it necessary to carry out the official business of
the city. The attestation signed by the City Treasurer shall have the same
force and effect as if the document were signed by the City Clerk. The Mayor
may only direct the City Treasurer to sign the attestation in the limited
circumstances as described herein.
(1991 Code, § 2-18) (Ord. 126, passed 6-17-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Filling vacancy in elective office, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-10
   Powers and duties of municipal Mayors generally, see W.Va. Code § 8-10-1
   Qualifications of municipal Mayors, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-7(c)
   Term of office, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-9
§ 32.16 CITY COLLECTOR AND TREASURER.
   (A)   General powers, duties and the like. The City Collector and Treasurer
shall collect assessments, levies, licenses, water rents and all other bills,
accounts and charges placed into his or her hands by the Council or by the City
Clerk and as may be required by law, and shall duly give receipt therefor. He
or she shall be chargeable with all such taxes, levies, licenses, water rents,
charges or other collections placed in his or her hands for collection, and
shall account therefor to the Council, as required by law.
   (B)   Keeping or paying out money. The City Collector and Treasurer shall
act as Treasurer and shall issue all checks when properly signed by the Mayor
and City Clerk and when he or she has sufficient funds in hand to so pay. He or
she shall keep all money collected by him or her in banks in so the city. He or
she shall not pay out any of such funds except upon such orders as are herein
specified and as allowed by law.
   (C)   Monthly reports to Council; settlement of accounts.
      (1)   Upon the request of the Mayor or a member of Council, the City
Collector and Treasurer will make a report to the Council, at its first
regularly scheduled meeting following such request, regarding the status of
city accounts.
      (2)   The Collector and Treasurer shall make full settlement of his or
her accounts as required by the rulings of the State Tax Commissioner and by
the laws of the state and as the Council, by resolution, may require.
   (D)   Records. The City Collector and Treasurer shall keep complete and
accurate fiscal accounts and records, as required by law and as prescribed by
the State Tax Commissioner and other state officers having authority to
prescribe therefor, and in accordance with directives from the Council.
   (E)   Rules and the like to which Collector subject. The City Collector and
Treasurer shall be subject to the provisions of the city’s Charter and to the
acts of the legislature relating to such officer and his or her duties, and
also to all applicable provisions of this code and other ordinances,
resolutions and orders of the Council.
   (F)   Election; term; qualifications. The City Collector and Treasurer shall
be elected by the Council at the first regular meeting held in the month of
September of each odd year, or as soon thereafter as practicable. He or she
shall be a citizen and qualified voter of the city at the time of his or her
election, and shall hold office, during the pleasure of the Council, for a term
of two years or until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The term
of his or her office shall commence on the first of October next succeeding his
or her election.
   (G)   Oath of office. Before entering upon the discharge of his or her
duties, the City Collector and Treasurer shall take and subscribe the oath of
office required by law in such cases for the faithful performance of his or her
duties.
(1991 Code, § 2-22) (Ord. passed 5-7-1981)
Charter reference:
   City Treasurer, see Char. Section
3.07
Statutory reference:
   Payment of money from municipal treasuries, see W.Va. Code § 8-13-22
   Powers and duties of Municipal Treasurers, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-13-15, 8-13-
16
§ 32.17 DEPUTY CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   There shall hereby be created the official position of Deputy City
Treasurer, who shall be granted all the powers, duties and responsibilities of
the acting City Treasurer, in the absence or inability of the City Treasurer to
exercise said powers, duties and responsibilities. The position of Deputy City
Treasurer shall be subject to all the provisions of the city code enumerating
the terms, qualifications, duties, responsibilities and powers of the City
Treasurer, with the sole exception that the Deputy City Treasurer shall not be
required to be a qualified voter or resident of city to act on a temporary
basis as City Treasurer.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, TEMPORARY BASIS shall be defined as
a period not to exceed six months.
(Ord. 046, passed 6-15-2006)
§ 32.18 CITY ATTORNEY.
   The Council shall appoint a City Attorney, who shall be an attorney at law,
admitted to practice in the State of West Virginia, and he or she shall be the
head of the Department of Law of the city. He or she shall be the legal
adviser, attorney and counsel for the city and for the officers of the
departments thereof in matters relating to their official duties. He or she
shall prosecute and defend all suits, actions and procedures for and on behalf
of the city, shall prepare all contracts, bonds and other instruments, in
writing, in which the city is concerned and shall endorse on each his or her
approval of the form and correctness thereof. He or she shall, if required by
the Mayor, appear and assist in the prosecution of persons arrested for
violating the laws and ordinances of the city or those laws of the state over
which the Municipal Court may have jurisdiction. The Mayor or any member of the
Council may require the opinion of the City Attorney, in writing, upon any
question of law involving his or her powers and duties. The term of office
shall be for one year commencing on April 1 of each year, and he or she shall
receive such compensation as shall be deemed appropriate.
(1991 Code, § 2-23)
§ 32.19 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Council may appoint a Public Works Director, who shall serve
during such periods as the Council may prescribe and who shall be paid such sum
as the Council may determine from time to time.
   (B)   The Public Works Director shall maintain on file in his or her office
copies of plans and specifications for street and sidewalk construction and for
the construction of other public improvements, works and buildings not required
to be filed elsewhere, as well as copies of all plans, plats, drawings and
diagrams which, by law, this code or other ordinance, require his or her
approval. He or she shall maintain a record of street grades and bench marks
within the city and such other records of an engineering or topographical
nature as may be of use to the city or to any of its officers or employees in
the discharge of their official duties. Except as may be otherwise provided by
law, this code or other ordinance, the Public Works Director shall supervise
all engineering, construction and surveying work done by or for the city, shall
perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by the Council and
shall make a monthly report to the Council, advising it of the status of such
projects as he or she is currently supervising.
(1991 Code, § 2-24) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
§ 32.20 CITY CODE EDITOR.
   (A)   The City Attorney shall be, ex officio, the city code editor. As such,
he or she shall prepare or cause to be prepared supplements to, or otherwise
revise, this code, noting the sections which have been repealed, generally
updating this code, and including, at his or her discretion, updated
annotations of court decisions or citations to other laws. He or she may make
and enter into all contracts and execute, acknowledge and deliver all
instruments necessary or incidental to the performance of his or her duties
under this section, subject to the availability of funds appropriated for such
purposes.
   (B)   In performing his or her duties and exercising his or her authority
under this section, the city code editor shall not alter the sense, meaning or
effect of any act of the Council, but he or she may:
      (1)   Renumber and rearrange sections or parts of sections;
      (2)   Transfer sections or divide sections, so as to give distinct
subject matters separate section numbers, but without changing the meanings
thereof;
      (3)   Insert or change the wording of headnotes and catchlines;
      (4)   Change reference numbers to agree with renumbered chapters or
sections;
      (5)   Substitute the proper section or chapter number for the terms “this
ordinance”, “the preceding section” and the like;
      (6)   Strike out figures where they are merely a repetition of written
words, and vice versa;
      (7)   Change capitalization for the sake of uniformity;
      (8)   Correct manifest typographical and grammatical errors; and
      (9)   Make any other purely formal or clerical changes in keeping with
the purposes of the revision.
   (C)   The city code editor shall omit all titles of ordinances, all
enacting, resolving and repealing clauses, all appropriation measures, all
temporary ordinances, all declarations of emergency and all validity,
declaration of policy and construction clauses, except when the retention
thereof is necessary or desirable to preserve the full meaning and intent of
the Council; and he or she may add such editor’s notes as he or she deems
appropriate.
(1991 Code, § 2-25)
CITY CLERK
§ 32.35 ELECTION; TERM; QUALIFICATIONS.
   The City Clerk shall be elected by the Council at its first regular meeting
in December, 1914, and every second year thereafter, for a term of two years.
He or she shall be a qualified voter of the city at the time of his or her
election. His or her term of office shall begin on January 1 next succeeding
his or her election, and he or she shall hold office for the term for which he
or she was elected and until his or her successor is elected and qualified,
unless sooner removed for cause by the Council.
(1991 Code, § 2-19)
§ 32.36 POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall be custodian of the city seal and of all records,
books, documents and papers for which custody is not otherwise provided, and he
or she shall certify to all true copies thereof and charge such fees therefor
as may be prescribed by this code or other ordinances of the Council. The City
Clerk shall issue all city permits not issued by other city officers and keep
full and accurate records thereof, and he or she shall serve as recording
Secretary to the Council. The City Clerk shall have such other powers and
perform such other duties as may be provided for municipal clerks and recorders
in applicable provisions of state law, and as may be prescribed by this code
and other ordinances, resolutions and orders of the Council.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall keep accurate records of every transaction in
relation to the affairs or business of the city which come within the purview
of his or her office, and such records shall be kept under proper headings, and
shall be legible, intelligible and comprehensive.
(1991 Code, § 2-20)
Charter reference:
   City Clerk, see Char. Secton
3.06
Statutory reference:
   Powers and duties of municipal recorders generally, see W.Va. Code § 8-10-3
§ 32.37 DUTIES AS TO ASSESSMENTS, TAXES, SERVICE CHARGES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   (1)   The City Clerk shall annually, not later than March 7, procure
from the County Assessor a certified statement showing, in separate amount, the
aggregate value of all real and personal property within the city which is
subject to taxation by the city, and showing the classification of such
property for tax purposes, as provided by W.Va. Code § 11-3-6.
      (2)   Upon procurement of such list from the County Assessor, the City
Clerk shall place such list before the Council at its next regular meeting.
   (B)   (1)   The City Clerk shall make out, on blanks provided for the
purpose, all assessments, allowances and orders of the Council and shall place
such forms into the hands of the City Collector and Treasurer for collection,
charging him or her with all such forms and taking his or her receipts
therefor.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall keep, in a well-bound book kept for that
purpose, a full, accurate and complete list of taxes, water rents, fines,
licenses and other orders placed by him or her into the hands of the City
Collector and Treasurer.
(1991 Code, § 2-21)
Statutory reference:
   Assessment of dogs, see W.Va. Code § 19-20-2
   Classification of property for levy purposes, see W.Va. Code § 11-8-5
   Providing that assessment of property for taxation by municipalities
generally shall be governed by the provisions of W.Va. Code Chs. 11 and 11A,
see W.Va. Code § 8-13-1
CHAPTER 33: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
33.001   Attendance of members at public meetings
   
33.002   Submission of reports and statements
Board of Library Directors
   
33.015   Created; composition; appointments, compensation and terms of members
   
33.016   Powers and duties
Planning Commission
   
33.030   Created; short title
   
33.031   Composition; appointments, term and compensation of members;
vacancies; removal
   
33.032   Officers
   
33.033   Planning Commission’s powers and duties
   
33.034   Prior Council approval of expenses and contracts
   
33.035   Additional powers and duties
   
33.036   Planning Commission meetings; quorum
Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners
   
33.050   Creation
   
33.051   Composition; compensation; terms; vacancies
   
33.052   Officers; by-laws, rules and regulations
   
33.053   Powers and duties generally
   
33.054   Appointment of Superintendent or Director of Recreation and personnel
   
33.055   Annual budget
   
33.056   Authority to receive gifts and bequests
   
33.057   Reports
   
33.058   Fees and charges for use of recreational services and facilities
   
33.059   Cooperation and the like with other governmental units
   
33.060   Additional powers and duties
Elkins Municipal Building Commission
   
33.075   Created
   
33.076   Public corporation; perpetual existence
   
33.077   Board
   
33.078   Powers
   
33.079   Indebtedness
   
33.080   Surplus funds
   
33.081   Contributions
   
33.082   Sale of property on direction of Council
   
33.083   Transfer of property to Commission
   
33.084   Worker’s compensation
Municipal Historic Landmarks Commission
   
33.095   Created
   
33.096   Composition; appointments, term and compensation of members; vacancies
   
33.097   Officers; by-laws; rules and regulations
   
33.098   Meetings; quorum; voting
   
33.099   Powers, authority and duties
Parking Authority
   
33.110   Established
   
33.111   Composition; appointment and terms of members; vacancies
   
33.112   Officers; chief administrative officer; compensation
   
33.113   Powers and duties generally
   
33.114   Contracts
   
33.115   Jurisdiction
   
33.116   Bonds
Elkins Water Board
   
33.125   Created
   
33.126   Composition; appointment
   
33.127   Term of members; vacancies; bylaws; compensation
   
33.128   Officers; meetings; vacancies
   
33.129   Powers and duties generally
   
33.130   Budget and compensation matters
   
33.131   Reports
   
33.132   Supervision of assets and liabilities
   
33.133   Protection of bondholders; amendment
Editor’s note:
   The Elkins-Randolph County Airport Authority was established by the mutual
agreement creating the joint ownership and operation and control of the Elkins-
Randolph County Airport. The particulars of that agreement are not set out
herein but are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.001 ATTENDANCE OF MEMBERS AT PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   (A)   Each board, commission or other body established by this code or by
other ordinance or resolution of the Council is hereby vested with the
authority to require the Chief of Police to compel the attendance of its
members at any public meeting, except as to any such member who has been
excused from attendance by the presiding officer of such board, commission or
other body, and except as to any such member who, by reason of illness or
physical disability, is unable to attend any such meeting.
   (B)   The Council reserves the right to suspend or revoke the appointment of
any member of any board, commission or other body established by this code or
by other ordinance or resolution of the Council who, without having been
properly excused and being physically fit, fails to attend two or more public
meetings of such board, commission or other body in any one calendar year.
(1991 Code, § 2-26)
§ 33.002 SUBMISSION OF REPORTS AND STATEMENTS.
   (A)   Each board, commission or other body established by this code or other
ordinance or resolution of the Council shall promptly submit all reports or
statements that are required of it by this code, state law or other ordinances,
resolutions or orders of the Council.
   (B)   No funds shall be released for the use of any such board, commission
or other body until all such reports or statements have been submitted.
(1991 Code, § 2-26.1)
BOARD OF LIBRARY DIRECTORS
§ 33.015 CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS, COMPENSATION AND TERMS OF MEMBERS.
   There is hereby created a Board of Library Directors of the city. Such Board
shall consist of five members. Initially, one member shall be appointed to
serve for one year; one member shall be appointed to serve for two years; one
member shall be appointed to serve for three years; one member shall be
appointed to serve for four years; and one member shall be appointed to serve
for five years, and thereafter their successors shall be appointed for terms of
five years each. All appointments shall be made by the Council and all
Directors so appointed shall serve without compensation and at the will and
pleasure of Council.
(1991 Code, § 2-27) (Ord. passed 10-20-1966)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to operate and the like, a public library and appoint
and support a library board, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(38) and (39)
   Interstate library pact, see W.Va. Code Ch. 10, Art. 1A
   Public libraries generally, see W.Va. Code Ch. 10, Art, 1
§ 33.016 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Library Directors, with respect to any public library
established pursuant to the provisions of the Charter §
28, subsec. (5) or W.Va. Code § 10-1-2, shall have the powers and perform the
duties prescribed for municipal boards of library directors by W.Va. Code Ch.
10, Art. 1, and shall conform to the requirements and limitations of that
article in all respects.
(1991 Code, § 2-28)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 33.030 CREATED; SHORT TITLE.
   There is hereby created a municipal Planning Commission in and for the city,
pursuant to the provisions of W.Va. Code § 8A-2-1. The title of the commission
shall be the “Planning Commission of the City of Elkins”, and it shall be known
as the Planning Commission.
(1991 Code, § 2-29) (Ord. 239, passed 6-1-2017)
Charter reference:
   Planning Commission, see Char. Sections
5.01,
5.03
Statutory reference:
   Municipal Planning Commissions, see W.Va. Code §§ 8A-2-1 et seq.
   Urban and rural planning and zoning generally, see W.Va. Code §§ 8A-7
§ 33.031 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS, TERM AND COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS;
VACANCIES; REMOVAL.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall consist of one Council member and the
Mayor or another administrative officer of the city, each to be appointed by
the Council, for a term coextensive with his or her term as Council member or
administrative officer, unless removed for cause prior to the expiration of
such term; and five resident freeholders, five of whom must have been residents
of the city for at least three years prior to nomination and appointment,
herein referred to as “citizen members”, who shall be nominated by the Mayor
and appointed by the Council, each for a term of three years and until his or
her successor has been duly appointed and qualified, unless removed for cause
prior to the expiration of his or her term of office. Vacancies in the citizen
membership shall be filled for the unexpired term only and made in the same
manner as original selections were made. The governing body of the municipality
may establish procedures for the removal of members of the Planning Commission
for inactivity, neglect of duty or malfeasance. The procedures must contain
provisions requiring that the person to be removed be provided with a written
statement of the reasons for removal and an opportunity to be heard on the
matter.
   (B)   Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation but shall
be reimbursed for all reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in
the performance of their official duties.
(1991 Code, § 2-30) (Ord. passed 6-5-1947; Ord. 239, passed 6-1-2017)
Statutory reference:
   State law basis of this section, and requirement that citizen members be
appointed so as to be representatives of various segments of the population,
see W.Va. Code § 8A-2-3
§ 33.032 OFFICERS.
   At its first regular meeting in each year, the Planning Commission shall
elect from its members a President and a Vice President; and the Vice President
shall have the authority to act as President during the absence or disability
of the President. The City Clerk shall act as Clerk of the Commission.
(1991 Code, § 2-31) (Ord. passed 6-5-1947; Ord. 239, passed 6-1-2017)
Statutory reference:
   State law basis of this section, see W.Va. Code § 8A-2-9
§ 33.033 PLANNING COMMISSION’S POWERS AND DUTIES.
   A Planning Commission has the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Exercise general supervision for the administration of the affairs of
the Commission;
   (B)   Prescribe rules and regulations pertaining to administration,
investigations and hearings; provided, that the rules and regulations are
adopted by the governing body;
   (C)   Supervise the fiscal affairs and responsibilities of the Commission;
   (D)   With consent from the governing body, hire employees necessary to
carry out the duties and responsibilities of the Planning Commission; provided,
that the governing body sets the salaries;
   (E)   Keep an accurate and complete record of all Planning Commission
proceedings;
   (F)   Record and file all bonds and contracts;
   (G)   Take responsibility for the custody and preservation of all papers and
documents of the Planning Commission;
   (H)   Make recommendations to the appropriate governing body concerning
planning;
   (I)   Make an annual report to the appropriate governing body concerning the
operation of the Planning Commission and the status of planning within its
jurisdiction;
   (J)   Prepare, publish and distribute reports, ordinances and other material
relating to the activities authorized under this subchapter;
   (K)   Adopt a seal, and certify all official acts;
   (L)   Invoke any legal, equitable or special remedy for the enforcement of
the provisions of this subchapter or any ordinance, rule and regulation or any
action taken thereunder;
   (M)   Prepare and submit an annual budget to the appropriate governing body;
   (N)   If necessary, establish advisory committees;
   (O)   Delegate limited powers to a committee composed of one or more members
of the Commission; and
   (P)   Contract for special or temporary services and professional counsel
with the approval of the governing body. Upon request, a County Prosecuting
Attorney, the County Surveyor, the County Engineer or any other county employee
may render assistance and service to a Planning Commission without
compensation.
(Ord. 239, passed 6-1-2017)
§ 33.034 PRIOR COUNCIL APPROVAL OF EXPENSES AND CONTRACTS.
   The Planning Commission shall not incur any debt or expense chargeable to or
for which the city may be liable or responsible, nor enter into any contract
for the services of any engineer, clerk or other help without first having had
and obtained the consent and approval of the Council in each instance,
manifested by an order duly approved by the Council for payment thereof, and so
entered in the minute records of the Council.
(1999 Code, § 2-35) (Ord. passed 6-5-1947; Ord. 239, passed 6-1-2017)
§ 33.035 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission shall have such further powers and perform such
further duties with respect to municipal planning and zoning as may be
specified for municipal planning and zoning commissions in W.Va. Code Ch. 8A,
Art. 2, and shall conform to the requirements and limitations contained in that
article.
(1991 Code, § 2-36) (Ord. 239, passed 6-1-2017)
§ 33.036 PLANNING COMMISSION MEETINGS; QUORUM.
   (A)   Regular meetings. When there is business to conduct, the Planning
Commission shall meet at least quarterly. In any event, the Planning Commission
shall meet at least semi-annually and may meet more frequently at the request
of the President or by two or more members.
   (B)   Special meetings. Notice for a special meeting must be in writing,
include the date, time and place of the special meeting, and be sent to all
members at least two days before the special meeting. Written notice of a
special meeting is not required if the date, time and place of the special
meeting were set in a regular meeting.
   (C)   Quorum. Pursuant to W.Va. Code § 8A-2-8, the Planning Commission must
have a quorum to conduct a meeting. A simple majority of Planning Commission
members present (minimum of four), constitute a quorum. No action of a Planning
Commission is official unless authorized by a majority of the members present
at a regular or properly called special meeting.
(Ord. 239, passed 6-1-2017; Ord. 326, passed 3-21-2024)
BOARD OF PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSIONERS
§ 33.050 CREATION.
   There is hereby created a Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners, for
the purpose of establishing, constructing, improving, extending, developing,
maintaining and operating a city public park and recreation system.
(1991 Code, § 2-37) (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
Statutory reference:
   Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-21-1 to 8-
21-14
   Public recreation and playgrounds generally, see W.Va. Code §§ 10-2-1 to 10-
2-5
§ 33.051 COMPOSITION; COMPENSATION; TERMS; VACANCIES.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall consist of five
persons, serving without compensation, who shall be appointed by the Council
and who, at the time of their appointment, shall be residents and freeholders
of the city. Membership on the Council shall not disqualify any member for
appointment to the Board, if otherwise qualified; however, not more than two
members of the Council may be so appointed. The term of the Board membership of
any such member of the Council so appointed shall continue during his or her
term as a member of the Council and until his or her successor is appointed.
The terms of other appointed members shall be for six years and until their
successors have been duly appointed; except, that the members of such Board
first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one member
shall expire annually thereafter. When any member of the Board, during his or
her term of office, shall cease to be a resident and freeholder of the city, he
or she shall thereby be disqualified as a member of the Board and his or her
office shall thereupon become vacant. When a vacancy occurs on the Board by
reason of death, resignation, change of residence from the city, failure to
remain a freeholder of the city or due to any other cause, the remaining
members of the Board shall appoint a successor, or if there should be no
members left on the Board, the Council shall appoint successors, and in either
event, the appointments shall be for the unexpired term or terms.
(1991 Code, § 2-38) (Ord. passed 2-1-1968; Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
§ 33.052 OFFICERS; BY-LAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall organize by electing
one of its members President and by installing such other officers as may be
necessary. The Board shall have the power to adopt by-laws, rules and
regulations for the proper conduct of public recreation for the city.
(1991 Code, § 2-39) (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
§ 33.053 POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall be responsible
for all policies, rules and regulations relating to the administration of a
public recreation program.
   (B)   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall provide, conduct
and supervise public playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation centers and other
recreational facilities and activities on any of the properties owned or
controlled by the city or on other properties, with the consent of the owners
and authorities thereof. It shall have the power to conduct any form of
recreational activity which will constructively and wholesomely employ the
leisure time of the people.
(1991 Code, § 2-40) (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
Statutory reference:
   General powers of the Board, see W.Va. Code § 8-21-10
§ 33.054 APPOINTMENT OF SUPERINTENDENT OR DIRECTOR OF RECREATION AND PERSONNEL.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall have the power to
appoint a Superintendent or Director of Recreation who shall be trained and
properly qualified for such work; and, upon the recommendation of the
Superintendent or Director, such other personnel as may be required.
(1991 Code, § 2-41) (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
§ 33.055 ANNUAL BUDGET.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall annually submit a
budget to the Mayor and Council for their approval.
(1991 Code, § 2-42) (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
§ 33.056 AUTHORITY TO RECEIVE GIFTS AND BEQUESTS.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners may solicit or receive any
gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or any donations to be
allocated, permanently or temporarily, in principal or by interest, to
playgrounds or for other recreational purposes.
(1991 Code, § 2-43) (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
§ 33.057 REPORTS.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall make to the Mayor and
Council full and complete annual and other required reports, and shall also
make reports requested by other governmental agencies.
(1991 Code, § 2-44) (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
§ 33.058 FEES AND CHARGES FOR USE OF RECREATIONAL SERVICES AND FACILITIES.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners upon the recommendation of
the Superintendent or Director of Recreation, shall have the authority to levy
fees and charges which it deems appropriate to provide recreational services or
facilities.
(1991 Code, § 2-45) (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
§ 33.059 COOPERATION AND THE LIKE WITH OTHER GOVERNMENTAL UNITS.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners is authorized to work jointly
with other municipal departments or political subdivisions to provide,
establish, operate, conduct and maintain a supervised recreation system and to
acquire, operate, improve and maintain property, both real and personal, for
parks, playgrounds, recreation centers and other recreation facilities and
activities.
(1991 Code, § 2-46) (Ord. passed 2-1-1968)
§ 33.060 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Park and Recreation Commissioners shall have such further
powers and perform such further duties with respect to the establishing,
constructing, improving, extending, developing, maintaining and operating a
city public park and recreation system as may be specified for such a Board in
W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 21, and shall conform to the requirements and
limitations contained in that article.
(1991 Code, § 2-46.1) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
ELKINS MUNICIPAL BUILDING COMMISSION
§ 33.075 CREATED.
   There is hereby created a Municipal Building Commission for the city which
shall be known as Elkins Municipal Building Commission.
(1991 Code, § 2-47) (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.076 PUBLIC CORPORATION; PERPETUAL EXISTENCE.
   The Commission shall be a public corporation and shall have perpetual
existence.
(1991 Code, § 2-48) (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.077 BOARD.
   (A)   All property, powers and duties and the management and control of the
Commission shall be vested in a Board of three members appointed by the Council
for terms of five years. Members first appointed shall serve respectively for
terms of one year, two years and three years. Thereafter, members shall be
appointed for terms of five years each. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term only. As the term of each initial appointee
expires, the successor to fill the vacancy created by such expired term, shall
be appointed for a term of five years. No more than two of the members of such
Board shall be from the same political party, and no member of such Board shall
hold any office, other than the office of notary public, or employment under
the United States of America, the state, any county or political subdivision
thereof, or of any political party. All members of such Board shall be
residents of the city. No member of such Board shall receive any compensation
for his or her services as such, but each member shall be reimbursed by the
Commission for any reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in the
discharge of his or her duties as a member of the Board.
   (B)   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under the State
Municipal Home Rule Pilot Program, under W.Va. Code § 8-l-5a, the city hereby
declares itself to be exempt from the requirement that no more than two-thirds
of the total number of its Building Commission be members of the same political
party as required by W.Va. Code § 8-33-3.
   (C)   All property, powers and duties and the management and control of the
Commission shall be vested in a Board of three members appointed by the Council
for terms of five years. Members first appointed shall serve respectively for
terms of one year, two years and three years. Thereafter, members shall be
appointed for terms of five years each. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term only. As the term of each initial appointee
expires, the successor to fill the vacancy created by such expired term, shall
be appointed for a term of five years. No member of such Board shall hold any
office, other than the office of notary public or employment under the United
States of America, the state, any county or political subdivision thereof or
any political party. All members of such Board shall be residents of the city.
No member of such Board shall receive any compensation for his or her services
as such, but each member shall be reimbursed by the Commission for any
reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in the discharge of his or
her duties as a member of the Board
(1991 Code, § 2-49) (Ord. passed 9-5-1976; Ord. 233, passed 3-2-2017)
§ 33.078 POWERS.
   The Commission shall have plenary power and authority to:
   (A)   Sue and be sued;
   (B)   Contract and be contracted with;
   (C)   Adopt, use and alter a common seal;
   (D)   Make and adopt all necessary, appropriate and lawful by-laws and rules
and regulations pertaining to its affairs;
   (E)   Elect such officers, appoint such committees and agents and employ and
fix the compensation of such employees and contractors as may be necessary for
the conduct of the affairs and operations of the Commission;
   (F)   Acquire, purchase, own and hold any property, real or personal; and
acquire, construct, equip, maintain and operate public buildings, structures,
projects and appurtenant facilities of any type for which the governmental body
or bodies creating such Commission are permitted by law to expend public funds
(all hereinafter in this subchapter referred to as facilities);
   (G)   Apply for, receive and use grants-in-aid, donations and contributions
from any source, including, but not limited to, the United States of America or
any department or agency thereof, and accept and use bequests, devices, gifts
and donations from any source whatsoever;
   (H)   Sell, encumber or dispose of any property, real or personal;
   (I)   Issue negotiable bonds, notes, debentures or other evidences of
indebtedness and provide for the rights of the holders thereof, incur any
proper indebtedness and issue any obligations and give any security therefor
which it may deem necessary or advisable in connection with exercising powers
as provided herein;
   (J)   Raise funds by the issuance and sale of revenue bonds in the manner
provided by the applicable provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 16, and to the
extent provided by §
33.079, without regard to the limitations specified in said W.Va. Code Ch. 8,
Art. 16, and the Commission is hereby declared to be a “governing body” as that
term is used in W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 16 only;
   (K)   Exercise the power of eminent domain in the manner provided for in
W.Va. Code Ch. 54 for business corporations, for the purposes set forth in
division (F) above, which purposes are hereby declared public purposes for
which private property may be taken;
   (L)   Lease its property or any part thereof, for public purposes, to such
persons and upon such terms as the Commission deems proper, but when the city
is a lessee under any such lease, such lease must contain a provision granting
the city the option to terminate such lease during any fiscal year covered
thereby; and
   (M)   Do all things reasonable and necessary to carry out the foregoing
powers.
(1991 Code, § 2-50) (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.079 INDEBTEDNESS.
   No statutory limitation with respect to the nature of amount of indebtedness
which may be incurred by municipalities or other public or governmental bodies
shall apply to the indebtedness of the Commission. No indebtedness of any
nature of the Commission shall constitute an indebtedness of the municipality
or a charge against any property of said municipality. No obligation or
indebtedness incurred by the Commission shall give any right against any member
of the Council or any member of the Commission. The rights of creditors of the
Commission shall be solely against the Commission as a corporate body and shall
be satisfied only out of property held by it in its corporate capacity.
(1991 Code, § 2-51) (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.080 SURPLUS FUNDS.
   If the Commission should realize a surplus over and above the amount
required for the maintenance, improvement and operation of its facilities and
for meeting all required payments on its obligations, it shall set aside such a
reserve for future operations, improvements and contingencies as it shall deem
proper and shall then apply the residue of such surplus, if any, to the payment
of any recognized and established obligations not then due; and after all such
recognized and established obligations have been paid and discharged in full,
the Commission shall, at the end of each fiscal year, set aside the reserve for
future operations, improvements and contingencies, as aforesaid, and then pay
the residue of such surplus, if any, to the city.
(1991 Code, § 2-52) (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.081 CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   Contributions may be made to the Commission from time to time by the
Council and such other persons that may desire to do so. All funds received by
the Commission shall be deposited in such banking institution or banking
institutions as the Commission may determine and shall be withdrawn therefrom
in such manner as the Commission may direct.
   (B)   The Commission shall keep strict account of all of its receipts and
expenditures and shall quarterly report to the counties, municipalities,
persons, firms or corporations which have made contributions to it. Such report
shall contain an itemized account of the Commission’s receipts and
disbursements during the preceding quarter. Such report shall be made within 60
days after the end of the quarter.
   (C)   (1)   Within 60 days after the end of each fiscal year, the Commission
shall make an annual report containing an itemized statement of its receipts
and disbursements for the preceding year and publish the same as a Class II-
O legal advertisement in compliance with the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 59,
Art. 3.
      (2)   The publication area for such publication shall be each county in
which the Commission’s facilities are located.
      (3)   The books, records and accounts of the Commission shall be subject
to audit and examination by the State Tax Department and by other proper public
officials or bodies in the manner provided by law.
(1991 Code, § 2-53) (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.082 SALE OF PROPERTY ON DIRECTION OF COUNCIL.
   In the event a majority of the Council shall so direct in writing and if all
indebtedness of the Commission has been paid in full, the Commission shall
sell, or transfer all or any of its properties and assets so directed and
distribute the proceeds thereof, if any, to the city.
(1991 Code, § 2-54) (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.083 TRANSFER OF PROPERTY TO COMMISSION.
   The city is hereby empowered and authorized to convey or transfer to the
Commission property of any kind, which has been acquired by the city, to carry
out the purposes of the Commission. When property is conveyed or transferred as
aforesaid, the city and the Commission shall agree in writing at the time the
conveyance or transfer is made as to the fair market value of such property.
(1991 Code, § 2-55) (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
§ 33.084 WORKER’S COMPENSATION.
   The Commission shall subscribe to the worker’s compensation fund of the
state and pay all necessary premiums thereto, to the end that all eligible
employers of such Commission shall be covered by worker’s compensation.
(1991 Code, § 2-56) (Ord. passed 9-5-1976)
MUNICIPAL HISTORIC LANDMARKS COMMISSION
§ 33.095 CREATED.
   There is hereby created a municipal historic landmarks commission for the
city which shall be known as the “Elkins Municipal Historic Landmarks
Commission”.
(1991 Code, § 2-56a) (Ord. passed 1-5-1984)
§ 33.096 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS, TERM AND COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS;
VACANCIES.
   (A)   This Historic Landmarks Commission shall consist of five members
appointed by the Mayor, a majority of whom shall be residents of the city.
Initially, one member shall be appointed to serve one year; one member shall be
appointed to serve for two years; one member shall be appointed to serve for
three years; one member shall be appointed to serve for four years; and one
member shall be appointed to serve for five years. As the term of each initial
appointee expires, the successor shall be appointed for a term of five years.
   (B)   Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor for the
unexpired term.
   (C)   No member of such Board shall receive any compensation for his or her
services as such, but each member shall be reimbursed for any reasonable and
necessary expenses actually incurred in the discharge of his or her duties as a
member of the Board.
(1991 Code, § 2-56b) (Ord. passed 1-5-1984)
§ 33.097 OFFICERS; BY-LAWS; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   At its first regular meeting in each year, the Commission shall elect from
its members a President and a Secretary. The Commission shall have the power to
adopt by-laws and rules and regulations for the conduct of its affairs. The by-
laws may provide for the election of additional officers.
(1991 Code, § 2-56c) (Ord. passed 1-5-1984)
§ 33.098 MEETINGS; QUORUM; VOTING.
   The Commission shall hold at least ten regular meetings per year which
meetings shall take place at City Hall or at such other place as the President
may direct. A majority of the members of the Commission shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. No member shall vote upon
any matter or proposition in which he or she may be interested other than as a
citizen. No action of the Commission shall be official unless authorized by a
majority of all members of the Commission at the meeting at which any vote is
taken.
(1991 Code, § 2-56d) (Ord. passed 1-5-1984)
§ 33.099 POWERS, AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall have power and authority within the jurisdictional
limits of the city and within the limits of available funds, to:
   (A)   Make a survey of, and designate as historic landmarks, buildings,
structures and sites which constitute the principal historical and
architectural sites which are of local, regional, statewide or national
significance. No building, structure or site shall be deemed to be an historic
one unless it has been prominently identified with, or best represents, some
major aspect of the cultural, political, economic, military or social history
of the locality of the city; the region, the state or nation, or has had a
major relationship with the life of an historic personage or event representing
some major aspect of, or ideals related to, the history of the locality of the
city, region, state of nation. In the case of buildings or structures which are
to be so designated, they shall embody the principal or unique features of an
architectural type or demonstrate the style of a period of our history or
method of construction, or serve as an illustration of the work of a master
builder, designer or architect whose genius influenced the period in which he
or she worked or has significance in current time;
   (B)   Prepare a register of buildings, structures and sites which meet the
requirements of division (A) above, publish lists of such properties and, with
the consent of the property owners, inspect such properties from time to time
and publish a register thereof from time to time setting forth appropriate
information concerning the registered buildings, structures and sites;
   (C)   With the consent of the property owners, certify and mark with
appropriately designed markers, buildings, structures and sites which it has
registered;
   (D)   Establish standards for care and management of certified landmarks and
withdraw such certification for failure to maintain the standards so
prescribed;
   (E)   Acquire by purchase, gift or lease and administer registered landmarks
and easements, and interests therein, both real and personal;
   (F)   Lease or sell property so acquired under terms and conditions designed
to ensure the proper preservation of the landmark in question;
   (G)   Establish historic districts for registered landmarks, utilizing the
same guidelines set forth in said division (A) above, and designate the area
thereof by appropriate marker;
   (H)   Identify historical districts for registered landmarks and aid and
encourage the municipality and county in which the district or landmark is
located to adopt rules and regulations for the preservation of historical or
architectural values;
   (I)   Prepare and place historical markers on or along the highway or street
closest to the location which is intended to be identified by such markers;
   (J)   Seek the advice and assistance of individuals, groups and departments
and agencies in the government who or which are conducting historical
preservation programs and coordinate the same insofar as possible;
   (K)   Seek and accept gifts, bequests, endowments and funds from any and all
sources for the accomplishment of the functions of the commission;
   (L)   Adopt rules and regulations concerning the operation of the
Commission, the functions and responsibilities of its officers, employees,
assistants and other personnel and such other matters as may be necessary to
carry out the purpose of this section;
   (M)   Adopt such other rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this section, but no such rules and regulations
shall be inconsistent with the provisions of this section or with any plan of
the Planning Commission of the city;
   (N)   To employ, within the limits of funds available therefor, such
employees, assistants, technical personnel and consultants as are necessary to
discharge the duties and responsibilities of the Commission;
   (O)   Keep an accurate and complete record of all Commission proceedings;
   (P)   Make an annual report to the Council of the city concerning the
operation of the Commission and the status of the Commission’s activities in
all matters pending before it; and
   (Q)   Exercise such additional powers, authority and duties as may be
provided by the provisions of W.Va. Ch. 8, Art. 26a.
(1991 Code, § 2-56e) (Ord. passed 1-5-1984)
PARKING AUTHORITY
§ 33.110 ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established and continued in the city a Parking Authority as
provided in W.Va. Code § 8-16-4.
(1991 Code, § 2-57) (Ord. passed 3-5-1970)
§ 33.111 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF MEMBERS; VACANCIES.
   The Parking Authority shall be composed of five members who shall be
appointed by the Council, of whom one shall be appointed for three years, two
for two years and two for one year, and the Mayor of the city who shall be an
ex officio member thereof, without a vote. Upon the expiration of each term,
except for the Mayor, and for each succeeding term thereafter, the successor
shall be appointed for a term of three years. The Mayor’s term shall coincide
with his or her tenure of office and shall terminate coincidentally with his or
her termination of office as Mayor. Vacancies in the Parking Authority shall be
filled in the same manner as the original appointments and, except for the
Mayor’s term, shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(1991 Code, § 2-58) (Ord. passed 3-5-1970)
§ 33.112 OFFICERS; CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Council shall designate one of the members of the Parking
Authority as Chairperson each year. The City Clerk is hereby designated as
Treasurer of the Parking Authority.
   (B)   The Parking Authority shall adopt rules of procedure, organize and
designate one of its members as Secretary. The Mayor is hereby designated as
the chief administrative officer of the authority.
   (C)   Members of the authority shall receive no salary but shall be
reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
(1991 Code, § 2-59) (Ord. passed 3-5-1970)
§ 33.113 POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The Parking Authority shall have such powers as are granted by and subject
to the limitations of W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 16, as amended, or as may be
hereafter amended.
(1991 Code, § 2-60) (Ord. passed 3-5-1970)
§ 33.114 CONTRACTS.
   The Parking Authority shall have power to take all steps and proceedings and
to make and enter into all contracts or arguments necessary or incidental to
the performance of its duties in the execution of its powers under this
subchapter and as provided by statute; provided, that any contract relating to
the financing or the acquisition, construction, extension or improvements of
off-street parking facilities or of any trust indenture relating thereto shall
be approved by the Council of the city.
(1991 Code, § 2-61) (Ord. passed 3-5-1970)
§ 33.115 JURISDICTION.
   The Parking Authority shall be limited to the acquisition, construction,
operation and extension and improvement of off-street parking facilities within
the city and shall have no authority over on-street parking or on-street
traffic within the city.
(1991 Code, § 2-62) (Ord. passed 3-5-1970; Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
§ 33.116 BONDS.
   Any bond issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be found by and subject to
all the covenants, agreements and provisions of the ordinance authorizing the
issuance of revenue bonds to finance such off-street parking and the provisions
of this subchapter shall be enforceable by the holders of such revenue bonds.
(1991 Code, § 2-63) (Ord. passed 3-5-1970)
ELKINS WATER BOARD
§ 33.125 CREATED.
   The Elkins Water Board (the “Water Board”) is hereby created and the
management, control, and operation of the municipal public waterworks system
(the “System”), as it shall exist from time to time, shall be vested in the
Water Board, created and functioning as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 281, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 33.126 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT.
   The Water Board shall consist of five persons, one of which shall be the
Mayor or the Mayor’s designee, who shall be a voting member. At least three of
the Board members, including the Mayor, shall be citizens and residents of the
City, and all of whom shall be residents of the State of West Virginia. With
the exception of the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee, all members of the Water
Board shall be appointed by the City Council and may not be Councilmembers,
officers, or employees of the city.
(Ord. 281, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 33.127 TERM OF MEMBERS; VACANCIES; BYLAWS; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Mayor of the City shall notify all appointees of their appointment
by City Council.
   (B)   Term. The terms of the members of the Water Board first appointed
shall be for one, two, three and four years, respectively, from the first day
of the month in which appointed. In the event of a vacancy for any reason or
upon expiration of the term of office of any member of the Water Board, the
member of the Water Board may be re-appointed, or a successor shall be
appointed by the City Council.
   (C)   Vacancies. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only
and all other appointments
shall be for a term of four years, to commence on the date following the
expiration date of the previous term. Members of the Water Board shall continue
to serve upon the expiration of their term until either re-appointed or a
successor is appointed. The Water Board shall have power to adopt bylaws,
rules, and regulations for its own government.
   (D)   Compensation. The members of the Board and the Treasurer and Secretary
shall each receive compensation in such amount as determined by the City
Council, from time to time, for their services and, in addition, shall be
reimbursed for any and all actual expenses incurred in the performance of
duties as directed by the Water Board.
(Ord. 281, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 33.128 OFFICERS; MEETINGS; VACANCIES.
   (A)   Officers. The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee shall serve as Chairman of
the Water Board. The City Treasurer, or the City Treasurer’s designee, shall
serve as the Treasurer of the Water Board and shall not be considered a member
of the Water Board. The Chief Operator/Manager, or the Chief Operator’s/
Manager’s designee, shall serve as Secretary of the Water Board and shall not
be considered a member of the Water Board. At the first meeting of the Water
Board and at the first meeting of each calendar year thereafter, it shall elect
a member of the Board to serve as Vice Chairman.
   (B)   Meetings.
      (1)   Presiding officer. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings when
present and shall call special meetings on his or her own motion, or when
requested to do so by any two members of the Board. The Vice Chairman shall
preside in the absence of the Chairman.
      (2)   Quorum. Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum,
however, any action to be taken by the Water Board must be affirmatively
approved by not less than three members of Water Board.
      (3)   Record of meeting. The Secretary shall keep a written record of the
proceedings which shall be available for inspection as other municipal records.
      (4)   Funds. The Treasurer shall receive and disburse the funds of the
System as directed by the Water Board.
      (5)   Vacancies. In the event that any member of the Water Board shall be
unable to fulfill the duties of his or her office for a period of six
consecutive months, a majority of the remainder of the said members of the
Water Board may declare the office of such member vacant, and the City Council
shall thereupon fill such vacancy as otherwise provided for herein.
(Ord. 281, passed 3-17-2021; Ord. 334, passed 6-24-2024)
§ 33.129 POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Water Board shall have full and complete authority for the
supervision, management, control, and operation of the System, including the
maintenance, operations, improvements, and extensions thereof, except as
otherwise provided by the Code of West Virginia.
   (B)   All bills for water service shall be collected and accounted for by
the Water Board in the manner and form required by law, the Public Service
Commission of West Virginia and the ordinances of the city, and all
disbursements and accounts of the System shall be ordered paid out only upon
approval of said Water Board; provided, however, that all such supervision,
management, and control of the System and the collection and accounting for
bills for water service shall be consistent and in accordance with any
ordinances pursuant to which the city may have authorized and issued any bonds
or notes from time to time outstanding, which by their terms are payable from
and secured by any revenues of the System and/or other assets of the System.
   (C)   The Water Board shall have the power and authority to make all
contracts and/or agreements, make such decisions and undertake and accomplish
all other actions necessary or proper for the full and complete supervision,
management, operation, and control of the System.
(Ord. 281, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 33.130 BUDGET AND COMPENSATION MATTERS.
   The Water Board shall have power to fix and maintain a separate budget, and
employ, fix the compensation of, supervise and discharge a manager and all
employees of the System; provided however, that the Water Board shall employ,
fix the compensation of and discharge a joint city/Water Board employee only
with the approval of the City Council or a joint Sewer Board/Water Board
employee only with the approval of the Sewer Board.
(Ord. 281, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 33.131 REPORTS.
   The Water Board shall provide reports, at least annually, or as otherwise
required by law, to the Mayor and City Council, indicating the System’s
financial condition. The Water Board shall also provide the City Council with
minutes of all meetings of the Water Board, an annual budget for the System,
and other information as may reasonably be requested.
(Ord. 281, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 33.132 SUPERVISION OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES.
   All assets and liabilities of the System, including accounts receivable and
accounts payable, and all employees thereof, shall be under the supervision,
management, and control of the Water Board. Personnel policies and practices,
and other matters affecting employees of the Water Board shall, to the extent
practicable and unless otherwise approved by the City Council, be the same as
those undertaken by the city, subject to the provisions of § 33.130.
(Ord. 281, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 33.133 PROTECTION OF BONDHOLDERS; AMENDMENT.
   The City Council enacts this subchapter for the assurance and protection of
the citizens of the city and for the purpose of assuring the holders of the
bonds of the city payable from the income and revenues of the System of an
efficient supervision, operation, and maintenance thereof. No amendment or
repeal of this subchapter shall be enacted unless approved by 75% of the
members of the City Council. Any such amendment or repeal shall otherwise be
enacted in accordance with the rules and regulations of the City Council.
(Ord. 281, passed 3-17-2021)
CHAPTER 34: POLICE
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Civil Service Commission
   
34.02   Chief of Police
   
34.03   Department; powers and duties generally
   
34.04   Special officers
Pension and Relief Fund
   
34.15   Established; sources; powers and duties
   
34.16   Board of Trustees
Charter reference:
   Appointment of police chief, see Char. Section
3.01
Cross-reference:
   Giving false alarms and reports, see §
130.005
   Motor vehicles and traffic generally, see Title VII
   Municipal court, see
Ch. 37
   Police pension fee added to court costs, see §
37.11
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to establish, equip and maintain a Police Department, see
W.Va. Code § 8-14-1
   Authority of Mayor over police force and to appoint special police officers,
see W.Va. Code § 8-10-1
   Execution of warrants and service of process by police officers anywhere in
the county, see W.Va. Code § 8-10-1
   Extraterritorial jurisdiction of city for police purposes, see W.Va. Code §§
8-12-5(48), 8-12-19
   Municipal Police Departments generally, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-14-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Generally. The police officer’s Civil Service Commission existing
immediately prior to the effective date of this code is hereby continued in
full force and effect; and all the pertinent provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 8-14-
6 through 8-14-23, inclusive, are hereby adopted by the Council and made
applicable to the regular members of the Police Department, except the Chief of
Police, and to applicants for such regular membership.
   (B)   Appointment from the list of eligibles. Every position, unless filled
by promotion, reinstatement or reduction, shall be filled, in the manner
specified in W.Va. Code § 8-14-15, from the Commission’s list of eligible,
except that the eligible list may contain the names of less than three
individuals. If the current list has been exhausted or if such list has been in
existence in excess of a three-year period next preceding the date of the
prospective appointment, the Commission shall proceed to establish an undated
list of eligible in accordance with the code and with these rules and
regulations and certify names from the new list of eligibles to the appointing
officer.
   (C)   Political party. Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under
the State Municipal Home Rule Pilot Program, under W.Va. Code § 8-l-5a, the
city hereby declares itself to be exempt from the requirement that no more than
two of the members of its Police Civil Service Commission be members of the
same political party as required by W.Va. Code § 8-14-7.
(1991 Code, § 14-1) (Ord. 231, passed 3-2-2017; Ord. 251, passed 2-1-2018)
Editor’s note:
   The police officer’s Civil Service Commission was established in this city
under the provisions of W.Va. Code prior Ch. 8, Art. 5A, since superseded by
the sections mentioned in the text of this section.
§ 34.02 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police shall be the commanding officer of the Police Department
and, under the general direction of the Mayor, he or she shall be responsible
to the Mayor and to the Council for the administration, training, discipline,
morale and effective deployment and utilization of the members of the Police
Department and of the property and equipment of the Police Department, for the
enforcement of the laws of the state and ordinances of the city, the prevention
of crime, the protection of persons and property and the maintenance of peace
and order within the city.
(1991 Code, § 14-2)
Charter reference:
   Appointment, see Char. Section
3.01
Cross-reference:
   Arrest of persons for disobedience at Council meetings, see §
31.04
§ 34.03 DEPARTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Police Department and the members thereof shall, under the overall
direction of the Mayor and the immediate direction of the Chief of Police,
protect persons and property and preserve law and order within the city and,
for such purposes, all police officers shall have the powers and authority
conferred upon municipal police officers by state law.
   (B)   Members of the Police Department shall be vigilant in the enforcement
of the laws of the state, as they may be applicable within the city, and the
provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city. They shall cooperate
with other city officers and employees.
   (C)   In addition to their duties assigned by the head of the Police
Department or by the Mayor, the police secretary and the police radio operators
shall have the authority to collect all costs, fines, forfeitures and penalties
which may be payable to the Municipal Court. The moneys so collected shall be
accounted for and paid over to the Municipal Judge or City Treasurer as soon
after their collection as is practicable.
(1991 Code, § 14-3)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of authority beyond city limits for one mile, see W.Va. Code § 8-
12-19
   Powers, authority and duties of members of municipal police departments, see
W.Va. Code § 8-14-3
§ 34.04 SPECIAL OFFICERS.
   (A)   Appointment; term, compensation. If at any time, in the opinion of the
Mayor, extra police officers are necessary for the protection of persons and
property or for the preservation of the peace and order, he or she shall
appoint such number of extra police officers as, in his or her judgment, are
necessary. Any extra police officer so appointed shall hold office during the
term for which he or she was appointed, unless sooner removed from his or her
office by the Mayor or Council, and shall have the same power to arrest persons
as is exercised by the Chief of Police and shall have general power to preserve
the peace and order of the city. For their services, such extra police officers
shall receive such sum as the Mayor shall prescribe. All members of the Police
Department shall not be less than 18 nor more than 45 years of age on the date
of his or her application; provided, however, persons qualifying for
appointment by reinstatement may be over 45 years of age.
   (B)   Indemnity bond. The Mayor shall require each such special officer to
give bond in the penalty of not less than $3,500 with good security approved by
the Mayor, conditioned that such special officer shall indemnify and save the
city harmless on account of any unlawful or improper acts done by him or her
and to satisfy and pay any damages that may be sustained by any person by
reason of any unlawful or improper act done by him or her while acting as such
special police officer; and, if he or she is authorized to carry a firearm, his
or her bond shall be in amount not less than the amount specified in §
30.01(C), and with the additional condition specified in §
30.01(C).
   (C)   Provisional or part-time paid officers. The city shall have the
authority and shall be permitted to hire provisional or part-time paid police
officers for periods of employment exceeding three months, provided said
provisional or part-time paid police officers shall:
      (1)   Already be certified and trained police officers, through the West
Virginia State Police Academy and practical experience; and
      (2)   Shall not be employed by the city for more than 1,040 hours during
any one calendar year.
(1991 Code, § 14-4) (Ord. 205, passed 1-7-2016; Ord. 207, passed 4-7-2016; Ord.
241, passed 6-15-2017; Ord. 260, passed 5-2-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to require bonds of its officers, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5
(46)
   Bonds of public officers generally, see W.Va. Code §§ 6-2-1 et seq.
   Bonds required of police officers, see W.Va. Code § 61-7-5
   Requirement that municipal officers who handle public funds give bond, see
W.Va. Code § 6-2-11
PENSION AND RELIEF FUND
§ 34.15 ESTABLISHED; SOURCES; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   A Police Officer’s Pension and Relief Fund is hereby established,
pursuant to the authority of W.Va. Code § 8-22-16, for the purposes enumerated
in W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 22. Such Fund shall consist of any gift, grant,
devise or bequest of any money or real or personal property, upon such terms as
to the investment and expenditure thereof as may be fixed by the grantor
thereof or determined by the Board of Trustees of the Fund, plus other funds,
assessments, fees and levies as provided in W.Va. Code §§ 8-22-19 and 8-22-20.
   (B)   Such fund shall be administered as provided by the West Virginia Code.
   (C)   (1)   The existing pension plan for police officers employed by the
city is hereby closed to new entrants, in accordance with the authority
provided in W.Va. Code § 8-22-16(e).
      (2)   The city shall utilize the optional method of financing the
unfunded actuarial accrued liability of the existing Police Officer’s Pension
and Relied Fund as provided in W.Va Code § 8-22-20(e).
      (3)   Newly hired police officers shall be enrolled in a retirement plan
created in W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 22A and approved and administered by the
State Consolidated Public Retirement Board.
      (4)   All current active members, retirees and other beneficiaries
covered by the existing Police Officer’s Pension and Relief Fund shall remain
covered by that plan and shall be paid all benefits of that plan in accordance
with applicable provisions of the West Virginia Code.
(1991 Code, § 14-5) (Ord. 192, passed 3-19-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Federal Social Security benefit, see §
30.03
   Participation of city in state employees’ retirement system, see §
30.04
Statutory reference:
   Duty of Council to levy annual tax for fund, see W.Va. Code § 8-22-19
   Municipal police officer’s pension and relief funds, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-22-
16 to 8-22-28
§ 34.16 BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   There shall be a Board of Trustees for the Police Officer’s Pension and
Relief Fund which shall be composed and have the powers and duties as are
provided by W.Va. Code §§ 8-22-17 and 8-22-18.
(1991 Code, § 14-6)
CHAPTER 35: ELECTIONS
Section
   
35.01   Applicability of state law; duties of Council and City Clerk
   
35.02   Designation of chief election official
   
35.03   Voter eligibility
   
35.04   Registration of voters and duty of Clerk to procure registration books
   
35.05   Voting precincts
   
35.06   Candidate filing period
   
35.07   Filing announcement of candidacy; requirements; filing fees
   
35.08   Prohibition against running for two offices
   
35.09   Prohibition against city employees holding office
   
35.10   Withdrawal of candidates
   
35.11   Write-in candidates
   
35.12   Election of Mayor and Council members
   
35.13   Ballot Commissioners; selection; duties generally
   
35.14   Drawing for ballot position
   
35.15   Election Commissioners and Clerks; notice; instructions; vacancies
   
35.16   Compensation of election officials; expenses
   
35.17   Electronic voting systems
   
35.18   Tie votes
   
35.19   Contested elections
   
35.20   Absentee voting
   
35.21   Early voting
   
35.22   Vacancies
   
35.23   Campaign finance
   
35.24   Construction
Charter reference:
   Elections, see Char.
 Article VI
Cross-reference:
   Election of City Clerk, see §
32.35
Statutory reference:
   Expenses of general elections, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-14
   Judicial review of orders of Council relating to city elections, see W.Va.
Code § 8-3-16
   West Virginia Election Code, see W.Va. Code Ch. 3
§ 35.01 APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW; DUTIES OF COUNCIL AND CITY CLERK.
   (A)   The provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 3 referring to elections, insofar as
such provisions can be applied within the city and insofar as not otherwise
provided by the city’s Charter or this code, shall govern the conduct of city
elections.
   (B)   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under the West Virginia
Home Rule Pilot Program, under W.Va. § 8-1-5a, the city hereby declares itself
to be exempt from the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 3-1-29 and 3-1-30, concerning
political party affiliation and those provisions shall not apply to the
selection of ballot commissioners and poll workers under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 234, passed 3-2-2017; Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
§ 35.02 DESIGNATION OF CHIEF ELECTION OFFICIAL.
   The chief election official of the city shall be the City Clerk, who shall
perform such other duties as required by ordinance and W.Va. Code Ch. 3.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
§ 35.03 VOTER ELIGIBILITY.
    Only persons who are bona fide residents of the city and are registered to
vote as provided by law shall be entitled to vote in any municipal election.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Persons entitled to vote, see W.Va. Code § 3-1-3
§ 35.04 REGISTRATION OF VOTERS AND DUTY OF CLERK TO PROCURE REGISTRATION BOOKS.
   (A)   The registration of voters of city shall be integrated with the system
of permanent registration of voters established by the West Virginia Code.
   (B)   The registration record shall remain in the possession of the Clerk of
the County Commission, except for use in municipal elections.
   (C)   At least one day prior to every municipal election it shall be the
duty of the City Clerk to procure from the office of the Clerk of the County
Commission the registration records necessary for the conduct of such election.
   (D)   Such records shall, within ten days after the date of the municipal
election, be returned to the office of the Clerk of the County Commission by
the City Clerk.
   (E)   In case of a contested municipal election, the registration record of
any challenged voter shall be made available by the Clerk of the County
Commission to the municipal Council to determine the contest. Such record shall
be returned to the office of the Clerk of the County Commission within a
reasonable time after the contest shall have been finally decided.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 3-1-27
§ 35.05 VOTING PRECINCTS.
   (A)   Voting precincts. There shall be five voting precincts established in
the city for the purpose of city elections as defined in the Elkins City
Charter.
   (B)   Polling places. The Chief Election Officer, before each election,
shall secure, for each voting precinct in the city, a suitable room or building
in which to hold the election and shall cause the same to be suitably provided
with heat, light and a sufficient number of booths or compartments, and
furnished with proper supplies for preparing ballots, or at/in which voters may
conveniently prepare their ballots, so that in the preparation thereof they may
be secure from the observation of others. Such room or building shall be
located in such precinct; provided, however, that upon a determination of the
Chief Election Officer that a suitable room or building in which to hold the
election is not reasonably available in such precinct then the Chief Election
Officer may secure a suitable room or building in which to hold the election
for such precinct in an adjacent precinct in the city.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Designation and arrangement of polling places, see W.Va. Code § 3-1-23
   Duty of Council to provide by ordinances for making precincts coincide, as
nearly as possible, to the boundaries of precincts established by the county,
see W.Va. Code § 3-1-6
§ 35.06 CANDIDATE FILING PERIOD.
   The candidate filing period shall commence on the second Monday in the
February preceding the date of the regular city election. The candidate filing
period shall continue until midnight on the third Friday thereafter. In the
event of a special election, the candidate filing period shall open on a Monday
and close on the third Friday thereafter, provided that the closing date must
be no later than 90 days preceding the date of the election.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023; Ord. 342, passed 1-23-2025)
§ 35.07 FILING ANNOUNCEMENT OF CANDIDACY; REQUIREMENTS; FILING FEES.
   (A)   Any person who is eligible and seeks to hold the office of Mayor or
member of Council shall file a certificate of announcement with the City Clerk
declaring as a candidate for election to office. The certificate of
announcement shall be in a form prescribed by the Secretary of State on which
the candidate shall make a sworn statement before a notary public or some other
officer qualified to administer oaths. An incomplete certificate of
announcement which lacks essential information may be rejected.
   (B)   The filing of the announcement with the City Clerk shall be made by
the last day of the candidate filing period, and must be received by the Clerk
before midnight, Eastern Standard Time, of that day or, if mailed, shall be
postmarked before that hour.
   (C)   Every person who becomes a candidate for election to office in any
election shall, at the time of filing the certificate of announcement as
required in this section, pay a filing fee as follows:
      (1)   A candidate for the office of Mayor shall pay a fee of an amount
set by Council from time to time; and
      (2)   A candidate for the office of Council member shall pay a fee of an
amount set by Council from time to time.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
§ 35.08 PROHIBITION AGAINST RUNNING FOR TWO OFFICES.
   A candidate’s name shall not appear on the ballot for any office if the
candidate files a certificate of announcement for more than one office and does
not formally withdraw from all but one office before the close of the candidate
filing period.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 3-5-7(i)
§ 35.09 PROHIBITION AGAINST CITY EMPLOYEES HOLDING OFFICE.
   A city employee shall not serve on Council or as Mayor while employed by the
city.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
§ 35.10 WITHDRAWAL OF CANDIDATES.
   A candidate who files a signed and notarized written statement of withdrawal
received by the Clerk not later than 84 days before the election shall be
removed from the ballot.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 3-5-11
§ 35.11 WRITE-IN CANDIDATES.
   Write-in candidates are required to file a certificate of announcement at
least 49 days before the election in order to have their votes counted. Also,
once they announce the intention to run a write-in campaign, they are required
to file campaign financial statements, just as with other candidates. Write-in
candidates shall not be required to pay a filing fee.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code §§ 3-6-4a and 3-6-
5
§ 35.12 ELECTION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   On the second Tuesday in June, 2023 and every two years thereafter on
the second Tuesday in June, there shall be elected by the qualified voters of
the city a Mayor and such other officers as may be provided for in the Charter
§
1.04. The Mayor shall hold office for the term of four years, commencing on
July 1 after the election and continuing until a successor shall have been
elected and qualified.
   (B)   On the same day mentioned in division (A) above, one member of the
Council shall be elected in each ward of the city, who shall hold his or her
office for the term of four years, commencing on July 1 after the election and
continuing until a successor shall have been elected and qualified.
   (C)   At the city election to be held in the year 2023, and at each such
election held thereafter, the person receiving the highest number of votes cast
for the office of Mayor and the person receiving the highest number of votes
cast for the office of Council member in each ward shall be elected.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
§ 35.13 BALLOT COMMISSIONERS; SELECTION; DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall, in consultation with Council, appoint two other
Ballot Commissioners. Those appointments shall be made between January 15 and
January 30, and they shall be for terms of two years, or until their respective
successors are duly appointed and qualified.
   (B)   The Clerk and two appointees shall constitute the Board of Ballot
Commissioners, and the Clerk shall be Chairperson. Together, they shall perform
the duties of such Commissioners at all regular and special elections held in
the city during their term of office.
   (C)   The provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 3 with respect to the duties and
responsibilities of Ballot Commissioners, so far as they are applicable, shall
apply to city elections.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code §§ 3-1-2a, 3-1-19,
3-1-20, 3-1-21,3-1-24, 3-5-10 and 3-6-3
§ 35.14 DRAWING FOR BALLOT POSITION.
   (A)   Position of candidate names on the ballot shall be determined by a
random drawing whenever more than one candidate has filed for the same office.
The drawing for ballot position shall commence at 9:00 a.m. on the fourth
Tuesday after the close of the candidate filing period. Should the
aforementioned drawing date be a legal holiday then the drawing shall commence
at the appointed hour on the first business day immediately thereafter.
   (B)   Once the drawing has been held, the Ballot Commissioners shall meet to
certify the ballot before it is conveyed to the printer.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code §§ 3-5-13a and 3-
6-2(d)(2)
§ 35.15 ELECTION COMMISSIONERS AND CLERKS; NOTICE; INSTRUCTIONS; VACANCIES.
   (A)   Uniform Election Board. No later than the forty-ninth day before the
election, the Council shall appoint a Uniform Election Board, consisting of two
Election Commissioners and two poll clerks, to conduct each election in each
precinct of the city. At the same time as the appointment of election officials
or at a subsequent meeting the Council shall appoint persons as alternates. At
the Council meeting immediately preceding the meeting at which the appointments
are to be made, the City Clerk, in consultation with the Council members from
each ward, shall submit a list of persons proposed for appointment by the
Council to serve as election officials in each ward.
   (B)   Notice. The Clerk shall mail notices to every person appointed as an
election official within seven days following appointment. The appointed
official must respond within 14 days following appointment and state whether or
not they will serve. If the person fails to respond in time, the Clerk appoints
a replacement from the alternate list or, after all alternates have been used,
any eligible voter.
   (C)   Instruction of election officials. No person may serve as an election
commissioner or poll clerk unless he or she has attended the instructional
program required with thirty days before the election. No election officer,
upon being so notified to appear for instruction, shall fail without just cause
to do so. If any officer does so fail to appear, the Council may appoint some
other qualified person and such person, after instruction, shall act in the
place of the defaulting officer.
   (D)   Qualifications. As to qualifications of election officials, the city
hereby adopts and will adhere to W.Va. Code § 3-1-28, Election officials;
eligibility, suspension of eligibility.
   (E)   Oaths. As to oaths to be administered to election officials, the city
hereby adopts and will adhere to W.Va. Code § 3-l-30a, Oaths of election
commissioners and poll clerks, substitution of persons.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
Statutory reference :
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code §§ 3-1-30, 3-1-46,
3-4A-14
§ 35.16 COMPENSATION OF ELECTION OFFICIALS; EXPENSES.
   (A)   Each Ballot Commissioner shall be allowed and paid a sum, to be fixed
by the Council, not exceeding an amount set by Council from time to time for
each day he or she shall serve as such, but in no case shall a Ballot
Commissioner receive allowance for more than ten days services in any one
election.
   (B)   Each election commissioner and poll clerk, including alternates, shall
be allowed and paid a sum, to be fixed by the Council, not exceeding an amount
set by Council from time to time, for one day's service for attending the
school of instruction for election officials.
   (C)   Each election commissioner and poll clerk shall be allowed and paid a
sum, to be fixed by the Council, not exceeding an amount set by Council from
time to time, for services at any one election. The sum to be allowed and paid
to Commissioners of Election and poll clerks is herewith set at an amount set
by Council from time to time.
   (D)   Each alternate election commissioner and poll clerk may be paid a sum,
to be fixed by the Council, not exceeding an amount set by Council from time to
time, for one day’s service for attending the school of instruction for
election officials.
   (E)   The Commissioners of Elections or poll clerks obtaining and delivering
the election supplies and returning them are to be paid an additional sum, to
be fixed by the Council, not to exceed an amount set by Council from time to
time. In addition, the Commissioner of Elections or poll clerk is to be paid
mileage up to the rate of reimbursement authorized by the travel management
rule of the Department of Personnel for each mile necessarily traveled in the
performance of his or her services.
   (F)   The compensation of election officers, the cost of printing ballots
and all other expenses incurred in holding and making the return of elections
shall be audited by the Council and paid out of the city treasury.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
§ 35.17 ELECTRONIC VOTING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   The Council adopts for use in all city elections the electronic voting
system which has been adopted for use by the County Commission upon such terms
and conditions as may be agreed upon between the County Commission and the
city.
   (B)   The provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 3-4A-1, et seq., relating to
electronic voting systems, shall, insofar as applicable, apply to city
elections.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
§ 35.18 TIE VOTES.
   Whenever two or more persons receive an equal number of votes for Mayor or
Council member, such tie shall be decided by ballot of the Council in existence
at the time the election is held.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Tie votes, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-15
§ 35.19 CONTESTED ELECTIONS.
   All contested elections shall be heard and determined by the Council in
existence at the time the election is held, and the contest shall be made and
conducted as provided for by state statutes for county and district offices.
The Council, by its proceedings in such cases, shall, as nearly as is
practicable, conform to similar proceedings of the County Commission in such
cases.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Contested elections, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-17
§ 35.20 ABSENTEE VOTING.
   The provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 3, Art. 3, Voting by absentees, so for as
applicable and except where clearly not adaptable, shall apply to all city
elections.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   For state law basis of this section, see W.Va. Code § 3-3-13
§ 35.21 EARLY VOTING.
   The voting period for early in-person voting is to be conducted during
regular business hours beginning on the thirteenth day before the election, and
continuing through the third day before the election. Additionally, early in-
person voting is to be available from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays
during the early voting period.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   For state law basis ofthis section, see W.Va. Code § 3-3-1
§ 35.22 VACANCIES.
   (A)   When a vacancy occurs in a municipal elective office, the governing
body shall fill the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person until the next
election.
   (B)   The office shall be placed on the next election for service of the
remainder of the vacated term or for a new term, whichever is appropriate.
   (C)   In the event of the temporary absence of the Mayor, the City Clerk
shall serve as the Acting Mayor. In the event of an extended absence of the
Mayor, Council shall by public vote select one of their number to serve as
Acting Mayor. The Acting Mayor shall exercise the powers and duties of the
Mayor as described in the Charter.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Filling of vacancies, see W.Va. Code § 8-5-10
§ 35.23 CAMPAIGN FINANCE.
   The provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 3, as they relate to campaign finance, so
far as applicable and except where clearly not adaptable, shall apply to all
city elections.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
§ 35.24 CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Nullification of former ordinances. These revisions to the city code
are prospective and supersede and eviscerate all prior election ordinances that
are inconsistent with the foregoing revisions.
   (B)   Severability. It shall be considered that it is the legislative
intent, in the enactment of any ordinance, that if any part of the chapter is
held unconstitutional, the remaining parts shall remain in force. Should any
provision of this chapter be determined to be invalid by a court or other
tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such section shall be deemed to be
severable, and all other code provisions shall be in full force and effect.
   (C)   Inconsistency. If any provision of this chapter is found to be
inconsistent with the West Virginia Code governing elections, or the Code of
State Regulations governing elections, as promulgated by the West Virginia
Secretary of State, then the State Code, or Code of State Regulations
promulgated by the West Virginia Secretary of State shall control, and any such
inconsistent provisions shall be deemed invalid.
(Ord. 310, passed 1-19-2023)
CHAPTER 36: TAXATION AND FINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   Costs for collecting delinquent amounts due municipality
Publication or Disclosure of Delinquent Fee Information
   
36.15   Purpose and intent
   
36.16   Publication procedures
   
36.17   Effect of irregularity as to delinquent loans
   
36.18   Effect on other collection methods
Public Utility Service Tax
   
36.30   Definitions
   
36.31   Imposed; amount
   
36.32   Collection; time of payment; accounting; reports
   
36.33   Maintenance and inspection of records
   
36.34   Exemptions
   
36.35   Liability; enforcement authority
   
36.36   Enforcement provisions
   
36.37   Notice to utilities
Hotel/Motel Tax
   
36.50   Imposition of tax
   
36.51   Tax on consumer
   
36.52   Rate
   
36.53   Definitions
   
36.54   Payment
   
36.55   Governmental exemptions
   
36.56   Credit transactions
   
36.57   Bankruptcy
   
36.58   Liability
   
36.59   Remittance to city
   
36.60   Records
   
36.61   Corporate ownership
   
36.62   Disposition of proceeds
 
   
36.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to levy and collect an excise tax on the privilege of
purchasing, using or consuming public utility services and tangible personal
property from public utilities and the like, see W.Va. Code § 8-13-5a
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01 COSTS FOR COLLECTING DELINQUENT AMOUNTS DUE MUNICIPALITY.
   If any person responsible for paying or remitting any municipal tax, fee or
other charge fails to timely pay and remit amounts due the municipality, such
person shall be liable and shall pay to the municipality all reasonable costs
and amounts incurred by the municipality in collecting the delinquent amounts.
The municipal official responsible for collecting the tax, fee or charge is
authorized to collect such costs and amounts in the same manner as the tax, fee
or charge. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, reasonable costs
and amounts for which a delinquent person shall be liable include, but are not
limited to, filing and recording fees, release fees, court costs, bad check
charges, postage, copy charges, court reporter charges, search costs and
similar items incurred by the municipality reasonably attributable to the
delinquency as determined by the responsible municipal official. (Alternative:
the responsible municipal official may waive collection of all or any party of
such costs for good cause shown.)
(Ord. 065, passed 10-18-2007) Penalty, see §
36.99
PUBLICATION OR DISCLOSURE OF DELINQUENT FEE INFORMATION
§ 36.15 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The Treasurer of the city collects fees. It is a goal of the office of the
Treasurer to achieve the effective collection of current and delinquent fees
while providing quality customer service. This policy provides procedures for
collecting delinquent municipal fee accounts by publishing or disclosing
delinquent account information to aid in the collection of fees enacted by city
ordinance, authorized by W.Va. Code § 8-13-13 and any other operative laws of
the state.
(Ord. 066, passed 9-20-2007)
§ 36.16 PUBLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Treasurer of the city may, from time to time in his or her
discretion, prepare one or more lists of those certain service fee accounts for
the previous period(s) which are reflected as delinquent in the city’s records
and to be included for publication, which list shall be published as a Class I
legal advertisement in compliance with W.Va. Code §§ 59-3-1 et seq., and the
publication area for such publication shall be the county.
   (B)   The delinquent account information published or disclosed pursuant to
this policy may show the name of any person(s) associated with the delinquent
account, including business name and owners thereof (if applicable), address
of, and the amount or amounts due from each delinquent account in the aggregate
or by period. The published list shall display the applicable period(s) to
which the delinquency relates. The list may be presented in any sequence,
format or grouping the Treasurer may determine and may omit accounts with de
minimus delinquencies.
   (C)   The Treasurer, after ascertaining which accounts are delinquent,
shall, at least ten days prior to publication or release of a list, send notice
to the last known name and address on record with the city associated with the
account. The notice shall identify the delinquent account and/or responsible
person(s) of last record, the applicable period(s) covered, aggregate amount
due and the procedures for settling the account. Any account that is delinquent
may be removed from the delinquent list prior to publication or release by
paying the city the full amount of fees and all related costs owed by such
account before the list is delivered for publication or release.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, a regular fee billing
statement showing that an account is more than 60 days overdue shall satisfy
the notice requirement of this division (C).
   (D)   The Treasurer, prior to the delivering a delinquent list to the
newspaper or otherwise releasing such list, shall review the same and be
satisfied that the list is correct.
(Ord. 066, passed 9-20-2007)
§ 36.17 EFFECT OF IRREGULARITY AS TO DELINQUENT LOANS.
   No irregularity, error, omission or mistake in respect to anything provided
by this policy to be done concerning the delinquent lists shall invalidate any
fee administered by the city. No irregularity, error, omission or mistake shall
invalidate any collection or enforcement procedures used by the city with
respect to any delinquent account. Nor shall any person be allowed to enjoin or
otherwise question the validity of any subsequent step in the collection and
enforcement procedures by reason of any irregularity, error, omission or
mistake. Any action by the Treasurer in good faith reliance on this policy
shall relieve the Treasurer and the city from any claim by any person aggrieved
by any publication or disclosure hereunder. The Treasurer may, without any
investigation or inquiry, rely upon the city’s existing and future regular
procedures and systems, including computerized collection systems, in
determining the name(s), amounts, periods and nature of purported delinquent
accounts for purposes of this policy.
(Ord. 066, passed 9-20-2007)
§ 36.18 EFFECT ON OTHER COLLECTION METHODS.
   The promulgation of this policy does not in any way limit the city from
utilizing other methods of collection, including without limitation,
administrative or judicial actions, liens, boot/tow orders, cease and desist
orders, payment plans, collection agencies and credit bureaus and all other
methods permitted by law.
(Ord. 066, passed 9-20-2007)
PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE TAX
§ 36.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE. Any service or tangible personal property purchased
within this city from a seller, as hereinafter in this section defined, namely:
telephone service; electric service; gas service, including bottled or liquid
gas, if the seller thereof is classified as a public utility subject to the
jurisdiction of the State Public Service Commission; water service and sanitary
sewer service if purchased, used or consumed within the corporate limits of
this city.
   PURCHASER. Any person who purchases, uses or consumes a public utility
service.
   SELLER. Any person, whether a public service corporation, a municipality or
private corporation, classified as a public utility and subject to the
jurisdiction of the State Public Service Commission, who sells, furnishes or
supplies a public utility service.
   USER. The owner or tenant of private residential property or the owner or
tenant of property used for commercial or industrial purposes, and every
combination thereof, of every kind.
(1991 Code, § 15-1) (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)
§ 36.31 IMPOSED; AMOUNT.
   There is hereby imposed and levied upon every purchaser of a public utility
service an excise tax upon the privilege of purchasing, using or consuming,
within the corporate limits of the city, such public utility service. Such tax
shall be in the amount of 2% of the charge, exclusive of any federal or state
tax thereon imposed upon the purchaser, made by the seller against the
purchaser with respect to each public utility service, which tax, in every
case, shall be collected by the seller and paid by the purchaser upon the
amount of each periodic statement rendered such purchaser by the seller, and
shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller at the time the purchase price or
such charge shall become due and payable under the agreement between the
purchaser and the seller. The tax imposed and levied by this subchapter is in
addition to all other taxes imposed and levied by this city. In the event the
amount of the charge for any single public utility service exceeds an amount
set by Council from time to time in any given calendar month to any single
purchaser, no tax shall be imposed for such additional purchase, use or
consumption in excess of an amount set by Council from time to time. In the
event more than one public utility shall furnish the identical public utility
service to the same purchaser, the purchaser shall be entitled to group such
services as a single public utility service in calculating the amount of the
charges in any calendar month for such public utility service.
(1991 Code, § 15-2) (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)
§ 36.32 COLLECTION; TIME OF PAYMENT; ACCOUNTING; REPORTS.
   It shall be the duty of every seller, in acting as the tax-collecting medium
or agency for the city, to collect from each purchaser for the use of the city
the tax hereby imposed and levied at the time of collecting the purchase price
charged for its public utility service, and the amount of tax actually
collected during each calendar month shall be reported by each seller to the
city, and each seller shall remit the amount of tax shown by such report to
have been collected by the city on or before the last day of the second
calendar month following the month in which collected, as well as the name and
address of any purchaser who has failed or refused to pay the tax so imposed
and levied. The required reports shall be in the form prescribed by the City
Collector and Treasurer.
(1991 Code, § 15-3) (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)
§ 36.33 MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   Every seller shall maintain complete records showing all purchases of public
utility service within the corporate limits of the city, which records shall
show the charge made against each purchaser, the dates such public utility
service was furnished, the date of payment therefor and the amount of tax
imposed hereunder, and such records shall be kept open for inspection by the
duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times, and the duly authorized
agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make, at the
expense of the city, such transcripts thereof during such times as they may
desire.
(1991 Code, § 15-4) (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)
§ 36.34 EXEMPTIONS.
   The tax hereby imposed and levied shall not apply to the following
transactions, which transactions are hereby exempted from such tax:
   (A)   Purchases of public utility service for resale;
   (B)   Purchases of public utility service by the United States of America,
the state and the political subdivisions, municipalities, boards, commissions,
authorities and public corporations thereof;
   (C)   Purchases of tangible personal property, such as appliances, as
distinguished from the public service supplied;
   (D)   Charges for telephone services which are paid by the insertion of
coins into coin-operated telephones and specific charges or tolls for telephone
calls to points outside the corporate limits of the city; and
   (E)   Nonrecurring charges incidental to the furnishing of public utility
service.
(1991 Code, § 15-5) (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)
§ 36.35 LIABILITY; ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   (1)   There shall be no liability upon the seller for erroneously
collecting the tax hereby imposed and levied or for erroneously failing to bill
for such tax as a result of a good-faith mistake on the part of the seller.
      (2)   When any purchaser contends that such tax is not owed by such
purchaser on the ground that the public utility service was not purchased, used
or consumed within the corporate limits of the city, the seller shall refer the
question to the City Collector and Treasurer, and such seller shall thereafter
collect or refrain from collecting such tax from such purchaser for such public
utility service, as instructed, in writing, by such city officer.
      (3)   Any claim for refunds of any such tax shall be presented to the
city and not to the seller.
   (B)   The City Collector and Treasurer shall have the authority to
promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations necessary for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(1991 Code, § 15-6) (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)
§ 36.36 ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.
   Any amount of tax due and unpaid under this subchapter shall be a debt due
the city. Such debt shall be a personal obligation of the purchaser, which
shall be enforceable as provided by W.Va. Code § 8-13-15, or in any other
manner provided by law for compelling the payment of taxes due municipalities.
(1991 Code, § 15-7) (Ord. passed 5-3-1971) Penalty, see §
36.99
§ 36.37 NOTICE TO UTILITIES.
   The tax hereby imposed and levied shall not be effective until the city
gives 60 days’ written notice by certified mail of the effective date of this
chapter to any public utility doing business within the city, which is required
to collect the tax imposed and levied hereby.
(1991 Code, § 15-8) (Ord. passed 5-3-1971)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to levy and collect an excise tax on the privilege of
purchasing, using or consuming public utility services and tangible personal
property from public utilities and the like, see W.Va. Code § 8-13-5a
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
§ 36.50 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is hereby imposed a tax upon the occupancy of hotel rooms located
within the city including, but not limited to, hotels owned by the state or any
political subdivision of the state.
(Ord. 097-01, passed 2-4-1997; Ord. 064, passed 10-18-2007; Ord. 180, passed 9-
4-2014)
§ 36.51 TAX ON CONSUMER.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be a tax upon the consumer and
shall be collected by the hotel operator as a part of the consideration paid
for the occupancy of a hotel room; provided, that the tax shall not be imposed
on any consumer occupying a hotel room for 30 or more consecutive days.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014; Ord. 247, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 36.52 RATE.
   The rate of tax imposed by this subchapter shall be 6% of the consideration
paid for the use or occupancy of the hotel room. The consideration paid for the
use or occupancy of the hotel room shall not include the amount of tax imposed
on the transaction under W.Va. Code §§ 11-15-1 et seq., or charges for meals,
valet service, room service, telephone service or other charges or
consideration not paid for the use or occupancy of a hotel room.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.53 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSIDERATION PAID or CONSIDERATION. The amount received in money, credits,
property or other consideration for or in exchange for the right to occupy a
hotel room as herein defined.
   CONSUMER. A person who pays the consideration for the use or occupancy of a
hotel room. The term CONSUMER shall not be construed to mean the government of
the United States of America, its agencies or instrumentalities, or the
government of the state or political subdivisions thereof.
   HOTEL. Any facility, building or buildings, publicly or privately owned
(including a facility located in a state, county or municipal park), in which
the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term
shall include, but not be limited to, boarding houses, hotels, motels, inns,
courts, condominiums, lodges, cabins and tourist homes. The term HOTEL shall
include state, county and city parks offering accommodations as herein set
forth. The term HOTEL shall not be construed to mean any hospital, sanitarium,
extended care facility, nursing home or university or college housing unit, or
any facility providing fewer than three rooms in private homes, not exceeding a
total of ten days in a calendar year, nor any tent, trailer or camper
campsites; provided, that where a university or college housing unit provides
sleeping accommodations for the general nonstudent public for a consideration,
the term HOTEL shall, if otherwise applicable, apply to such accommodations for
the purposes of this tax.
   HOTEL OPERATOR. The person who is proprietor of a hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, trustee in
possession, trustee in bankruptcy, receiver, executor or in any other capacity.
Where the HOTEL OPERATOR performs his or her functions through a managing agent
of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also
be deemed a HOTEL OPERATOR for the purposes of this subchapter and shall have
the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter by either the principal or the managing agent
shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
   HOTEL ROOM.
      (1)   Any room or suite of rooms or other facility affording sleeping
accommodations to the general public and situated within a hotel.
      (2)   The term HOTEL ROOM does not include:
         (a)   A banquet room, meeting room or any other room not primarily
used for, or in conjunction with, sleeping accommodations; or
         (b)   Sleeping accommodations rented on a month-to-month basis or
other rental arrangement for 30 days or longer at the inception at a boarding
house, condominium, cabin, tourist home, apartment or home; and
         (c)   Sleeping accommodations rented by a hotel operator to those
persons directly employed by the hotel operator for the purposes of performing
duties in support of the operation of the hotel or related operations.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
syndicate, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, receiver,
corporation, guardian, trust, business trust, trustee, committee, estate,
executor, administrator of any other group or combination acting as a unit.
   STATE PARK. Any state-owned facility which is part of this state’s park and
recreation system established pursuant to this code. For purposes of this
subchapter, any recreational facility otherwise qualifying as a hotel and
situated within a STATE PARK shall be deemed to be solely within the county in
which the building or buildings comprising said facility are physically
situated, notwithstanding the fact that the STATE PARK within which said
facility is located may lie within the jurisdiction of more than one county.
   TAX, TAXES or THIS TAX. The hotel occupancy tax authorized by this
subchapter.
   TAXPAYER. Any person liable for the tax authorized by this subchapter.
(Ord. 097-01, passed 2-4-1997; Ord. 064, passed 10-18-2007; Ord. 180, passed 9-
4-2014; Ord. 247, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 36.54 PAYMENT.
   (A)   The consumer shall pay to the hotel operator the amount of tax imposed
by this subchapter, which tax shall be added to and shall constitute a part of
the consideration paid for the use and occupancy of the hotel room, and which
tax shall be collectible as such by the hotel operator who shall account for,
and remit to the city, all taxes paid by consumers. The hotel operator shall
separately state the tax authorized by this subchapter on all bills, invoices,
accounts, books of account and records relating to consideration paid for
occupancy or use of a hotel room. The hotel operator may commingle taxes
collected hereunder with the proceeds of the rental of hotel accommodations.
All taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall be
deemed to be held in trust by the hotel until the same shall have been remitted
to the city as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   A hotel or hotel operator shall not represent to the public in any
manner, directly or indirectly, that it will absorb all or any part of the tax
or that the tax is not to be considered an element in the price to be collected
from the consumer.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.55 GOVERNMENTAL EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Hotel room occupancy billed directly to the federal government shall
be exempt from this tax; provided, that rooms paid for a federal government
employee for which reimbursement is made shall be subject to this tax.
   (B)   Hotel room occupancy billed directly to this state or its political
subdivisions shall be exempt from this tax; provided, that rooms paid for by an
employee of this state for which reimbursement is made shall be subject to this
tax.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.56 CREDIT TRANSACTIONS.
   A hotel operator doing business wholly or partially on a credit basis shall
require the consumer to pay the full amount of tax due upon a credit sale at
the time such sale is made or within 30 days thereafter.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.57 BANKRUPTCY.
   In the distribution, voluntary or compulsory, in receivership, bankruptcy or
otherwise, of the property or estate of any person, all taxes due and unpaid
authorized under this subchapter shall be paid from the first money available
for distribution in priority to all claims and liens except taxes and debts due
to the United States which under federal law are given priority over the debts
and liens created by this subchapter for this tax and taxes and debts due to
the state. Any person charged with the administration or distribution of any
such property or estate who shall violate the provisions of this section shall
be personally liable for any taxes accrued and unpaid which are chargeable
against the person whose property or estate is in administration or
distribution.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.58 LIABILITY.
   If any hotel operator fails to collect the tax authorized by this subchapter
and levied pursuant to this subchapter or shall fail to properly remit such tax
to the taxing authority, he or she shall be personally liable for such amount
as he or she failed to collect or remit; provided, that such hotel operator
shall not be held liable for failure to collect such tax if the hotel operator
can by good and substantial evidence prove the refusal of the purchaser to pay
this tax despite the diligent effort in good faith of the hotel operator to
collect the tax.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014) Penalty, see §
36.99
§ 36.59 REMITTANCE TO CITY.
   (A)   A profit may not accrue to any person as a result of the collection of
the tax authorized under this subchapter. Notwithstanding that the total amount
of taxes collected by a hotel operator may be in excess of the amount for which
a consumer would be liable by the application of the levy imposed under this
subchapter for the occupancy of a hotel room or rooms, the total amount of all
taxes collected by any hotel operator shall be remitted to the city as
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   (1)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be due and payable
in monthly installments on or before the fifteenth day of the calendar month
next succeeding the month in which the tax accrued; provided, that for credit
sales in which the tax authorized by this subchapter is not collected by the
hotel operator at the time of such sales, such tax shall not, for purposes of
this subchapter, be regarded as having accrued until the date on which it is
either received by the hotel operator or upon the expiration of the 30-day
payment period set forth in this subchapter. The hotel operator shall, on or
before the fifteenth day of each month, prepare and deliver to the city a
return for the preceding month, in the form prescribed by the city. Each return
shall be signed by the hotel operator or his or her duly authorized agent.
      (2)   For the first month that the tax is delinquent, there shall be
assessed by the Treasurer a penalty in the amount of 10% of the tax due for the
delinquent period. No payment for a subsequent period shall be collected until
all prior delinquent taxes have been paid in full with all penalties assessed
thereto.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.60 RECORDS.
   Each hotel operator shall keep complete and accurate records of taxable
sales and of charges, together with a record of the tax collected thereon, and
shall keep all invoices and other pertinent documents in such form as the city
may require. Such records and other documents shall be preserved for a period
of not less than three years, unless the city shall consent in writing to their
destruction within that period or shall require that they be kept for a longer
period.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.61 CORPORATE OWNERSHIP.
   If the taxpayer is an association or corporation, the officers thereof
actually participating in the management or operation of the association or
corporation shall be personally liable, jointly and severally, for any default
on the part of the association or corporation; and payment of tax, fines,
additions to tax or penalties which may be imposed by this subchapter, may be
enforced against such officers as against the association or corporation which
they represent.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.62 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   Application of proceeds. The net proceeds of the tax collected and
remitted to the city pursuant to this subchapter shall be deposited into the
general revenue fund of the city and after appropriation thereof, shall be
expended only as provided in division (B).
   (B)   Required expenditures. At least 50% of the net revenue receivable
during the fiscal year by the city pursuant to this subchapter shall be
expended in the following manner for the promotion of conventions and tourism:
      (1)   If a convention and visitor’s bureau is located within the city,
county or region, the city shall appropriate the percentage required by this
division (B) to that bureau. If a convention and visitor’s bureau is not
located within the city, county or region, then the percentage appropriation
required by this division (B)(1) shall be appropriated as follows:
         (a)   Any hotel located within the city, county or region may apply to
the city for an appropriation to such hotel of a portion of the tax authorized
by this subchapter and collected by such hotel and remitted to the city, for
uses directly related to the promotion of tourism and travel, including
advertising, salaries, travel, office expenses, publications and similar
expenses. The portion of such tax allocable to such hotel shall not exceed 75%
of that portion of such tax collected and remitted by such hotel which is
required to be expended pursuant to this division (B); provided, that prior to
appropriating any moneys to such hotel the city shall require the submission
of, and give approval to, a budget setting forth the proposed uses of such
moneys; and
         (b)   If there is more than one convention and visitor’s bureau
located within the municipality, county or region, the Council may allocate the
tax authorized by this subchapter to one or more of such bureaus in such
portion as the Council in its sole discretion determines.
      (2)   The balance of net revenue required to be expended by this division
(B) shall be appropriated to the regional travel council serving the area in
which the city is located.
(Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
§ 36.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any purchaser failing or refusing to pay the tax hereby imposed and
levied and any seller or purchaser violating any of the provisions of §§
36.30 through
36.37 or any lawful rule or regulation promulgated hereunder shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined an amount set by Council from time to time. The
failure or refusal to pay the tax for public utility service purchased, used or
consumed during different statement periods shall constitute separate and
distinct offenses.
(1991 Code, § 15-7)
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully refuse to
collect or to pay the tax or to willfully refuse to make the return required to
be made by §§
36.50 through
36.62; or to willfully make any false or fraudulent return or false statement
in any return with the intent to default the city, or to willfully evade the
payment of the tax, or any part thereof; or for any person to willfully aid or
abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax, or any part
thereof; or for any officer, partner or principal of any corporation or
association to willfully make or willfully permit to be made for such
corporation or association any false return, or any false statement in any
return authorized by §§
36.50 through
36.62, with the intent to evade the payment of this tax.
      (2)   Any person willfully violating any of the provisions of §§
36.50 through
36.62 shall for the first offense be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount set by Council from time to time
or imprisoned for a period of not more than 30 days, or both fined and
imprisoned. For each offense after the first offense, such person shall be
guilty of a felony, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount set
by Council from time to time, or imprisoned in the penitentiary not less than
one nor more than three years, or in the discretion of the court be confined in
the county jail not more than one year, or both fined and imprisoned.
      (3)   Every prosecution for any offense arising under §§
36.50 through
36.62 shall be commenced within three years after the offense was committed,
notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary.
      (4)   Proceedings against any person under this section shall be
initiated in the county of this state wherein such person resides if any
element of the offense occurs in such county of residence, or if no element of
the offense occurs in such county of residence, then in the county where the
offense was committed.
      (5)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         EVADE. To willfully and fraudulently commit any act with the intent of
depriving the state of payment of any tax which there is a known legal duty to
pay.
         FRAUD. Any false representation or concealment as to any material fact
made by any person with the knowledge that it is not true and correct, with the
intention that such representation or concealment be relied upon by the state.
         WILLFULLY. The intentional violation of a known legal duty to perform
any act, required to be performed by any provision of §§
36.50 through
36.62, in respect of which the violation occurs; provided, that the mere
failure to perform any act shall not be a willful violation under §§
36.50 through
36.62. A willful violation of §§
36.50 through
36.62 requires that the defendant have had knowledge of or notice of a duty to
perform such act, and that the defendant, with knowledge of or notice of such
duty, intentionally failed to perform such act.
(Ord. passed 5-3-1971; Ord. 180, passed 9-4-2014)
CHAPTER 37: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
General Provisions
   
37.01   Created; presiding judge
   
37.02   Judge; oath of office; bond
   
37.03   Municipal Court Clerk serving as Municipal Court Judge
   
37.04   Judge; powers and duties generally
   
37.05   Docket; allocation of fees, fines and costs
   
37.06   Record of traffic cases; Traffic Violations Bureau
   
37.07   Appeals; minimum fine
   
37.08   Enforcement and collection of fines, costs and fees
   
37.09   Costs; generally
   
37.10   Municipal Court technology and technology maintenance fee
   
37.11   Costs; arrest fee; police pension fee
   
37.12   Additional Court costs upon certain convictions
   
37.13   Administrative fee
Deferred Payment of Fines and Costs
   
37.25   When permitted
   
37.26   Determination of ability to pay; questionnaire
   
37.27   Payment of fine as condition to probation or suspension of sentence
   
37.28   Good behavior as condition to deferred payment
   
37.29   Procedure upon default in payment
   
37.30   Reimbursement for costs of incarceration
   
37.31   Teen Court fee
   
37.32   Plan administration fees and late fees
 
   
37.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   For state law providing that, notwithstanding any Charter provision to the
contrary, any municipality may provide by ordinance for the creation and
maintenance of a municipal court and the like, and to authorize such court and
the judge thereof to exercise such jurisdiction, judicial powers and duties as
set forth in W.Va. Code § 8-10-1 and similar or related provisions contained in
its municipal charter, see W.Va. Code § 8-10-2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.01 CREATED; PRESIDING JUDGE.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Municipal Court of the city, which shall
be presided over by the Municipal Court Judge or Judges.
   (B)   The Council shall appoint a qualified person or persons to the office
of Municipal Court Judge, to serve in such office at the pleasure of the
Council. In the event that the Council shall appoint more than one person to
act as Municipal Court Judge, it shall appoint one of such persons to act as
Chief Judge.
(1991 Code, § 11-1) (Ord. passed 1-6-1983)
§ 37.02 JUDGE; OATH OF OFFICE; BOND.
   No person shall exercise any power or perform any duty as Municipal Court
Judge until he or she has qualified for such office by taking the oath of
office and by giving the bond required by W.Va. Code § 8-10-1, and by giving
such other faithful performance and true accounting bond as may be required by
the Council under which he or she shall be responsible for all city funds
coming into his or her hands by virtue of his or her office.
(1991 Code, § 11-2)
§ 37.03 MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK SERVING AS MUNICIPAL COURT JUDGE.
   In the absence of or in the case of the inability of the Municipal Court
Judge to perform his or her duties, the Municipal Court Clerk may act as
Municipal Court Judge if the Municipal Court Clerk has complied with the
requirements set forth in W.Va. Code § 8-10-2(b) and (c), as are also required
to be complied with by the Municipal Court Judge. The record of the compliance
by the Municipal Court Clerk shall be kept as an official record of the
Municipal Court.
(Ord. 238, passed 6-1-2017)
§ 37.04 JUDGE; POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The Municipal Court Judge shall be a conservator of the peace within the
city and, insofar as any ordinance of the city is concerned, shall have and
exercise all such powers and duties in criminal cases as a Magistrate may
lawfully exercise under the statutes of the state; and he or she shall also be,
ex officio, a Magistrate within the city and shall, within the city, have and
exercise all the powers relating to crime and perform all duties fixed by law
upon a Magistrate; except, that he or she shall have no jurisdiction over civil
cases. The Municipal Court Judge shall have such further powers and perform
such other duties as may be, from time to time, prescribed or conferred by any
law of the state or by ordinance of the city, as well as the judicial powers
conferred upon the Mayor by the City Charter, insofar as such Charter
provisions are not in conflict with the State Constitution or any state statute
which takes precedence over the City Charter.
(1991 Code, § 11-3)
§ 37.05 DOCKET; ALLOCATION OF FEES, FINES AND COSTS.
   There shall be a docket of the Municipal Court, and it shall be the duty of
the Municipal Court Judge to docket fully thereon all cases in the Court, and
to show thereon all fees, fines and costs adjudged and collected. The Municipal
Court Judge shall, at least once a month, make a written report to the City
Collector and Treasurer, showing all receipts for the previous month, and shall
deliver and pay over to the City Collector and Treasurer all money so received
and to which the city is entitled.
(1991 Code, § 11-4)
§ 37.06 RECORD OF TRAFFIC CASES; TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
   The Municipal Court Judge shall keep or cause to be kept a record of every
traffic complaint and other legal form of traffic charge deposited with or
presented to the Municipal Court or its Traffic Violations Bureau, if and when
he or she shall establish such bureau, and shall keep a record of every
official action by the Court or its Traffic Violations Bureau in reference
thereto, including, but not limited to, a record of every conviction,
forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal, and the amount of fine or forfeiture
resulting from every traffic complaint deposited with or presented to the Court
or Traffic Violations Bureau.
(1991 Code, § 11-5)
Statutory reference:
   For state law basis of this section, see W.Va. Code § 17C-19-8
§ 37.07 APPEALS; MINIMUM FINE.
   (A)   Every person sentenced by the Municipal Court Judge to imprisonment or
to the payment of a fine of an amount set by Council from time to time shall be
allowed an appeal to the Circuit Court of the county; the procedure upon appeal
from the Municipal Court shall be the same as that for an appeal from a
Magistrate’s Court.
   (B)   In no case shall a fine of an amount set by Council from time to time
be imposed if a defendant, his or her agent or attorney objects thereto.
(1991 Code, § 11-6)
§ 37.08 ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION OF FINES, COSTS AND FEES.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of §§
37.25 through
37.32, upon failure to pay any fine or costs adjudged against him or her, a
defendant may be confined to the city or county jail until such fine and costs
are paid, but not exceeding 30 days.
   (B)   In addition to the power of imposing imprisonment for nonpayment of
fines as above set forth, the Municipal Court Judge shall have the same
authority and power in collection of fines, fees and costs as are given to a
Magistrate under the laws of the state.
(1991 Code, § 11-7) (Ord. passed 11-2-1967)
§ 37.09 COSTS; GENERALLY.
   The city shall be entitled to and the Municipal Court Judge may tax, in all
cases appearing before him or her involving violations of city ordinances, the
same costs, fees and allowances and in the same amounts as a Magistrate may
tax.
(1991 Code, § 11-8) (Ord. passed 11-2-1967)
§ 37.10 MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY AND TECHNOLOGY MAINTENANCE FEE.
   The Court shall assess a mandatory fee of $10 upon each and every defendant
found guilty or pleading nolo contendere regarding a misdemeanor violation,
including traffic violations and moving violations, but excluding municipal
parking ordinance violations. The city shall use the money raised by this fee
to not only fund the current technological costs of its Municipal Courtand to
update the Municipal Court’s technology as needed.
(Ord. 244, passed 9-21-2017; Ord. 305, passed 9-15-2022)
§ 37.11 COSTS; ARREST FEE; POLICE PENSION FEE.
   There shall be taxed as part of the costs, whenever there is a conviction
for violation of the city laws or ordinances, an arrest fee of an amount set by
Council from time to time and a police pension fee of an amount set by Council
from time to time. The arrest fee shall be paid into the general funds of the
city and the pension fee shall be paid into the Police Officer’s Pension and
Relief Fund.
(1991 Code, § 11-9)
Statutory reference:
   Arrest fee, payable into the Police Officer’s Pension and Relief Fund, see
W.Va. Code § 8-22-20
§ 37.12 ADDITIONAL COURT COSTS UPON CERTAIN CONVICTIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 8-11-1 and 8-11-1a, there
is hereby imposed, in addition to any other costs which may lawfully be
imposed, an additional cost of an amount set by Council from time to time upon
the conviction for violation of a municipal ordinance, except that such
additional cost shall not be assessed for a traffic offense that is not a
moving violation or an offense for which the ordinance does not provide for a
period of incarceration. Of the imposed amount set by Council from time to
time, as an additional cost, an amount set by Council from time to time shall
be an administrative cost to be retained by the city.
   (B)   The Clerk of the Municipal Court, or such person designated to receive
fines and costs, shall at the end of each month pay into the regional jail and
prison development fund in the state treasury an amount set by Council from
time to time of the costs collected in each proceeding except for traffic
offenses that are not moving violations: provided, that in a case where a
defendant has failed to pay all costs assessed against him or her, no payment
shall be made to the Regional Jail and Prison Development Fund unless and until
the defendant has paid all costs which, when paid, are available for the sum
and benefit of the city.
(1991 Code, § 11-9.1) (Ord. passed 8-6-1987)
§ 37.13 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.
   The Court shall assess a mandatory administrative fee of $45 upon each and
every defendant found guilty or pleading nolo contendere regarding a
misdemeanor violation, including traffic violations and moving violations, but
excluding municipal parking ordinance violations. The city shall use the money
received by this fee to help in the costs of maintaining the Municipal Court.
(Ord. 304, passed 9-15-2022)
DEFERRED PAYMENT OF FINES AND COSTS
§ 37.25 WHEN PERMITTED.
   Whenever a person is convicted in the Municipal Court of a violation of this
code or other ordinance or any rule, regulation, notice or order promulgated
pursuant to the authority thereof and such person is sentenced to pay a fine or
costs, and it shall appear to the Court, on its own motion or on motion of the
defendant, that such defendant is unable to pay such fine or costs forthwith,
the Court may order the defendant to pay such fine or costs in installments or
upon such other terms and conditions or within such period of time as may
enable the defendant to pay such fine or costs.
(1991 Code, § 11-10)
§ 37.26 DETERMINATION OF ABILITY TO PAY; QUESTIONNAIRE.
   (A)   In determining whether a defendant is unable to pay a fine or costs
forthwith, the Court may require such defendant to file a petition, under oath,
with the Court, upon a form provided by the Court, setting forth the financial
condition of the defendant.
   (B)   Such form shall be a questionnaire and shall include, but shall not be
limited to:
      (1)   The name and residence of the defendant and his or her occupation,
if any;
      (2)   His or her family status and the number of persons dependent upon
him or her;
      (3)   His or her monthly income;
      (4)   Whether his or her dependents are employed and, if so, their
approximate monthly income;
      (5)   His or her banking accounts, if any;
      (6)   Real estate owned by the defendant or any interest he or she may
have in real estate;
      (7)   Income produced therefrom;
      (8)   Any independent income accruing to the defendant; tangible and
intangible personal property owned by the defendant or in which he or she may
have an interest;
      (9)   A statement listing the approximate indebtedness of the defendant
to other persons; and
      (10)   (a)   1.   The payment plan of the defendant, should the Court
exercise its discretion in permitting the payment of such fine or costs in
installments or other conditions to be fixed by the Court; and
            2.   At the end of such form, there shall be printed in bold face
type, in a distinctive color, the following:
 
THIS STATEMENT IS MADE UNDER OATH. ANY FALSE STATEMENT OF A MATERIAL FACT TO
ANY QUESTION CONTAINED HEREIN SHALL CONSTITUTE FALSE SWEARING AND SHALL BE AN
OFFENSE AGAINST THIS SECTION. THE MAXIMUM PENALTY IS $100 FINE OR THIRTY DAYS
IN JAIL, OR BOTH.
 
         (b)   A copy of the petition shall be retained by the defendant.
   (C)   (1)   If the defendant is unable to read or write, the Court, or the
Clerk, may assist the defendant in completing the petition and require him or
her to affix his or her mark thereto.
      (2)   The consequences of the making of a false statement shall be
explained to such defendant.
(1991 Code, § 11-11) Penalty, see §
37.99
§ 37.27 PAYMENT OF FINE AS CONDITION TO PROBATION OR SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE.
   If a defendant is sentenced to pay a fine or costs and payment of the fine
or costs is ordered to be made on an installment basis or on other conditions
under the provisions of §
37.25, and if the defendant is also placed on probation or imposition of the
execution of sentence is suspended, the Court may make payment of the fine a
condition to probation or suspension of sentence.
(1991 Code, § 11-12)
§ 37.28 GOOD BEHAVIOR AS CONDITION TO DEFERRED PAYMENT.
   If a defendant is permitted to pay a fine and/or costs on an installment
basis or under such other conditions as the Court shall fix under the
provisions of §
37.25, the Court may require, as a condition, that the defendant be of peaceful
and good behavior until the fine and/or costs are paid.
(1991 Code, § 11-13)
§ 37.29 PROCEDURE UPON DEFAULT IN PAYMENT.
   When any person sentenced to pay a fine or costs defaults in the payment of
any such fine or costs or any installment thereof, the Court may issue a
summons for such person to appear before the Court for a hearing on the
question of whether such person’s failure to pay any installment was
attributable to intentional refusal to comply with the prior order of the Court
or to lack of a good-faith effort to comply therewith. The Court may, after
such hearing, order that the person in default be allowed additional time for
payment, may reduce or remit the amount of the fine or costs or the unpaid
portion thereof in whole or in part or, upon a finding that the default was
intentional or due to the lack of a good-faith effort to comply with the prior
order of the Court, may order such person confined for a period of up to 30
days, as the Court, at its discretion, shall determine.
(1991 Code, § 11-14)
§ 37.30 REIMBURSEMENT FOR COSTS OF INCARCERATION.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision to the code to the contrary and in
addition to any fine, cost assessment or fee authorized or required to be
imposed upon a person by virtue of his or her conviction of a criminal
provision of this code, or a lawfully enacted ordinance of a political
subdivision of this state, a person so convicted and incarcerated in a regional
jail by virtue of said conviction may be assessed the costs of up to 30 days of
his or her incarceration.
   (B)   Prior to any person being required to pay the cost of his or her
incarceration pursuant to the provisions of division (A) above, a hearing shall
be held before the sentencing Court to determine his or her ability to pay. The
Court may not sentence a defendant to pay his or her costs of incarceration
unless he or she is or in the foreseeable future will be able to pay them. In
determining the amount and method of payment of costs, the Court shall take
account of the financial resources of the defendant and the nature of the
burden that payment of costs will impose.
   (C)   A defendant who has been sentenced to pay costs and who is not in
willful default in the payment of the costs may at any time petition the
sentencing Court for remission of the payment of costs or of any unpaid portion
of the costs. If it appears to the satisfaction of the Court that payment of
the amount due will impose manifest hardship on the defendant or the
defendant’s family or dependents, the Court may excuse payment of all or part
of the amount due in costs, or modify the method of payment.
(Ord. O-44, passed 6-1-2006)
§ 37.31 TEEN COURT FEE.
   The Court shall assess a mandatory fee upon each and every defendant found
guilty or pleading nolo contendere to a misdemeanor violation, including
traffic violations and moving violations, and all city ordinances, but
excluding municipal parking ordinance violations. The County Teen Court Program
shall be financed with the foregoing fee.
(Ord. 074, passed 4-3-2008)
§ 37.32 PLAN ADMINISTRATION FEES AND LATE FEES.
   The Municipal Court is authorized to collect the following fees related to a
payment plan which shall be imposed by the Municipal Court as follows:
   (A)   A plan administration fee of $25 shall be imposed when a defendant is
enrolled in a payment plan for the payment of fines, costs and fees imposed by
the Municipal Court.
   (B)   A late fee of $10 shall be imposed for each 30-day period that a
defendant is in default on the payment plan. The late fees shall not exceed $30
in the aggregate amount regardless of the number of days that the defendant is
in default of the payment plan.
(Ord. 272, passed 8-6-2020)
§ 37.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any defendant who shall knowingly make a false statement of a material
fact to any question contained in the questionnaire authorized by §
37.26 shall be guilty of false swearing under §
37.26 and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 or 30
days imprisonment or both such fine and imprisonment.
(1991 Code, § 11-11)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWERS AND SEWAGE
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE
Section
   
50.01   Service to be provided by city; exceptions
   
50.02   Department of sanitation; rules and regulations
   
50.03   Provision of trash receptacles
   
50.04   Placement and removal of receptacles and garbage or refuse
   
50.05   Rates for city service; designated; bag limits
   
50.06   Rates for city service; authority of Director of Public Works
   
50.07   Rates for city service; consequences of nonpayment
   
50.08   Private disposition
   
50.09   Landfill usage
   
50.10   Disposal of trash
   
50.11   Prohibition of illegal dumping
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of the Council to prohibit the accumulation and require the
disposal of garbage and refuse, and to provide for the elimination of public
health and safety hazards and to abate nuisances, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(10),
(23)
§ 50.01 SERVICE TO BE PROVIDED BY CITY; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall engage in the business of collecting and disposing garbage
or refuse, or shall collect or dispose of garbage or refuse within the city
limits except the city; provided, that farmers and other persons who desire to
collect garbage for the feeding of hogs or other animals and fowl may, upon
application to the Mayor, be authorized to do so, under such regulations as the
Mayor may prescribe; but such farmers and other persons shall make no charge
nor receive any compensation whatever for garbage service to or from any
person.
(1991 Code, § 9-6) (Ord. passed 6-15-1950; Ord. passed 12-5-1968) Penalty, see
§
50.99
§ 50.02 DEPARTMENT OF SANITATION; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   There shall be a Department of Sanitation under the supervision and
direction of the Director of Public Works. The Department of Sanitation, with
the approval of the Council, shall be adequately equipped and supplied with
personnel and equipment to properly and satisfactorily carry out the essential
public service of collecting, removing and disposing of refuse produced in the
households and places of business of the citizens of the city. The Mayor or
other duly authorized officer, with the approval of the Council, shall have the
authority to prescribe, publish, promulgate and enforce any and all reasonable
rules and regulations deemed by him or her necessary or proper, consistent with
state law, this code and other ordinances, to carry out the objects and
purposes thereof and for the safety and health of the citizens of the city with
respect to the collection, removal and disposal of refuse as herein defined;
and it shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any
such rules and regulations as approved by the Council.
(1991 Code, § 9-7) (Ord. passed 6-15-1950) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 PROVISION OF TRASH RECEPTACLES.
   Every person in the city who produces or accumulates garbage shall have it
removed in the manner prescribed by this chapter and shall provide a suitable
garbage can or receptacle, to be approved by the Director of Public Works, in
which such garbage shall be deposited as it, from time to time, is made or
accumulates, and a separate receptacle in which shall be deposited all
crockery, glass, glass bottles, tin cans and other similar articles which are
subject to being collected.
(1991 Code, § 9-8) (Ord. passed 6-15-1950)
§ 50.04 PLACEMENT AND REMOVAL OF RECEPTACLES AND GARBAGE OR REFUSE.
   All receptacles and/or garbage or refuse to be hauled in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall be placed in a spot accessible to the
Sanitation Department not more than 24 hours previous to 6:00 a.m. on the day
of collection. No receptacles and/or garbage or refuse shall be allowed to
stand or remain on any of the sidewalks, streets or alleys of the city for more
than 24 hours after such collection has been made by the Sanitation Department.
(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-2014) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 RATES FOR CITY SERVICE; DESIGNATED; BAG LIMITS.
   (A)   The Council shall, from time to time, establish the charges that will
be imposed for garbage and refuse collection services. A current list of such
charges shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk where it shall be
available for public inspection during normal city office hours.
   (B)   At no time, however, shall rates which are disclosed to be producing
less revenue than is required to meet all obligations and costs involved in
rendering such service be continued.
   (C)   All trash shall be placed in the type of plastic bags as described
below with the following limits per household per week of either division (1),
(2) or (3).
      (1)   Twelve kitchen type trash bags which are the maximum size of 13-
gallons; or
      (2)   Six larger trash bags which are the maximum size of 30-gallons; or
      (3)   Three contractor bags which are the maximum size of 55-gallons.
      (4)   No trash bag shall weigh more than 30 lbs.
      (5)   Any bags beyond the specified limits for each category described
above shall not be collected by the Sanitation Department on the weekly day of
service.
(1991 Code, § 9-9) (Ord. passed 3-5-1992; Ord. O-008, passed 1-15-2004; Ord.
113, passed 6-3-2010; Ord. 169, passed 7-18-2013; Ord. 200, passed 9-24-2015;
Ord. 345, passed 6-26-2025)
§ 50.06 RATES FOR CITY SERVICE; AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works is authorized and empowered to prescribe
rates for the removal and disposal of other refuse materials not expressly
mentioned in §
50.05.
   (B)   If the number of times for the weekly collection of garbage set out in
that section shall prove burdensome and a good service can be given by
collections a lesser number of times weekly, the Director may, at his or her
discretion, modify §
50.05 accordingly in such cases.
(1991 Code, § 9-10) (Ord. passed 6-15-1950)
§ 50.07 RATES FOR CITY SERVICE; CONSEQUENCES OF NONPAYMENT.
   Upon the failure of any person receiving such service to pay therefor when
due, the city may discontinue such service after appropriate notice.
(1991 Code, § 9-11) (Ord. passed 6-15-1950)
§ 50.08 PRIVATE DISPOSITION.
   Private scavengers, pushcart operators and private garbage collectors are
hereby prohibited from engaging in the business of transporting or disposing of
raw or prepared garbage and refuse containing organic wastes, putrid matter and
wastes or excreta subject to putrification.
(1991 Code, § 9-12) (Ord. passed 6-15-1950) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.09 LANDFILL USAGE.
   (A)   The schedule of fees charged for landfill usage shall be an amount set
by Council from time to time.
   (B)   A finance charge in the amount as set by Council from time to time on
the past due balance will be imposed on all accounts not paid within 60 days of
the billing date.
   (C)   The city landfill closed on September 2015.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1992)
§ 50.10 DISPOSAL OF TRASH.
   A person shall not place trash in trash receptacle belonging to another
private individual, corporation, partnership, proprietorship or association
without that person’s or entity’s prior consent.
(Ord. passed 4-16-1992) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.11 PROHIBITION OF ILLEGAL DUMPING.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ILLEGAL DUMPING.
         (a)   The disposal of trash or refuse generated outside the city
limits by nonresidents of the city or persons or entities who do not pay city
sanitation fees into city maintained trash receptacles.
         (b)   ILLEGAL DUMPING shall also be defined as disposal of trash or
refuse generated outside the city limits of the city into city maintained trash
receptacles by persons or entities who do not pay city sanitation fees, but who
use city trash receptacles with the permission of those friends, family
members, employers, or others who do pay city sanitation fees.
   (B)   Enforcement. Enforcement of the prohibition on illegal dumping shall
be assumed by the Police Department and Municipal Court of the city.
Enforcement of penalties and collection of fines shall be conducted pursuant to
Chapter 37 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. O-009, passed 1-22-2004) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
50.10 shall be subject to a fine of an amount set by Council from time to time
plus court costs.
   (C)   Any person or entity found guilty of illegal dumping in violation of §
50.11 in the Municipal Court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense against
the city, and shall be fined an amount set by Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 4-16-1992; Ord. O-009, passed 1-22-2004)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
General Provision
   
51.01   Furnishing water in competition with city; compliance with regulations
and the like
   
51.02   Water Committee; composition; appointments
   
51.03   Applications and permits to use water
   
51.04   Prohibited uses in case of scarcity
   
51.05   Use of supply; supplying others
   
51.06   Drinking fountains and fixtures exposed to general use
   
51.07   Use of water meters; minimum charge
   
51.08   Duties of City Clerk; record
   
51.09   Unauthorized use of supply
   
51.10   Service pipes from mains to curb
   
51.11   Fixtures and service pipes from building to curb
   
51.12   Damage to system; misuse of materials; trespassing
   
51.13   Liability
   
51.14   Noncompliance where two families are supplied from same service pipe
   
51.15   Reports to Water Department
   
51.16   Special valve where boiler is supplied from mains
   
51.17   Cutting off water; notification, reimbursement procedure
Rates, Charges, Billings and Related Provisions
   
51.30   Estimates and rates in certain cases
   
51.31   Rates
   
51.32   Tapping fees
Backflow and Cross-Connections
   
51.45   Purpose
   
51.46   Authority
   
51.47   Responsibility
   
51.48   Definitions
   
51.49   Administration
   
51.50   Requirements
   
51.51   Degree of hazard
   
51.52   Existing in-use backflow prevention devices
   
51.53   Periodic testing
   
51.54   Records
 
   
51.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Changing, diverting or obstructing streams, sewers, drains and the like, see
§
130.021
   Contaminating watercourses, wells, drains and the like, see §
130.021
   Contamination of water supply by garbage, refuse and the like, see §
91.023
   Elkins Water Board, see §§
33.125 through
33.133
   Grades and elevations generally, see §§
10.08 through
10.12
   Sewers and sewage generally, see
Ch. 52
   Stagnant water generally, see §
91.006
GENERAL PROVISION
§ 51.01 FURNISHING WATER IN COMPETITION WITH CITY; COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS
AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish water in competition with the
city; provided, that any person may furnish water for his or her own use. It
shall be unlawful for any person to use water from the mains or service pipes
of the city without first complying with the rules, regulations and schedules
of water rates set forth in this chapter.
(1991 Code, § 20-1) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.02 WATER COMMITTEE; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS.
   The care and maintenance of the waterworks established by the city shall be
entrusted to the Water Committee, which shall be made up of three members of
the Council, to be appointed biannually at the organizational meeting of the
Council.
(1991 Code, § 20-2)
§ 51.03 APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS TO USE WATER.
   (A)   All applications for the introduction or supply of water to any
premises, or for the extension of any pipe conveying water must be made, in
writing, by the owner of the premises or his or her authorized agent, to the
City Clerk, on blanks kept for the purpose. Such application shall state fully
and without reserve or concealment the use to which the water is to be applied
and the place where the mains or pipes are to be tapped.
   (B)   No permit to use water shall be granted except to the property owner
or his or her agent, and he or she shall be responsible for compliance with the
established rules and regulations governing the supply and introduction of
water and the rates thereof.
(1991 Code, § 20-3) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 PROHIBITED USES IN CASE OF SCARCITY.
   The Council shall have the right, in the case of scarcity of water, to order
the discontinuance of the use of all street sprinklers, fountains and motors
during the term of such scarcity, and the Committee shall be the judge of any
such scarcity.
(1991 Code, § 20-4) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 USE OF SUPPLY; SUPPLYING OTHERS.
   No person supplied with water shall be permitted to use the water for any
other purpose than that stated in the application or agreement; nor shall any
person supply water in any way to any other person without a written permit
from the Water Committee, nor shall he or she permit others to use his or her
hose or other attachments, nor leave them exposed to use by others.
(1991 Code, § 20-5) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 DRINKING FOUNTAINS AND FIXTURES EXPOSED TO GENERAL USE.
   No hydrants or other fixtures, except public drinking fountains, shall be
placed within the limits of any street, unless such hydrant or other fixture is
securely closed and protected against general use. No drinking fountains
erected for public use shall have openings by which they can be used as a
source of domestic supply.
(1991 Code, § 20-6) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07 USE OF WATER METERS; MINIMUM CHARGE.
   (A)   (1)   The Council reserves the right to set meters and charge meter
rates, whenever there is any doubt as to the quantity of water used or wasted.
      (2)   Customers shall have the right, at their option, to put in meters
and pay meter rates; provided, that the kind of meters shall be designated by
the Council or the Water Committee.
      (3)   Whenever meters are used, they shall be placed by the city plumbers
under the direction of the Water Committee, and the cost of the meter and the
cost of placing such meter shall be paid by the city.
      (4)   The city officers shall have access to the meters at all reasonable
times for the purpose of inspection and care.
   (B)   Where meters are placed on the premises of any user of water, they
shall be read quarterly, and collections made as from other users.
(1991 Code, § 20-7) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08 DUTIES OF CITY CLERK; RECORD.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall keep all such records and make all such reports
as may be required by the rules and regulations of the State Public Service
Commission, or which may be required by the Council, by resolution.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall make out at the beginning of each quarter all
water rents and charges and place them in the hands of the City Collector and
Treasurer, and keep a record thereof in a well-bound book to be known and
designated as the “Water Record”.
(1991 Code, § 20-8)
§ 51.09 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF SUPPLY.
   The introduction of service pipes for the supply of water into any premises
shall be under the direct supervision of the Water Committee or its authorized
agent.
(1991 Code, § 20-9) (Ord. 111, passed 4-1-2010) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.10 SERVICE PIPES FROM MAINS TO CURB.
   (A)   The kind, size and strength of service pipe to be used and the depth
to which such pipe shall be laid to the curb shall be determined by the Water
Committee or its authorized agents.
   (B)   The city shall bear all the expense for the laying and keeping in
repair of the service pipe from the water main to the curb.
(1991 Code, § 20-10)
§ 51.11 FIXTURES AND SERVICE PIPES FROM BUILDING TO CURB.
   All persons taking water must keep their service pipes and fixtures
connected therewith in good repair and protected from frost at their own
expense.
(1991 Code, § 20-11)
§ 51.12 DAMAGE TO SYSTEM; MISUSE OF MATERIALS; TRESPASSING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest or destroy the
waterworks, reservoir, pipes, branches, fittings, faucets, fire plugs, hydrants
or any part thereof or any property or building belonging or appertaining
thereto. Any person having the authority to use or open the fire plugs for any
other purpose other than in case of fire shall do so under the supervision of
the city plumbers or some other person authorized by law to open or use the
plugs; and it shall be the duty of all officers of the Council or the members
thereof or their authorized agents to apprehend every offender or trespasser on
the works or property and take him or her before the Mayor, to answer for such
offense. Any person using the fire plugs, hose or other such material shall pay
the City Collector and Treasurer for the use thereof and other expenses
attending such use, and shall also be liable for any damage done thereto.
(1991 Code, § 20-12) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.13 LIABILITY.
   It is expressly stipulated by the city and the consumers of water from the
waterworks that no claim shall be made against the city by reason of the
breaking of any pipe or cock or for any failure of the supply of water, and all
contracts made shall be subject to this condition.
(1991 Code, § 20-13)
§ 51.14 NONCOMPLIANCE WHERE TWO FAMILIES ARE SUPPLIED FROM SAME SERVICE PIPE.
   In case two or more families are supplied with water from the same service
pipe, if either of the parties fails to pay the water rent when due, or fails
to comply with any rule of the Water Committee or of the waterworks, the city
shall turn off the water from such pipes until the rent is paid or the rule is
strictly complied with or both.
(1991 Code, § 20-14)
§ 51.15 REPORTS TO WATER DEPARTMENT.
   The Water Department shall inspect and make out, on or before the first
meeting in July and January of each year, a complete report of all water
connections, accounts and discharges and submit such report to the Water
Committee for examination. The Water Committee shall correct any errors therein
and pass the report to the Treasurer. The report shall be presented to the
Council for action and after action by the Council, shall be filed with the
City Collector and Treasurer. It shall be the duty of the city plumber to
report all violations of the rules and regulations to the Water Committee and
the Committee shall see that all the aforesaid rules and regulations are
enforced.
(1991 Code, § 20-15)
§ 51.16 SPECIAL VALVE WHERE BOILER IS SUPPLIED FROM MAINS.
   In all cases in which boilers are supplied directly from the water mains, a
suitable valve or vacuum must be attached to prevent damage from collapsing
when the water is shut off from the street mains. Check valves shall not be
permitted.
(1991 Code, § 20-16) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.17 CUTTING OFF WATER; NOTIFICATION, REIMBURSEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of every property owner to whose property
water is furnished by the city to notify the City Clerk, in writing, at any
time he or she desires water rent to cease; and no exoneration for water rent
shall be made to any person until such notice in writing is received by the
Clerk, and in no case for less than 30 days.
      (2)   Upon the receipt of such notice by the City Clerk, he or she shall
immediately notify the Water Department, whose duty it shall be to turn off the
water to such premises, and the water shall not be turned on again until notice
is received from the property owner.
      (3)   In no case shall any person, except the city plumber or other
person employed by the city for that purpose, turn such water off or on.
   (B)   If the water rent covering the time when water is shut off has not
been paid, the City Clerk shall notify the City Collector and Treasurer, who
shall deduct the amount of such rent from the respective rent; but if the rent
has been paid, the City Clerk shall draw an order reimbursing the party for the
time such water is turned off, which order shall be signed as are other city
orders by the Mayor, if he or she is satisfied that it is correct.
(1991 Code, § 20-17) Penalty, see §
51.99
RATES, CHARGES, BILLINGS AND RELATED PROVISIONS
§ 51.30 ESTIMATES AND RATES IN CERTAIN CASES.
   Water supplied to any place for which the system of measurement is not
provided by this chapter shall be estimated by the Water Department subject to
the approval of the Council.
(1991 Code, § 20-18)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to lay and collect charges for services rendered by
municipal waterworks to those served both within and without the city, see
W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(32)
§ 51.31 RATES.
   The rates charged for the use of water from the city mains shall be such as
are approved by the Council and the Public Service Commission and on file in
the City Clerk’s office.
(1991 Code, § 20-19) (Ord. passed 1-2-1992; Ord. passed 7-16-1992; Ord. passed
3-18-1993; Ord. 063, passed 9-6-2007; Ord. 119, passed 8-19-2010; Ord. 132,
passed 11-3-2011; Ord. 154, passed 6-21-2012; Ord. 197, passed 7-2-2015; Ord.
302, passed 9-15-2022)
§ 51.32 TAPPING FEES.
   Tapping fees shall be fixed by the Council and a schedule filed with the
City Clerk.
(1991 Code, § 20-20) (Ord. 302, passed 9-15-2022)
BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
§ 51.45 PURPOSE.
   (A)   To protect the public water system served by the city from the
possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within its customer’s
internal distribution water system(s), such contaminants or pollutants that
could backflow due to the back-pressure or back-siphonage into the public water
system;
   (B)   To promote the elimination and/or control of cross-connections and
backflow conditions, actual or potential, within a customer’s internal
distribution water system(s), non-potable systems, plumbing fixture and
processes; and
   (C)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection and backflow prevention control which will effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of the public and/or customer’s water system(s) from
cross-connections and backflow conditions.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.46 AUTHORITY.
   By the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 300f et
seq. and 1996 amendment, and W.Va. Code Ch. 16, Art. 1 and Public Health Laws,
State Bureau of Public Health 64 CSR 3-1.1 et seq., the water purveyor has the
primary responsibility for preventing water from unapproved sources, or any
other substances, from entering the potable water system.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.47 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The water purveyor shall be responsible for the protection of the public
potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the
backflow from back-pressure or back-siphonage of contaminants or pollutants
through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of the water
purveyor, an approved backflow preventer assembly is required at the water
service connection to any customer’s premises, the water purveyor, or his or
her delegated agent, shall give notice in writing to said customer to install
an approved backflow preventer assembly at each service connection to his or
her premises. The customer shall, within 90 days, install such approved
assembly, or assemblies, at his or her own expense, and failure or refusal, or
inability on the part of the customer to install said assembly or assemblies
within 90 days, shall constitute a grounds for discontinuing water service to
the premises until such assembly or assemblies have been properly installed.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.48 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Accepted by the water purveyor as meeting an applicable
specification stated or cited in the State Department of Health and Human
Resources regulation, or as suitable for the proposed purpose.
   ASSEMBLY. A backflow preventer usually consisting of a combination of
approved check valve components and additional instrumentation including
approved shutoff valves and test cocks.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. Any water supply or water source, on or available,
to a customer’s premises other than the water purveyor’s approved public water
system.
   BACKFLOW. The undesirable reversal of water flow or introduction of other
liquids, mixtures or substances, caused by a pressure differential in the
distribution pipes of a potable water system.
   BACKFLOW CONDITION(S). Any set of circumstances, actual or potential, that
could be construed to create a cross-connection allowing for backflow of a
contaminant or pollutant to enter a potable water system.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTER. A device or assembly, or means designed to prevent
backflow in a potable water system. Most commonly categorized as air gap,
atmospheric vacuum breaker, barometric loop, double check with intermediate
atmospheric vent, double check valve assembly, hose bibb vacuum breaker,
pressure breaker, reduced pressure principle assembly and residential dual
check.
      (1)   AIR GAP. A physical separation sufficient to prevent backflow
between the free-flowing discharge end of the potable water system and any
other system. Physically defined as a distance equal to twice the diameter of
the supply side pipe diameter but never less than one inch.
      (2)   ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER. A device which prevents backflow by
creating an atmospheric vent when there is either a negative pressure or sub-
atmospheric pressure in a water system.
      (3)   BAROMETRIC LOOP. A fabricated piping arrangement rising at least 35
feet at its topmost point above the highest fixture it supplies. It is utilized
in water supply systems to protect against back-siphonage.
      (4)   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly of two independently
operating spring loaded check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on
each side of the check valves, and properly located test cocks for the testing
of each check valve.
      (5)   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE WITH INTERMEDIATE ATMOSPHERIC VENT. A device
having two spring loaded check valves separated by an atmospheric vent chamber.
      (6)   HOSE BIBB VACUUM BREAKER. A device attached to a hose bibb and
which acts as an atmospheric vacuum breaker.
      (7)   PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER. An assembly containing an independently
operated spring loaded check valve and an independently operated spring loaded
air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly
includes tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the valves and
properly located test cocks for the testing of the check and air valve.
      (8)   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTER. An assembly
consisting of two independently operating approved check valves with an
automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two check
valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves plus
properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valves and the relief
valve.
      (9)   RESIDENTIAL DUAL CHECK. A device consisting of two spring loaded,
independently operating check valves. Generally employed immediately downstream
of the water meter to act as a fixture isolation device.
   BACKPRESSURE. A condition in which the customer’s system pressure is greater
than the water purveyor’s system pressure.
   BACK-SIPHONAGE. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other
than the primary source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure or negative
pressure in the potable water system.
   COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. A public water system that serves at least 25
residents year round or that has 15 service connections serving year round
residents.
   CONTAINMENT (EXTERNAL PROTECTION). A method of backflow prevention which
requires a backflow preventer assembly be installed after the meter and prior
to any water service entrance.
   CONTAMINANT. A substance that will impair the qualify of potable water to a
degree that it creates a serious health hazard to the public leading to
poisoning or the spread of disease.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any actual or potential, direct or indirect, connection
between the public water system and an unapproved water supply or other source
of contamination or pollution.
   CUSTOMER. A billing unit or service connection to which drinking water is
believed by a public water system. A CUSTOMER may also be identified as an
owner.
   DEGREE OF HAZARD. The degree of hazard is the potential risk to health and
the potential adverse effects upon the public water system based on the
probability of backflow occurring and the type or nature of the contaminant. A
HEALTH HAZARD is any condition, device or practice which creates or may create
a danger to health and well being of the water consumer. A SEVERE HEALTH HAZARD
is any health hazard (contaminant) that could be expected to result in
significant morbidity or death. A NON-HEALTH HAZARD (POLLUTANT) is any
condition that could degrade the quality or adversely affect the public water
system.
   DEVICE. A single body backflow preventer with one or two check valves that
cannot be tested and does not have shut-off valves or test cocks.
   FIXTURE ISOLATION (INTERNAL ISOLATION). A method of backflow prevention
where a backflow preventer is located to control a cross-connection or
potential source of contamination at an in-plant piece of equipment or process
location other than at a water service entrance.
   OWNER. Any person who has legal title to, or license to operate, or resides
in a property or facility which is supplied drinking water from a public water
system. May also be referred to as a CUSTOMER.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, company, public or private corporation,
political subdivision, agency of the state, agency or instrumentality of the
United States, or any other legal entity.
   POLLUTANT. A foreign substance, if permitted to enter the public water
system, will degrade potable water quality so as to constitute a moderate
hazard, or impair the usefulness of the water to a degree which does not create
an actual hazard to the public health, but which docs adversely and
unreasonably affect (appearance or color, odor, taste and the like) the water
for domestic use.
   POTABLE WATER. Water that is safe for human consumption as described by the
State Bureau for Public Health.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. Includes the works, auxiliaries, for the collection,
treatment, storage and distribution of drinking water from the source of supply
to a customer’s premises. May also be known as a WATER PURVEYOR.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The Municipal Water Department, Water Board, Public Service
District or other administrative authority invested with the authority and
responsibility for a public water system.
   WATER SERVICE ENTRANCE. The point in the customer’s water system beyond the
sanitary control of the public water system (water purveyor), generally
considered to be the outlet end of the water meter and always before any
unprotected branch water line.
   WEST VIRGINIA BUREAU FOR PUBLIC HEALTH (WVBPH). The State of West Virginia
Bureau for Public Health.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.49 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The water purveyor will establish, operate and promote a cross-
connection and backflow prevention control program, to include the keeping of
necessary records, which fulfills the requirements of the WVBPH Cross-
Connections and Backflow Prevention Regulations.
   (B)   The owner shall allow his or her property to be inspected for possible
cross-connections and backflow conditions, and shall follow the provisions of
the water purveyor’s program and the WVBPH Cross-Connections and Backflow
Prevention Regulations where a cross-connection is permitted.
   (C)   If the water purveyor requires that the public water system be
protected by containment, the owner shall be responsible for the installation
and maintenance of the required backflow preventer assembly(blies) and for
water quality beyond the outlet end of the containment assembly(blies) and
could utilize fixture isolation protection for that purpose, The owner may also
seek local public health officials, or personnel from the water purveyor, or
their designated representatives, or certified/licensed private sector
personnel to assist him or her in the survey of their facility(ties) and to
assist him or her in the selection of proper containment assemblies and/or
fixture isolation devices, and the proper installation of these assemblies/
devices.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.50 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Water purveyor.
      (1)   On new installations, the water purveyor will provide an on-site
evaluation and/or inspection of plans in order to determine the type of
backflow preventer assembly(blies), if any, that will be required based on
actual or potential cross-connections and the degree of health hazards.
      (2)   For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the water
purveyor will perform evaluations and inspections of plans and/or premises for
actual and potential cross-connections and backflow conditions and inform the
owner by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary, the method of
achieving the correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made.
Ordinarily, 90 days will be allowed. However, this time period may be shortened
depending upon the degree of hazard involved and the history of the device(s)/
assembly(blies) already in place.
      (3)   The water purveyor will not allow any actual or potential cross-
connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved air gap or backflow
preventer assembly(blies) and which must be regularly tested or inspected to
ensure satisfactory operation,
      (4)   The water purveyor shall inform the owner by letter of any failure
to comply prior to a re-inspection. The water purveyor will allow an additional
15 days for the correction(s). In the event the owner fails to comply with the
necessary correction(s) by the time of a second re-inspection, the water
purveyor will inform the owner by letter, that the water service to the owner’
      (5)   If the water purveyor determines at any time that a serious threat
to the public health exists, water service will be terminated immediately.
      (6)   The water purveyor will conduct initial and follow-up inspections
to determine the nature of existing or potential hazards. The main focus will
be on high hazard industries and commercial premises.
      (7)   The water purveyor must report any backflow incident(s) occurring
in the public water system as soon as possible but no later than 24 hours after
the incident to the WVBPH.
   (B)   Owner.
      (1)   The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of
all actual or potential cross-connections and/or backflow conditions on his or
her premises.
      (2)   The owner, after having been informed by a letter from the water
purveyor, shall at his or her expense, install, maintain and test, or have
tested, any and all backflow preventer assemblies on his or her premises.
      (3)   The owner shall correct within 30 days any malfunction of an air
gap or backflow preventer assembly(blies) which is revealed by periodic
inspection or testing. This may also involve the removal and/or replacement of
the backflow preventer assembly(blies).
      (4)   The owner shall inform the water purveyor of any proposed or
modified cross-connections and also any existing cross-connections of which the
owner is aware, but have not been found by the water purveyor.
      (5)   The owner shall not install a bypass around any backflow preventer
assembly unless there is a backflow preventer assembly of the same type on the
bypass. Owners who cannot shut down operation for testing of the assembly
(blies) must supply additional assemblies necessary to allow testing to take
place.
      (6)   The owner shall install only backflow preventer assemblies approved
by the water purveyor or the WVBPH.
      (7)   The owner shall install backflow preventer assemblies in a manner
approved by the water purveyor and general industry standards.
      (8)   Any owner having a private well or other auxiliary water source
must have be approval of the water purveyor and the WVBPH if the well or source
is cross-connected to the water purveyor’s system. Permission to cross-connect
may be denied. The owner may be required to install a backflow preventer
assembly at the service entrance if a private water source is maintained, even
if it is not cross-connected to the water purveyor’s system.
      (9)   In the event the owner installs plumbing to provide portable water
for domestic purposes which is on the water purveyor’s side of a backflow
preventer assembly, such plumbing must have its own backflow preventer assembly
installed.
      (10)   The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for
service, permits, periodic assembly testing, retesting in the case that a
backflow preventer assembly fails to operate correctly, and follow-up re-
inspections for noncompliance with water purveyor or WVBPH requirements.
      (11)   The owner must maintain for a minimum of three years records of
installation and removal, all testing, repair and maintenance for all
assemblies/devices in the owner’s water distribution system(s).
      (12)   The owner will report any backflow incident(s) occurring in their
facility(ties)/building(s) as soon as possible but no later than 24 hours after
the incident to the water purveyor and to the WVBPH. Also, the owner must
maintain for a minimum of three years all records and reports of all backflow
incidents occurring in their facility(ties)/building(s). These records and
reports are to be made available to the water purveyor and/or WVBPH upon
request.
      (13)   The city strongly recommends that the owner install vacuum
breakers on all hose-bib faucets (i.e., garden hose or outdoor faucets) that do
not have an anti-siphon unit or are not anti-siphon protected.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.51 DEGREE OF HAZARD.
   (A)   The water purveyor recognizes the threat to the public water system
arising from cross-connections and backflow conditions.
   (B)   All threats will be classified by degree of hazard which will
determine the requirements for the installation of approved backflow preventer
assemblies.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.52 EXISTING IN-USE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   Any existing backflow preventer assembly shall be allowed by the water
purveyor to continue in service unless the degree of hazard is such as to
supersede the effectiveness of the present backflow preventer assembly, or
there is an unreasonable risk to the public health. Where the degree of hazard
has increased, as in the case of a residential installation converting to a
business establishment, any existing backflow preventer assemblies must be
upgraded to a reduced pressure principle assembly, or a reduced pressure
principle assembly must be installed in the event that no backflow preventer
assembly is present.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.53 PERIODIC TESTING.
   (A)   Backflow preventer assemblies shall be tested and inspected at least
annually.
   (B)   Periodic testing shall be performed by a WVBPH certified tester. This
testing will be done at the owner’s expense.
   (C)   Any backflow preventer assembly which fails during a periodic test
will be repaired or replaced. When repairs are necessary, upon completion of
the repair, the assembly will be retested at the owner’s expense to ensure
correct operation. High hazard situations will not be allowed to continue
unprotected if the backflow preventer assembly fails the periodic test and
cannot be repaired immediately. In other situations, a compliance date of not
more than 30 days after the test date may be established. The owner is
responsible for the costs of all testing, repair service, replacement parts or
a replacement assembly. Parallel installation of two assemblies is an effective
means of the owner ensuring uninterrupted water service during testing or
repair of one of the assemblies and is strongly recommended when the owner
desires such continuity.
   (D)   Backflow preventer assemblies will be tested more frequently than
specified in division (A) above in cases where there is a history of test
failures and the water purveyor feels that due to the degree of hazard
involved, additional testing is warranted. Cost of the additional tests will be
born by the owner.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.54 RECORDS.
   (A)   The water purveyor will initiate and maintain (update) the following:
      (1)   Master files on customer evaluations and/or inspections of cross-
connections and backflow conditions;
      (2)   Master files on all customer backflow preventer assemblies;
      (3)   Master files on customer backflow preventer tests, repairs and
replacements. Records for replaced backflow preventer shall be maintained for a
period of one year after the date of removal from service;
      (4)   Records and reports of any backflow incident(s) occurring in the
public or consumer water systems shall be maintained for at least three years
after the date of the incident; and
      (5)   Copies of any of the above and other records and/or reports
supplied to the WVBPH. This material shall be maintained for at least three
years after submission.
   (B)   Upon request, the water purveyor will submit records of inspection and
noncompliance, surveys, tests results and/or corrective actions, and backflow
incident reports to the State Bureau for Public Health.
(Ord. O-27, passed 3-3-2005)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   For any violation of §
51.07, a penalty of an amount set by Council from time to time shall be
imposed, the amount paid forfeited and the supply of water cut off until the
fine is paid.
(1991 Code, § 20-7)
   (C)   Any person, not authorized by the Committee, who shall be found
tapping the water mains or turning on the water in violation of §
51.09, shall be fined an amount set by Council from time to time, and the
introduction of the water shall not be allowed until the fine is paid.
(1991 Code, § 20-9)
   (D)   Any person violating §
51.17 shall be fined an amount set by Council from time to time and may be
imprisoned in the city jail not exceeding 30 days.
(1991 Code, § 20-17)
(Ord. 111, passed 4-1-2010)
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS AND SEWAGE
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Unsanitary discharges
   
52.03   Private sewage disposal systems
   
52.04   Building sewer permits
   
52.05   Prohibited discharges
   
52.06   Tampering with equipment
   
52.07   Authorized employees permitted to enter premises
   
52.08   Rates; schedule
Sanitary Board
   
52.25   Established; composition; qualifications, appointment and term of
members; vacancies
   
52.26   Eligibility of city personnel
   
52.27   Officers and by-laws
   
52.28   Compensation of members and allowances for expenses; bond of Treasurer
   
52.29   Authority as to supervision and control of sewerage system
   
52.30   Statutory authority of Board
 
   
52.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Garbage, refuse and weeds generally, see
Ch. 50
   Grades and elevations generally, see §§
10.08 through
10.12
   Obstructing, changing or diverting streams, sewers, drains and the like, see
§
130.021
   Water generally, see
Ch. 51
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to establish and maintain a sewer system and sewage
treatment and disposal system and to acquire property necessary therefor, see
W.Va. Code §§ 8-12-5(32), (33), 8-18-1, 16-13-1
   Authority of city to levy assessments for sewer improvements, and to
regulate sewer connections, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-18-1 et seq.
   Authority of city to make low cost improvements, including construction,
repairing and the like, storm, sanitary and combined sewers, see W.Va. Code §§
8-17-1 et seq.
   Authority of city to require certain properties to be connected to public
sewer, see W.Va. Code § 8-18-22
   Extraterritorial jurisdiction of city for purposes of this chapter, see
W.Va. Code §§ 8-12-5(43) and 8-12-19
   Municipal sewage works and sanitary districts, see W.Va. Code §§ 16-13-1 et
seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20º C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial prepared cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society and corporation.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle, greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and is controlled by public authority.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residents, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STORM DRAIN (STORM SEWER). A sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted
water.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator for the city.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023)
§ 52.02 UNSANITARY DISCHARGES.
   (A)    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to
be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any part under the jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provision of this chapter.
   (C)   Except a hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and
abutting on any street, alley, or rights-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
city, is hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public service in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90
days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is
within 100 feet of the property line.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   (A)    Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of §
52.02(D) of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Wastewater
Superintendent/Chief Operator. The application for such permit shall be made on
a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the
Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator. A permit and inspection fee shall be
paid to the city at the time the application is filed according to the current
fee schedule approved by the Sanitary Board.
   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator. He or she shall be allowed to inspect
the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the
permit shall notify the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator when the work
is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the
Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department
of Public Health. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than 14,400 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
52.02(D) of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
   (H)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal system
shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023)  Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 BUILDING SEWER PERMITS.
   (A)    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Wastewater Superintendent/
Chief Operator.
   (B)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential
and commercial service; and for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on
a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgement of the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator. A
permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit
and fee for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at
the time the application is filed according to the current fee schedule
approved by the Sanitary Board.
   (C)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court yard, or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
   (E)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found on examination and test by the Wastewater Superintendent/
Chief Operator, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and A.S.C.E. Manuals of Practice (MOP) MOP 60/WEF MOP FD-5.
   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (H)   No permit shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior and
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff
or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (I)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M and A.S.C.E. Manuals of Practice
(MOP) MOP 60/WEF MOP FD-5. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator before installation.
   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made
under the supervision of the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator or his or
her representative.
   (K)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023)  Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including
interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief
Operator. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged on approval of the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator to a
storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the reeling waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to
cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the pubic
sewer;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; or
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   (D)   No permit shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator that such wastes can
harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator
will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities, in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment
plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid vapor having a temperature higher than one 150º F (65º
C);
      (2)   Any water or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32º F and 150º F (0º C and
65º C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator for such materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal,
or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving
waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Wastewater
Superintendent/Chief Operator in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
SLUGS as defined in this chapter.
      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters; or
      (11)   Any waters or wastes having a five-day BOD greater than 300 parts
per million by weight; containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids; or having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the
average sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review of the
Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator. Where necessary in the opinion of the
Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator, the owner shall provide, at his or
her expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the
biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by weight; reduce the
suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight; or control the quantities
and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any
other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment
facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Wastewater
Superintendent/Chief Operator and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
   (E)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in division (D) of this section, and which in
the judgement of the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life to constitute a public
nuisance, the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator may:
         (a)   Reject the wastes;
         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         (d)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provision
of division (J) of this section.
      (2)   If the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator permits the
pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the
plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator, and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   (F)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator, they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or
any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (G)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective.
   (H)   When required by the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator, the
owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes
shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters
and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator. The manhole
shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained
by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (I)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater”, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling
shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to
life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a 24 hours composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD
and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all
outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.
   (J)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the
industrial concern.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023)  Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 TAMPERING WITH EQUIPMENT.
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
section shall be subject to immediate arrest under criminal charges.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023)  Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.07 AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES PERMITTED TO ENTER PREMISES.
   (A)    The Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator and other duly
authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator or his
or her representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes
including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other
industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) of this section, the Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator
or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be
held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall
indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees
and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company
to maintain safe conditions as required in §
52.05(H) of this chapter.
   (C)   The Wastewater Superintendent/Chief Operator and other duly authorized
employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023)  Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.08 RATES; SCHEDULE.
    The rates and charges for sewage and sewage disposal service provided by it
to customers throughout the territory served, are hereby fixed and determined
by the Council pursuant to the sewer tariff, P.S.C. No. 12 and as set forth in
schedules of rates on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(1991 Code, § 16-6) (Ord. passed 7-28-1949; Ord. passed 10-5-1953; Ord. passed
8-5-1954; Ord. passed 9-18-1958; Ord. passed 3-17-1966; Ord. passed 3-15-1984;
Ord. passed 7-7-1994; Ord. 022, passed 2-6-2006; Ord. 057, passed 10-19-2006;
Ord. 155, passed 6-21-2012; Ord. 257, passed 11-1-2018; Ord. 266, passed 11-21-
2019; Ord. 312, passed 4-20-2023; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Authority and duty of Council to establish and maintain just and equitable
rates or charges for use of and services rendered by municipal sewage works and
the like, see W.Va. Code § 16-13-16
   City itself being subject to same charges and rates as established for other
customers, see W.Va. Code § 16-13-17
SANITARY BOARD
§ 52.25 ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATIONS, APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF
MEMBERS; VACANCIES.
   There is hereby created a Sanitary Board of the city, which shall be
composed of the Mayor and two persons appointed by the Common Council, one of
whom, during any construction period, must be a registered professional
engineer, and the engineer member of the Board need not be a resident of the
city. After the construction of the plant has been completed, the engineer
member may be succeeded by a person not an engineer. The appointed members of
the Board shall serve their terms subject to the will and pleasure of the
Common Council. The appointees shall originally be appointed for terms of two
and three years respectively and, upon the expiration of each term and each
succeeding term, appointment of a successor shall be made in similar manner for
a term of three years. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term and such
substitutions shall be made in the same manner as was the original appointment.
(1991 Code, § 16-11) (Ord. passed 7-18-1957; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal Sanitary Boards, see W.Va. Code Ch. 16, Art. 13, especially §§ 16-
13-18 and 16-13-18a
§ 52.26 ELIGIBILITY OF CITY PERSONNEL.
   No officer or employee of the city holding a paid or unpaid office or
position shall be eligible to appointment on the Sanitary Board until at least
one year from the expiration of the term of his or her public office or
employment.
(1991 Code, § 16-12) (Ord. passed 7-18-1957; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023)
§ 52.27 OFFICERS AND BY-LAWS.
   The Mayor shall be Chairperson of the Sanitary Board, which shall elect a
Vice Chairperson from its members and shall designate a Secretary and
Treasurer, though the Secretary and Treasurer may be one and the same person,
who need not be members of the Sanitary Board. The Vice Chairperson, Secretary
and Treasurer shall hold office, as such, at the will of the Sanitary Board.
The Sanitary Board shall have power to establish by-laws, rules and regulations
for its own government.
(1991 Code, § 16-13) (Ord. passed 7-18-1957; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023)
§ 52.28 COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS AND ALLOWANCES FOR EXPENSES; BOND OF TREASURER.
   (A)   Each member of the Sanitary Board shall receive such compensation for
his or her services as the Common Council may, from time to time, prescribe,
and shall be entitled to payment for his or her reasonable expenses incurred in
the performance of his or her duties. The Secretary and Treasurer shall be paid
such reasonable compensation for their services as the Council may, from time
to time, prescribe, and the Treasurer shall give bond in such amount as the
Council may, at any time, require.
   (B)   All compensation, as well as expenses incurred by the Sanitary Board,
its officers and employees, shall be paid solely from funds provided under the
authority of W.Va. Code Ch. 16, Art.13.
(1991 Code, § 16-14) (Ord. passed 7-18-1957; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023)
§ 52.29 AUTHORITY AS TO SUPERVISION AND CONTROL OF SEWERAGE SYSTEM.
   The construction, acquisition, improvement, equipment, custody, operation
and maintenance of all works for the collection, treatment and disposal of
sewage within or without the corporate limits of the city, the collection of
revenues therefrom for the services rendered thereby and the employment of all
engineers, architects, inspectors, superintendents, managers, collectors,
attorneys and other personnel, as, in the judgment of the Sanitary Board, may
be necessary to the execution of its powers and duties, shall be under the
supervision and control of the Sanitary Board.
(1991 Code, § 16-15) (Ord. passed 7-18-1957; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023)
§ 52.30 STATUTORY AUTHORITY OF BOARD.
   The Sanitary Board shall have, in addition to the powers enumerated herein,
all other powers provided for such boards by W.Va. Code Ch. 16, Art. 13.
(1991 Code, § 16-16) (Ord. passed 7-18-1957; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)    Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except
§
52.04 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in division (A) of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $100 for
each violation. Each 24-hour period, in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city
by reason of such violation.
(Ord. 262, passed 8-15-2019; Ord. 314, passed 5-4-2023)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
      
72.   OPERATION OF VEHICLES
      
73.   BICYCLES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   PEDESTRIANS
      
75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
76.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Adoption by Reference of State Motor Vehicle Laws
   
70.01   Adoption of state law
Parties, Procedure Upon Arrest and Reports in Criminal Cases
   
70.15   Parties to a crime
   
70.16   Offenses by persons owning or controlling vehicles
   
70.17   When person arrested must be taken immediately before a justice of the
peace or court
   
70.18   When person arrested to be given five days’ notice to appear in court
   
70.19   Procedure prescribed by article not exclusive
   
70.20   Form for and records of books of traffic citations
   
70.21   Disposition and records of traffic citations
   
70.22   Record of traffic cases
   
70.23   Guaranteed arrest bond certificates as cash bail
Municipal Traffic School
   
70.35   Findings of the Council
   
70.36   Establishment and name
   
70.37   Powers and authorities of the Municipal Traffic School
   
70.38   Facilities for conducting Municipal Traffic School
   
70.39   Municipal Court Clerk
   
70.40   Course enrollment fees
   
70.41   Times for course offering
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Parking Authority, see §§
33.110 through
33.116
   Recording of traffic cases, see §
37.06
   Riding upon fire apparatus, see §
92.039
   Traffic Violations Bureau, see §
37.06
   Trains exceeding speed limits, see §
130.020
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to provide for the use of the city’s streets, roads and
ways, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-12-2, 8-12-5(4)
   Authority to adopt traffic regulations not inconsistent with state law, see
W.Va. Code §§ 17C-2-7, 17C-2-8, 17C-6-3, 17C-8-5
   Motor vehicles registration, certificate of title and the like, see W.Va.
Code §§ 17A-1-1 et seq.
   Operators’ and chauffeurs’ licenses, see W.Va. Code §§ 17B-1-1 et seq.
   State inspection of vehicles, see W.Va. Code §§ 17C-16-1 et seq.
   State Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Law, see W.Va. Code §§ 17D-1-1 et
seq.
   Traffic regulations and laws of the road, see W.Va. Code §§ 17C-1-1 et seq.
ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF STATE MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS
§ 70.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   There is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code to the
same extent as if the same were copied verbatim herein all provisions of W.Va.
Code Ch. 17, Ch. 17A, Ch. 17B, Ch. 17C and Ch. 17D, as amended or as may
hereafter be amended by the legislature of the state, to the extent that the
same may be made legally applicable within the corporate limits of the city. In
case of conflict between the provisions of the adopted portions of the code of
the state and the provisions of this Traffic Code, the provisions of the former
shall be binding and controlling and the provisions of this Traffic Code shall
be considered modified and amended to include the conflicting state code
provisions. Any violations of the West Virginia Code provisions, which are not
specifically made violations of this Traffic Code, may be pleaded in warrants
as violations of this Traffic Code under this section.
(1991 Code, § 19-152) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979; Ord. passed 3-6-1986)
PARTIES, PROCEDURE UPON ARREST AND REPORTS IN CRIMINAL CASES
§ 70.15 PARTIES TO A CRIME.
   Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit or
knowingly aids or abets in the commission of, any act declared herein to be a
crime, whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons or
as a principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense, and every
person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes,
coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any provision of this
Traffic Code is likewise guilty of such offense.
(1991 Code, § 19-143) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.16 OFFENSES BY PERSONS OWNING OR CONTROLLING VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for the owner, or any other person, employing or otherwise
directing the driver of any vehicle to require or knowingly to permit the
operation of such vehicle upon a highway in any manner contrary to law.
(1991 Code, § 19-144) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.17 WHEN PERSON ARRESTED MUST BE TAKEN IMMEDIATELY BEFORE A JUSTICE OF THE
PEACE OR COURT.
   Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of this Traffic Code
punishable as a misdemeanor, the arrested person shall be immediately taken
before a Magistrate within the county or before the Municipal Court and who has
jurisdiction of such offense and is nearest or most accessible with reference
to the time and place where said arrest is made, in any of the following cases:
   (A)   When a person arrested demands an immediate appearance before such
Magistrate or court;
   (B)   When the person is arrested upon a charge of driving while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs; and
   (C)   In any other event when the person arrested refuses to give his or her
written promise to appear in court as hereinafter provided.
(1991 Code, § 19-145)
§ 70.18 WHEN PERSON ARRESTED TO BE GIVEN FIVE DAYS’ NOTICE TO APPEAR IN COURT.
   (A)   Whenever a person is arrested for any violation of this Traffic Code
punishable as a misdemeanor, and such person is not immediately taken before
the Municipal Court of the city as hereinbefore required, the arresting officer
shall prepare written notice to appear in court containing the name and address
of such person, the license number of his or her vehicle, if any, the offense
charged, and the time and place when and where such person shall appear in
court.
   (B)   The time specified in said notice to appear must be at least five days
after such arrest unless the person arrested shall demand an earlier hearing.
   (C)   The place specified in said notice to appear must be before the
Municipal Court of the city.
   (D)   (1)   The arrested person, in order to secure release, as provided in
this section, must accept a copy of the written notice prepared by the
arresting officer.
      (2)   The officer shall deliver a copy of the notice to the person
promising to appear.
   (E)   Thereupon, said officer shall forthwith release the person arrested
from custody.
(1991 Code, § 19-146)
§ 70.19 PROCEDURE PRESCRIBED BY ARTICLE NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The following provisions of this subchapter shall govern all police officers
in making arrests without a warrant for violations of this Traffic Code, but
the procedure prescribed herein shall not otherwise be exclusive of any other
method prescribed by law for the arrest and prosecution of a person for an
offense of like grade.
(1991 Code, § 19-147)
§ 70.20 FORM FOR AND RECORDS OF BOOKS OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS.
   (A)   Every traffic-enforcement agency in this state shall provide in
appropriate form traffic citations containing notices to appear which shall be
issued in books with citations, in quadruplicate and meeting the requirements
of this subchapter.
   (B)   The chief administrative officer of every such traffic-enforcement
agency shall be responsible for the issuance of such books and shall maintain a
record of every such book and each citation contained therein issued to
individual members of the traffic-enforcement agency and shall require and
retain a receipt for every book so issued.
(1991 Code, § 19-148)
§ 70.21 DISPOSITION AND RECORDS OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS.
   (A)   Every traffic-enforcement officer upon issuing a traffic citation to
an alleged violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of this state or
of any traffic ordinance of any city or town shall deposit the original or a
copy of such traffic citation with the Municipal Court of the city.
   (B)   Upon the deposit of the original or a copy of such traffic citation
with the Municipal Court of the city as aforesaid, said original or copy of
such traffic citation may be disposed of only by trial in said Court or other
official action by a Judge of said Court, including forfeiture of the bail by
the person to whom such traffic citation has been issued by the traffic-
enforcement officer.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any traffic-
enforcement officer or other officer or public employee to dispose of a traffic
citation or copies thereof or of the record of the issuance of the same in a
manner other than as required herein.
   (D)   The chief administrative officer of every traffic-enforcement agency
shall require the return to him or her of a copy of every traffic citation
issued by an officer under his or her supervision to an alleged violator of any
traffic law or ordinance and of all copies of every traffic citation which has
been spoiled or upon which any entry has been made and not issued to an alleged
violator.
   (E)   Such chief administrative officer shall also maintain or cause to be
maintained in connection with every traffic citation issued by an officer under
his or her supervision a record of the disposition of the charge by the court
in which the original or copy of the traffic citation was deposited.
(1991 Code, § 19-149)
§ 70.22 RECORD OF TRAFFIC CASES.
   The Municipal Court of the city shall keep or cause to be kept a record of
every traffic complaint or other legal form of traffic charge deposited with or
presented to said Court, and shall keep a record of every official action by
said court in reference thereto, including, but not limited to, a record of
every conviction, forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal and the amount of
fine or forfeiture resulting from every said traffic complaint deposited with
or presented to said court.
(1991 Code, § 19-150)
§ 70.23 GUARANTEED ARREST BOND CERTIFICATES AS CASH BAIL.
   (A)   Any guaranteed arrest bond certificate of any surety company licensed
to do business by the Insurance Commissioner, shall, when presented by the
person whose signature appears thereon, be accepted in lieu of cash bail in an
amount set by Council from time to time, as a bail bond, to guarantee the
appearance of such person in the Municipal Court of the city at such time as
may be required by the court when such person is arrested for violation of any
motor vehicle law of the state or traffic ordinance of any municipality in the
state (except for the offenses of reckless driving, driving while intoxicated
or for any felony) committed prior to the date of expiration shown on such
guaranteed arrest bond certificate; provided, that any such guaranteed arrest
bond certificate so presented as a bail bond in any court in the state shall be
subject to the same forfeiture and enforcement provisions as any other bail
bond.
   (B)   The term GUARANTEED ARREST BOND CERTIFICATE, as used herein, means any
printed card or other certificate issued by an automobile club or association
to any of its members, which said card or certificate is signed by such member
and contains a printed statement that such automobile club or association and a
surety company guarantee the appearance of the person whose signature appears
on the card or certificate and that they will in the event of failure of said
person to appear in court at the time of trial, pay any fine or forfeiture
imposed on such person in an amount set by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 19-151)
MUNICIPAL TRAFFIC SCHOOL
§ 70.35 FINDINGS OF THE COUNCIL.
   The Council of the city hereby makes the following findings.
   (A)   There exists within the city, various problems resulting from the
improper use and operation of motor vehicles which seem to increasingly result
in the commission of offenses, sometimes popularly referred to as “moving”
violations, and all being violations of the statutes of the state and/or the
traffic ordinances of the city.
   (B)   An appropriate manner of:
      (1)   Addressing the problems associated with the improper use and
operation of motor vehicles; and
      (2)   Reducing the commission of “moving” violations by operators of
motor vehicles within the corporate limits of the city, is through additional
education of operators of motor vehicles in safe driving practices.
   (C)   An efficient, reasonable and proper manner of providing the additional
education to operators of motor vehicles would be through the city’s
establishment of a Municipal Traffic School.
   (D)   Any and all persons possessing a valid motor vehicle operator’s
license shall be deemed to be eligible for enrollment and participation in the
Municipal Traffic School.
   (E)   In certain instances, the operators of motor vehicles who are charged
with certain “moving” violations of the city’s traffic ordinances but only in
the sound discretion and with the prior and express approval of the city’s
Municipal Court Judge, may be afforded an opportunity before any formal and
final adjudication of such charged, “moving” traffic violations, to enroll in
the City’s Municipal Traffic School, and upon full and successful completion
thereof, to have one charged, but non-adjudicated “moving” traffic violation
dismissed without the transmittal by city authorities of any notice respecting
the violation to the Division of Motor Vehicles of the West Virginia Department
of Transportation; provided, that no more than one such traffic violation shall
be eligible for dismissal in the event that multiple violations are committed
within any 12-month period, all in lieu of any further judicial proceedings
thereon.
   (F)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (E) above, that certain
offenses, being more particularly:
      (1)   Driving under the influence of alcohol or other controlled
substance;
      (2)   Reckless driving;
      (3)   Any school zone offense;
      (4)   Vehicular homicide; or
      (5)   Any offense involving an accident wherein any property is damaged
or any person is injured, then the enrollment in and successful completion of
the Municipal Traffic School course shall not under any circumstances result in
the dismissal of such pending traffic violation.
   (G)   Further notwithstanding the provisions of division (E) above, that any
person who either at the time of the commission of any offense which may be
subject to dismissal as a consequence of the operator’s successful completion
of the aforesaid course, or who otherwise at the time of application for
enrollment in the said course is shown according to the records maintained by
the Division of Motor Vehicles of the state’s Department of Transportation as
having then currently accrued more than six points upon the operator’s driving
records, then there shall be no dismissal of any pending traffic violation as
charged against the motor vehicle operator.
   (H)   The discretion hereby vested with the city’s Municipal Court Judge is
intended by the Council to be at all times exercised in a nonarbitrary and
nondiscriminatory manner in compliance with the statutory provisions of W.Va.
Code § 8-11-2, as amended, and in no event shall the herein vested discretion
be deemed to invalidate the provisions of this subchapter.
   (I)   Except as otherwise expressly limited or prohibited herein, the Judge
of the city’s Municipal Court may establish such other administrative
procedures, rules and/or regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of
this subchapter, which the Municipal Court Judge may deem to be necessary,
however, prior to effectuation, any such administrative procedures, rules and/
or regulations shall be reduced to written form and further shall be subject to
the approval by motion of the Council, and following the Council’s approval of
any such administrative procedures, rules and/or regulations, the same shall be
included within the minutes of the Council meeting during which any
administrative procedures, rules and/or regulations are approved.
   (J)   The Municipal Court of the city shall collect all fees and costs as
are referenced in division (C) above, and as such collection is required by any
provision of the State Code. Furthermore, the Municipal Court shall conform its
prejudgment alternative disposition procedures with the statutory provisions of
W.Va. Code § 8-11-5.
   (K)   Attendance of the Municipal Traffic School of the city for purposes of
obtaining prejudgment alternative disposition of any traffic offense, shall not
be available to any person arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol
or drugs or any other offense for which a mandatory period of confinement in
jail is required. Notwithstanding the immediately foregoing litigation, any
person arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs or any
other offense for which a mandatory period of confinement in jail is required,
who requests to attend the Municipal Traffic School of the city, may
nevertheless enroll in, and attend the Municipal Traffic School; however, such
enrollment and attendance shall not in any event be deemed to constitute any
prejudgment alternative disposition to the offense charged.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-3-2018)
§ 70.36 ESTABLISHMENT AND NAME.
   (A)   Established. There is now hereby created and established the Municipal
Traffic School of the city, which shall be instructed by the certified members
of the Police Department, and as said members are designated by the city’s
Police Chief.
   (B)   Course enrollment fee. The enrollment fee for attendance of the
Municipal Traffic School of the city is hereby established in the amount of
$100. All Municipal Traffic School course fees collected by the City Treasurer
shall be deposited into the General Fund of the city.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-3-2018)
§ 70.37 POWERS AND AUTHORITIES OF THE MUNICIPAL TRAFFIC SCHOOL.
   (A)   To offer a course of awareness and instruction in a classroom setting,
which advocates the safe operation of motor vehicles;
   (B)   To enroll in the Municipal Traffic School any person possessing a
valid motor vehicle operator’s license, who makes proper, written application
for enrollment in the same;
   (C)   To certify in writing upon the request of the Municipal Court Judge,
or any other person whomsoever, the successful completion or alternatively, the
failure to successfully complete, the Municipal Traffic School course by any
motor vehicle operator/enrollee thereof; and
   (D)   To facilitate the Municipal Court Clerk’s collection of the
appropriate administrative fee for enrollment from all course enrollees, the
initial course enrollment fee being hereby established in the amount of $100.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-3-2018)
§ 70.38 FACILITIES FOR CONDUCTING MUNICIPAL TRAFFIC SCHOOL.
   The Council of the city shall provide suitable facilities to the Municipal
Traffic School for purposes of conducting the course described herein. The
Municipal Court Clerk shall at all times have available for distribution at
City Hall, a sufficient number of applications for enrollment in the Municipal
Traffic School course.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-3-2018)
§ 70.39 MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK.
   The Municipal Court Clerk of the city, or designee(s) thereof, shall serve
as the Municipal Traffic School Clerk. It shall be the responsibility of the
Municipal Traffic School clerk to provide any required clerical assistance to
the Municipal Traffic School, and further to maintain and preserve any and all
enrollee applications, course attendance records, certificates of successful
completion and any and all other records relevant to the Municipal Traffic
School.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-3-2018)
§ 70.40 COURSE ENROLLMENT FEES.
   All Municipal Traffic School course fees which are collected by the
Municipal Court Clerk shall be deposited into the General Fund of the city by
the Treasurer.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-3-2018)
§ 70.41 TIMES FOR COURSE OFFERING.
   The Municipal Traffic School course shall be offered through the Police
Department on a quarterly basis, i.e., every three months, however, depending
upon the quantity of course applicants, the course may be offered on a more
frequent basis.
(Ord. 253, passed 5-3-2018)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the
provisions of this Traffic Code.
      (2)   Every person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any of
the provisions of this Traffic Code for which another penalty is not provided
shall for a first conviction thereof be punished by a fine an amount set by
Council from time to time or by imprisonment for not more than ten days; for a
second such conviction within one year thereafter, such person shall be
punished by a fine of an amount set by Council from time to time or by
imprisonment for not more than 20 days or by both such fine and imprisonment;
upon a third or subsequent conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine
of an amount set by Council from time to time or by imprisonment for not more
than six months or both such fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   Any person in violation of the provisions of this Traffic Code; or any
person who has been assessed fines pursuant to violations of this Traffic Code,
who has not paid the fine or fines assessed within 30 days of the assessment,
may be subject to a civil or criminal action in the Municipal Court of the
city, or in any court of competent jurisdiction within the United States.
(1991 Code, § 19-142) (Ord. 015, passed 5-20-2004; Ord. 021, passed 11-4-2004)
CHAPTER 71: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Condition of vehicle while parked
   
71.02   Restricted areas generally
   
71.03   Parking trucks and commercial vehicles in residential districts
   
71.04   Prohibited uses
   
71.05   Right-of-way at parking areas
   
71.06   Violation of parking time limit
   
71.07   Clearing of streets and parking areas
   
71.08   Responsibility of registered owner
   
71.09   Collisions while parking
Metered Parking
   
71.20   Compliance with instructions on meters
   
71.21   Additional zones
   
71.22   Parking spaces; positions of parked vehicles; movement of vehicles
   
71.23   Position and indications of parking meters
   
71.24   Operation of meters; time limits; exceptions
   
71.25   Extension of parking time
   
71.26   Permitting vehicle to remain parked when meter shows overtime
   
71.27   Use of slugs and the like in meters
   
71.28   Willful damage or injury to meters; liability
   
71.29   Parking of bicycles in metered spaces
   
71.30   Exemptions
   
71.31   Regulation of parking other than by meters
Stopping, Standing and Parking
   
71.45   Outside of business or residence districts
   
71.46   Skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades and similar devices
   
71.47   Officers authorized to remove illegally stopped vehicles
   
71.48   Prohibited in specified places
   
71.49   Right and left parallel parking; angle parking; highway signs
restricting parking and the like
   
71.50   Privileges for disabled; qualification; application; violation;
revocation
   
71.51   Signs on workers and church buses; when lawful for such buses to stop
on highways and streets
   
71.52   Parking in alleys
   
71.53   Parking in downtown alleys
 
   
71.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 CONDITION OF VEHICLE WHILE PARKED.
   No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such
vehicle to stand unattended on any street without first effectively setting the
brakes and stopping the motor of the vehicle and, when standing upon any grade,
the front wheels of such vehicle shall be turned toward the curb or side of the
street.
(1991 Code, § 19-9) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 RESTRICTED AREAS GENERALLY.
   When signs with appropriate markings are in place giving notice that
stopping, standing or parking is restricted or prohibited in a given location,
no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except in compliance with the
directions of such signs or markings.
(1991 Code, § 19-10) (Ord. O-010, passed 2-6-2004) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 PARKING TRUCKS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   No commercial vehicle or motor truck larger than half-ton capacity shall be
parked or left standing on any street or alley located in a residential
district, as designated by the zoning ordinance, as codified in
Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances, for more than five hours at any time,
except when actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise; provided,
that trucks belonging to or operated by the occupant of a business premises
located in a residential district shall be permitted to stand in front of
business premises actually occupied by him or her; and provided further, that
any tradesperson or mechanic, while actually engaged in work on premises
located in a residential district, shall be permitted to have any truck owned
or operated by him or her stand in front of such premises.
(1991 Code, § 19-12) (Ord. passed 5-21-1959) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 PROHIBITED USES.
   No person shall stand or park or permit the standing or parking of a vehicle
upon any street or public place for the principal purpose of displaying it for
sale; for the primary purpose of advertising; for the purpose of utilizing the
street or public place for storage or warehousing; or for washing, greasing or
repairing such vehicle; except, that temporary emergency repairs to permit
removal of the vehicle may be made on a public street or public place.
(1991 Code, § 19-13) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT PARKING AREAS.
   All moving vehicles passing a space lawfully available for the parking of
vehicles shall have the right-of-way over parked vehicles; provided, that when
a vehicle is being moved into or from a parking space and is actually in
motion, operators of passing vehicles shall be alert to the movement of such
other vehicle and shall use reasonable diligence to prevent accidents.
(1991 Code, § 19-14)
§ 71.06 VIOLATION OF PARKING TIME LIMIT.
   Vehicles which remain standing or parked continuously upon any street for 72
hours or more shall be subject to removal by order of the Mayor and stored, at
owner’s cost and expense and at the owner’s risk, upon city premises or, at the
option of the Mayor, in public storage premises, if such storage is obtained at
reasonable cost.
(1991 Code, § 19-15) (Ord. 190, passed 3-19-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07 CLEARING OF STREETS AND PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   The Mayor may require that parking sections on any of the streets of
the city may be cleared temporarily for the purpose of cleaning or any other
public purpose, and may cause notices to be given by posting, by barriers or
otherwise; and any person neglecting or refusing to move his or her vehicle as
required by such notice shall be guilty of an offense under this chapter,
subject to ticketing and fines, and such vehicle shall be subject to removal as
provided by §
71.06.
   (B)   Any person who has been assessed tickets or fines under this section,
who have not paid such tickets or fines within 30 days of issuance, shall be
subject to prosecution in any court of competent jurisdiction in the state.
(1991 Code, § 19-16) (Ord. 096-06, passed 4-16-1996; Ord. 019, passed 7-15-
2004) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08 RESPONSIBILITY OF REGISTERED OWNER.
   No person shall allow any vehicle registered in his or her name to stand or
be parked in any street, alley or public place in the city in violation of any
of the laws or ordinances of the city regulating the standing or parking of
vehicles.
(1991 Code, § 19-17) Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   For state law basis of this section, see W.Va. Code § 17C-19-2
§ 71.09 COLLISIONS WHILE PARKING.
   Care shall be taken by all persons parking vehicles to avoid injury to any
other parked vehicles and, in all cases of collision or other injury with or to
another vehicle, caused by the parking of any vehicle, the operator of the
moving vehicle shall be, prima facie, responsible unless the vehicle which is
already parked is parked in violation of the provisions of this chapter. In all
cases where any vehicle shall strike another vehicle in the process of parking,
irrespective of whether such striking shall be in the presence or absence of
the owner of the vehicle so struck, it shall be the duty of the operator of the
moving vehicle to report the fact to the police authorities or to the Mayor.
Any operator of such moving vehicle who drives away from the scene of such
collision without reporting the collision as aforesaid shall be deemed guilty
of an offense under this chapter, irrespective of whether the accident was the
fault of such operator.
(1991 Code, § 19-18) Penalty, see §
71.99
METERED PARKING
§ 71.20 COMPLIANCE WITH INSTRUCTIONS ON METERS.
   At any place within the city where a parking meter is now or shall hereafter
be installed and in place, pursuant to the authority of the Council, the
instructions printed on the legend attached to the meter shall be complied with
by each person using the parking space appurtenant to such meter.
(1991 Code, § 19-19) Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to maintain and operate municipal parking facilities,
including parking lots, curb-line parking, meters and the like, see W.Va. Code
§§ 8-16-1, 8-16-2
§ 71.21 ADDITIONAL ZONES.
   (A)   Establishment by Mayor. Pursuant to resolution hereafter adopted by
the Council, declaring that traffic conditions justify and required additional
parking zones, the Mayor is hereby authorized to establish additional parking
meter zones and positions upon the streets of the city, and to cause such to be
marked, designated and controlled as specified by this subchapter for the
parking of vehicles.
   (B)   Contracts for obtaining meters. Upon adoption by the Council of a
resolution establishing additional parking meter zones, as provided by division
(A) above, the Mayor is directed and empowered to enter into negotiations for
the making of a contract to acquire and install suitable parking meters for the
purpose of carrying such resolution into effect; and when the terms, provisions
and conditions of such contract shall be found by the Mayor to be suitable, he
or she shall submit the contract to the Council and the Council shall have the
sole right of authorizing the making of such contract; provided, that no
contract shall be negotiated or entered into for the purposes aforesaid save
and except upon the condition that the payment of the cost, including the cost
of the installation of such parking meters, shall be derived wholly from the
revenue and funds obtained from the operation of such parking meters, and no
debt shall be imposed upon the city for the cost of such meters and the
installation thereof.
(1991 Code, § 19-20)
§ 71.22 PARKING SPACES; POSITIONS OF PARKED VEHICLES; MOVEMENT OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   In each parking meter zone a parking space of approximately 20 feet in
length shall be marked on the street or curb adjacent to the meter and parallel
with the curb; except, that where angle parking is required, such parking space
shall be marked on the street at an angle of 45 degrees, and the width of such
space shall be approximately ten feet.
   (B)   Vehicles parked parallel to the curb shall have both front and rear
wheels nearest the curb placed within one foot thereof, and the front wheels of
vehicles parked diagonally shall be placed in contact with the curb.
   (C)   Vehicles parked in parallel positions shall be so placed that the
center of the forward half of the vehicle, as nearly as is practicable, shall
be opposite the parking meter. Vehicles parked in diagonal positions shall be
so placed that the foremost part of the vehicle shall be opposite to and fully
in clearance of the meter.
   (D)   Parking movements shall be in the normal direction of traffic
movement.
(1991 Code, § 19-21)
§ 71.23 POSITION AND INDICATIONS OF PARKING METERS.
   Parking meters shall be installed in the parking meter zones in the parking
positions indicated, as closely adjacent to the curb as is practicable without
exposing the meters to danger of injury by vehicles and without interfering
with the free passage of vehicles or pedestrians. Each parking meter shall be
so set as to show or display, by some appropriate device, that the respective
allotted parking position is or is not legally in use; and each such meter
shall be provided with an appropriate designation to indicate the legal parking
time established by this chapter; and the operation of such meters shall
indicate, by proper device and characters, the duration of legal parking in
such position and the expiration of such period and the period of illegal or
overtime parking.
(1991 Code, § 19-22)
§ 71.24 OPERATION OF METERS; TIME LIMITS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Duty of driver; limited exception for commercial vehicles; general
exception on Sunday and holidays; exception for vehicles with parking permits.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to park a vehicle in a
parking position indicated by a meter unless a coin of the United States of the
denomination indicated on the meter for the time for which parking is desired
is deposited immediately in the parking meter at such position; and failure to
make such deposit shall constitute a violation of this section; provided, that
commercial vehicles may load and unload in such parking space as provided by
division (C) below; and provided, further, that vehicles may park in such
parking spaces on Sundays and other holidays an provided by division (E) below;
and provided, further that vehicles may park in such parking spaces upon the
prominent display of a valid city metered parking permit.
   (B)   Indication of parking time; overtime parking. Upon depositing such
coin, such driver shall place the parking meter in operation in accordance with
the directions contained thereon, and each parking position may be lawfully
occupied by such vehicle for the parking time prescribed for such parking
position. If the vehicle shall remain in such parking position beyond the
permitted parking time limit, the parking meter shall, by its dial or
appropriate device, indicate illegal parking and thereafter such vehicle shall
be held to be parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time and
such overtime or illegal parking shall be a violation of this section.
   (C)   Loading or unloading trucks or commercial vehicles. No truck or
commercial vehicle shall be parked at any time in any metered parking position,
unless such parking is solely for the purpose of immediately loading or
unloading such vehicle, and only for such purposes shall such a vehicle occupy
a metered parking position without deposit of a five-cent coin.
   (D)   Time limits. Subject to the provisions for deposit of a coin, as
specified by division (A) above, the permitted parking time in any metered
parking position shall be limited to the period shown on the dial face of that
particular meter, and such time limit shall apply between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays; and, on Fridays
such time limit shall apply between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
   (E)   Sundays and holidays. The time limit for parking vehicles shall not
apply on Sunday or on any legal holiday which is generally observed by business
places located within the parking zone areas, nor to the days devoted to any
city-wide events or celebrations announced by the Mayor; and during such
excluded days vehicles may be parked in metered positions without the deposit
of a coin in the parking meter.
   (F)   Free parking. There shall be free parking for vehicles in non-
restrictive areas from December 1 of each year through January 1 of each
following year.
(1991 Code, § 19-23) (Ord. passed 4-5-1956; Ord. passed 4-6-1961; Ord. passed
9-7-1995; Ord. 96-01, passed 1-18-1996) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.25 EXTENSION OF PARKING TIME.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to
deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter a coin for the purpose of
increasing or extending the parking time for any vehicle beyond the limit
indicated on the parking meter at the parking position of such vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-24) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.26 PERMITTING VEHICLE TO REMAIN PARKED WHEN METER SHOWS OVERTIME.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to
permit a vehicle to remain or be placed in a metered parking position while the
parking meter at such parking position displays a signal indicating that such
parking position has already been occupied beyond the period of legal parking
time permitted for such parking position.
(1991 Code, § 19-25) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.27 USE OF SLUGS AND THE LIKE IN METERS.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section to
deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or any
other metal article or object as a substitute for a lawful coin of the United
States.
(1991 Code, § 19-26) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.28 WILLFUL DAMAGE OR INJURY TO METERS; LIABILITY.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person
willfully to deface, tamper with, damage, open or break, destroy or impair the
usefulness of any parking meter installed under this subchapter, and the
unauthorized removal of any parking meter or of money therefrom shall also
constitute a violation of this section. In addition, any person who shall
willfully or negligently and without authority of law, deface, tamper with,
damage, open or break, impair the usefulness of or remove any parking meter
installed under this subchapter shall be liable to the city or to the owner of
the meter for the actual damage done, for which the city shall have a right of
action in its name for its own benefit or for the benefit of the owner of the
meters.
(1991 Code, § 19-27) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.29 PARKING OF BICYCLES IN METERED SPACES.
   No bicycle shall be parked at any time in any metered parking position, with
or without the deposit of a coin of the United States in the parking meter; and
any such parking of a bicycle shall be unlawful and a violation of this
section.
(1991 Code, § 19-28) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.30 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to authorized emergency
vehicles.
(1991 Code, § 19-29)
§ 71.31 REGULATION OF PARKING OTHER THAN BY METERS.
   Full power and authority is reserved to the Council to designate, from time
to time, in the interest of the general public welfare, parking positions
within any parking meter zone, the use of which positions may be limited or
regulated otherwise than by parking meters; provided, that such parking
positions be appropriately marked and designated as the Council shall require.
(1991 Code, § 19-30)
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
§ 71.45 OUTSIDE OF BUSINESS OR RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Upon any highway outside of a business or residence district, no
person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, upon the paved or main-traveled part of the highway when it is
practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off such part of said
highway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a
standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a
clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a distance of 200
feet in each direction upon such highway.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or main-traveled portion of a highway in such
manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position.
(1991 Code, § 19-125) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.46 SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLERBLADES AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
   No person shall ride or propel skateboards, in-line skates, or roller skates
except in a prudent and careful manner, with reasonable regard for the safety
of the operator, other persons, and the property of other persons.
(Ord. O97-06, passed 12-4-1997; Ord. O99-09, passed 6-17-1999; Ord. 018, passed
6-17-2004; Ord. 340, passed 1-23-2025) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.47 OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of any of the foregoing provisions of this subchapter such officer is
hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person
in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or main-
traveled part of such highway.
   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge
or causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(1991 Code, § 19-126) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.48 PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of said entrance (when properly signposted);
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
      (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
      (15)   Within 20 feet of any mail receptacle served regularly by a
carrier using a motor vehicle for daily deliveries, if such parking interferes
with or causes delay in the carrier’s schedule;
      (16)   Upon any controlled-access highway; and
      (17)   At any place on any highway where the safety and convenience of
the traveling public is thereby endangered.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(1991 Code, § 19-127) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.49 RIGHT AND LEFT PARALLEL PARKING; ANGLE PARKING; HIGHWAY SIGNS
RESTRICTING PARKING AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or
parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 18
inches of the right-hand curb.
   (B)   Local authorities may by ordinance permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 18 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one-way roadway.
   (C)   Local authorities may by ordinance permit angle parking on any
roadway, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on any federal-aid or
state highway unless the State Road Commission has determined by resolution or
order entered in its minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit
angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
   (D)   The State Road Commission with respect to highways under its
jurisdiction may place signs prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing
or parking of vehicles on any highway where in its opinion, as evidenced by
resolution or order entered in its minutes, such stopping, standing or parking
is dangerous to those using the highway or where the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic
thereon. Such signs shall be official signs and no person shall stop, stand or
park any vehicle in violation of the restrictions stated on such signs.
(1991 Code, § 19-128) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.50 PRIVILEGES FOR DISABLED; QUALIFICATION; APPLICATION; VIOLATION;
REVOCATION.
   (A)   A physically disabled person who displays upon a motor vehicle
stopped, left standing either attended or unattended, or parked by him or her,
or a vehicle under his or her direction and for his or her use, a
distinguishing insignia provided for in this section may exercise the stopping,
standing or parking privileges provided in this section. The distinguishing
insignia shall be displayed on the motor vehicle in the manner prescribed by
the Commissioner.
   (B)   A person desiring to have a distinguishing insignia issued to him or
her under this section shall submit to the Commissioner:
      (1)   An application therefor on a form prescribed and furnished by the
Commissioner;
      (2)   A certificate issued by a person licensed to practice medicine in
this state stating that the applicant is physically disabled within the meaning
of this section; and
      (3)   A fee of an amount set by Council from time to time.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the application, the physician’s certificate and the
registration fee if the Commissioner finds that the applicant qualifies for the
stopping, standing or parking privileges provided for in this section, the
Commissioner may issue to such applicant either, as the case may warrant:
      (1)   A temporary insignia to be used by persons who are temporarily
disabled, such insignia to be valid for such period of time as the
aforementioned physician determines the applicant will be disabled; or
      (2)   A permanent insignia to be used by persons who are certified as
permanently disabled by the aforementioned physician.
   (D)   (1)   The two types of insignia shall be identical in size and form
while being clearly distinguishable by color and lettering from each other for
identification purposes. The Commissioner shall adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations in accordance with W.Va. Code Ch. 29a, as needed to administer the
provisions of this section.
      (2)   Free stopping, standing or parking places marked “reserved for
disabled persons” shall be designated in close proximity to all state, county
and municipal buildings or other public facilities. Such places shall be
reserved solely for physically disabled persons during the hours that such
buildings are open for business.
      (3)   In this section PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON means any person who has
sustained a permanent disability rendering it difficult and burdensome for such
person to walk, or any person who is similarly disabled for a temporary period
of time.
(1991 Code, § 19-129) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.51 SIGNS ON WORKERS AND CHURCH BUSES; WHEN LAWFUL FOR SUCH BUSES TO STOP
ON HIGHWAYS AND STREETS.
   Any bus used primarily for the transportation of workers only and any bus
operated by a church may bear upon the front and rear thereof a plainly visible
sign, either painted or affixed on the body of the bus proper, or attached
securely to the bus, containing the words, “workers’ bus” or “church bus”,
respectively, in letters not less than eight inches in height. Any bus used
primarily for the transportation of workers only and any bus operated by a
church and bearing signs in that manner may lawfully stop upon the paved
portion of any highway or street where there is no loading zone or pull-off
adjacent to the highway or street to load or discharge persons; provided, that
such bus shall be equipped with warning lamps permitted under W.Va. Code § 17C-
15-19(d) and shall use such warning lamps when stopped on the highway or
decreasing speed in order to stop, in order to warn the operators of other
vehicles of a possible traffic hazard.
(1991 Code, § 19-130)
§ 71.52 PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   No person shall park any vehicle, whether occupied or not, within an alley
in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten
feet width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
(Ord. 298, passed 5-5-2022)
§ 71.53 PARKING IN DOWNTOWN ALLEYS.
   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley as shown on the map attached
to Ord. 298, except when actually loading or unloading goods, wares or
merchandise and then for period not to exceed 30 minutes.
(Ord. 298, passed 5-5-2022)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
other penalty is provided, or aiding, abetting or assisting in any such
violation shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount set by Council from time
to time for each offense.
      (2)   For a second or further violation, the person convicted may also be
sentenced to imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(1991 Code, § 19-31)
   (B)   Any person violating §
71.27 shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount set by Council from time to
time or imprisoned for not more than 30 days or shall be both so fined and
imprisoned.
(1991 Code, § 19-26)
   (C)   Any person violating §
71.28 shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount set by Council from time to
time or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or shall be both so fined and
imprisoned.
(1991 Code, § 19-27)
   (D)   Any person who violates §
71.46 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined an
amount set by Council from time to time.
   (E)   (1)   Any person who is not disabled permanently or temporarily and
who applies for the stopping, standing or parking privileges provided for in §
71.50, or any person who upon having been granted such privileges wrongfully
uses or abuses them or any person who falsely certifies that a person is
disabled permanently or temporarily in order that such person may be granted
such privileges shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof,
in addition to any other penalty he or she may otherwise incur or have imposed
upon him or her by law, shall be fined an amount set by Council from time to
time, or imprisoned in the county jail not more than 30 days, or both fined and
imprisoned.
      (2)   The Commissioner shall recall and destroy any distinguishing
insignia that was issued under improper circumstance.
   (F)   Any person who violates the parking provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to fines and penalties in an amount to be set by the Common Council
from time to time for each offense.
(1991 Code, § 19-129) (Ord. 298, passed 5-5-2022)
   (G)   Parking tickets. Any person who violates the parking provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to fines and penalties in an amount to be set by
the Common Council from time to time for each offense.
(Ord. 98-06, passed - -; Ord. O97-06, passed 12-4-1997; Ord. O99-09, passed 6-
17-1999; Ord. 018, passed 6-17-2004; Ord. 292, passed 12-2-2021)
CHAPTER 72: OPERATION OF VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.001   Vehicles on sidewalks; generally
   
72.002   Vehicles on sidewalks; at gasoline service stations
   
72.003   Vehicles to stop before crossing sidewalk or entering street
   
72.004   Backing over streets, alleys and intersections
   
72.005   Backing wagons or trucks into curbs; double parking
   
72.006   Speed limit zones
   
72.007   U-turns
   
72.008   Definitions
Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws
   
72.020   Applicability to vehicles upon streets and highways; exceptions
   
72.021   Obedience; required
   
72.022   Obedience; public officers and employees; inapplicable to persons
engaged in highway surface work
   
72.023   Authorized emergency vehicles
   
72.024   Applicability to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn
vehicles
   
72.025   No interference with rights of owners of real property
Traffic, Signs, Signals and Markings
   
72.040   Obedience to traffic-control devices and instructions; official signs
to be in proper position and the like
   
72.041   Obedience to traffic-control devices and instructions; at site of
street or highway construction or maintenance
   
72.042   Traffic-control signal legend
   
72.043   Pedestrian walks and wait signals
   
72.044   Flashing signals
   
72.045   Display of unauthorized devices, signs and the like; such devices and
the like declared nuisance and subject to removal
   
72.046   Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs
or signals
Serious Traffic Offenses
   
72.060   Driving under the influence of alcohol, controlled substances or
drugs; penalties
   
72.061   Definition of phrase “in the city”; phrases synonymous with driving
under the influence of alcohol; validation of warrants
   
72.062   Reckless driving
Speed Restrictions
   
72.075   Speed limitations generally
   
72.076   Minimum speed regulations
   
72.077   Special speed limitations; vehicles not designed for carrying
passengers and equipped with pneumatic tires
   
72.078   Special speed limitations; all other vehicles
   
72.079   Charging violations; rule in civil actions
   
72.080   Prima facie evidence of speed by devices employing microwaves; placing
of signs relative to radar
   
72.081   Racing on streets and highways
Driving on Right Side of Roadway, Passing and the Like
   
72.095   Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions
   
72.096   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions
   
72.097   Overtaking and passing vehicle proceeding in same directions; passing
on the left generally
   
72.098   Overtaking and passing vehicle proceeding in same directions; when
overtaking on the right is permitted
   
72.099   Overtaking and passing vehicle proceeding in same directions;
limitations on overtaking on the left
   
72.100   Overtaking and passing vehicle proceeding in same directions; further
limitations on driving to left of center of roadway
   
72.101   Overtaking and passing vehicle proceeding in same directions; no-
passing zones
   
72.102   One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
   
72.103   Driving on roadways laned for traffic
   
72.104   Following too closely
   
72.105   Driving on divided highways
   
72.106   Controlled-access roadway
Turning and Starting
   
72.120   Required position and method of turning at intersections
   
72.121   Right turns
   
72.122   Left turns on two-way roadways
   
72.123   Left turns on other than two-way roadways
   
72.124   Turning on curve or crest of grade prohibited
   
72.125   Starting parked, and the like, vehicle
   
72.126   Opening and closing of vehicle doors
   
72.127   Turning movements and required signals
   
72.128   Signals to be given by hand and arm or signal device
   
72.129   Method of giving hand-and-arm signals
Right-of-Way
   
72.140   Vehicle approaching or entering intersection
   
72.141   Vehicle turning left at intersection
   
72.142   Vehicle entering through highway or stop intersections
   
72.143   Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway
    
72.144   Operation of vehicles and streetcars on approach of authorized
emergency vehicles
Miscellaneous Rules
   
72.155   Unattended motor vehicle
   
72.156   Limitations on backing
   
72.157   Obstruction to driver’s view or driving mechanism
   
72.158   Passengers in seat with operator
   
72.159   Passengers on running board
   
72.160   Driving on mountain highways
   
72.161   Coasting prohibited
   
72.162   Following fire apparatus
   
72.163   Crossing fire hose
   
72.164   Putting glass and the like on highway
   
72.165   Vehicles parked on private property
   
72.166   Driving without inspection certificate or license
   
72.167   Prohibition against skidding, spinning of wheels and excessive noise
Special Stops Required
   
72.180   Railroad crossings; generally
   
72.181   Railroad crossings; all vehicles must stop at certain crossings
   
72.182   Railroad crossings; certain vehicles must stop at all crossings
   
72.183   Railroad crossings; moving heavy equipment
   
72.184   Vehicles must stop at through highways; erection of signs
   
72.185   Stopping before emerging from alley or private driveway
   
72.186   Overtaking and passing school bus; highways with separate roadways
Accidents
   
72.200   Accidents involving death or personal injuries
   
72.201   Accidents involving damage to vehicle
   
72.202   Duty to give information and render aid
   
72.203   Duty upon striking unattended vehicle
   
72.204   Duty upon striking fixtures upon highway
   
72.205   Immediate report to Police Department
   
72.206   Written reports; required
   
72.207   Written reports; when driver unable to report
   
72.208   Garages to report accidents and bullet damage
   
72.209   Accident reports to be confidential
   
72.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate the standing and parking of vehicles on
streets under city’s jurisdiction, see W.Va. Code § 17C-2-8(a)(1)
   Authority of city to regulate the use of streets, crosswalks and public
places belonging to city, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(4)
   State motor vehicle law relating to stopping, standing and parking, see
W.Va. Code §§ 17C-13-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.001 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS; GENERALLY.
   No vehicle shall be driven on or across any sidewalk or any part of the
street between the curb and the property line. In those streets where there is
no regular curb, the curb shall be construed as the ditch or gutter bordering
each side of the street, except at a public or permitted private driveway or
entrance to private premises.
(1991 Code, § 19-1) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.002 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS; AT GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS.
   (A)   All persons driving motor vehicles over any gasoline service station
driveway across any sidewalk shall use extraordinary care and caution to
prevent injury to pedestrians on the sidewalks.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle from
one street to another across the sidewalks at any corner gasoline service
station or garage unless entering for or leaving after the transaction of
business thereat or unless the vehicle shall be stopped on such premises after
entering from one street and before leaving over the sidewalk of another
street.
(1991 Code, § 19-2) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.003 VEHICLES TO STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK OR ENTERING STREET.
   Vehicles emerging from an alley, private driveway or building shall be
stopped immediately before crossing the sidewalk or the sidewalk area extended
across an alley and, upon entering the street or public roadway, the emerging
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the street
or public roadway about to be entered.
(1991 Code, § 19-4) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-12-6
§ 72.004 BACKING OVER STREETS, ALLEYS AND INTERSECTIONS.
   No vehicle shall be backed into any street or alley intersection or over or
upon a sidewalk, nor shall any vehicle be backed at any time or place upon any
street or alley, unless such movement can be made in safety and without
endangering other users of the street or alley.
(1991 Code, § 19-5) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.005 BACKING WAGONS OR TRUCKS INTO CURBS; DOUBLE PARKING.
   No wagons, drays or other vehicles shall be backed into the curb on any of
the streets of the city, except for the purpose of loading or unloading and
then only where the load is of such character and weight as to necessitate the
loading or unloading thereof upon the vehicle placed in such position. In the
event of necessity to load or unload by backing the vehicle to the curb, such
vehicle shall not be permitted to stand in such position except during the
actual time necessary to load or unload; and if such necessary time will exceed
15 minutes, special permission shall be obtained from the Chief of Police
before the vehicle is backed into such position. All such vehicles shall be
moved to a position parallel with the curb as soon as is reasonably possible;
and in all cases where the wagon or other vehicle is drawn by horses or tractor
and is backed into the curb as herein provided, the horses or tractor shall be
turned so as to face parallel with moving traffic. Wherever alleys are
available, all loading and unloading must be on the alley and not by parking on
or using a street for such purpose. It shall be unlawful, at all times and
places, to park any truck or commercial vehicle in the manner known as “double
parking”.
(1991 Code, § 19-6) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.006 SPEED LIMIT ZONES.
   Whenever official traffic-control signs are placed, erected or installed
pursuant to the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 17C-6-2, 17C-6-3, 17C-6-3a or 17C-
6-5, giving notice of a maximum or minimum speed limit, no driver of a vehicle
shall drive in excess of such maximum speed or more slowly than such minimum
speed permits.
(1991 Code, § 19-7) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.007 U-TURNS.
   No vehicle shall make a U-turn at any place on any paved street in the city.
(1991 Code, § 19-8) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.008 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, duly
chartered rescue squad, police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency
vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are
designated or authorized by the Commissioner or the chief of police of an
incorporated city, and such privately owned ambulances and emergency vehicles
as are designated by the Commissioner.
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is more than 20 inches in
diameter.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than seven passengers
and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than
a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use for business
or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks, or office
buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
such highway, street or roadway.
   CROSSWALK. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway; and any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly
used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosive and which contains
any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by
percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or
of destroying life or limb.
   FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of husbandry.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F, or less, as
determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test device.
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any
load thereon.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict; and
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate
INTERSECTION.
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
   METAL TIRE. Every tire the surface of which in contact with the highway is
wholly or partly of metal or other hard nonresilient material.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a
motor which produces not to exceed five horsepower, and every bicycle with
motor attached.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails.
   OWNER. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or in the event a
vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is
entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the OWNER for the purpose of this chapter.
   PARK. When prohibited, the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PNEUMATIC TIRE. Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support
the load.
   POLE TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by
another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or
pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and
ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as
poles, pipes, trusses or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to
make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY; PRIVATE PROPERTY.
      (1)   PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
      (2)   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Real estate in private ownership without regard
to the manner in which it is used.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails.
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal or device erected by authority of
a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance
of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the highway.
   ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall
refer to any such roadways separately but not to all such ROADWAYS
collectively.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a SAFETY ZONE.
   SCHOOL BUS. Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and
operated for the transportation of children to or from school or privately
owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or
from school.
   SCHOOL GROUNDS. The land on which a school is built together with such other
land used by students for play, recreation or athletic events while attending
school.
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a police
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   SOLID TIRE. Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not
depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
   STOP. When required, the complete cessation from movement.
   STOP, STOPPING or STANDING. When prohibited, any stopping or standing of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic-control sign or signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof at the entrances to which
vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to stop before
entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in
this chapter.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices not
inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body
or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
   TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(1991 Code, § 19-62)
OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS
§ 72.020 APPLICABILITY TO VEHICLES UPON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter relating to the operation of vehicles
refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon streets and highways
except:
   (A)   Where a different place is specifically referred to in a given
section; and
   (B)   The provisions of §§
70.15 through
70.23,
72.040 through
72.046,
72.060 through
72.062,
72.075 through
72.081,
72.095 through
72.106,
72.120 through
72.129,
72.140 through
71.144 and
72.155 through
72.167 shall apply upon streets and highways.
(1991 Code, § 19-63)
§ 72.021 OBEDIENCE; REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful and, unless otherwise declared in this subchapter with
respect to particular offenses, it is a misdemeanor for any person to do any
act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 19-64) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.022 OBEDIENCE; PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; INAPPLICABLE TO PERSONS
ENGAGED IN HIGHWAY SURFACE WORK.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter applicable to the drivers of
vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or
operated by the United States, this state or any county, city, town, district
or any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this
section and subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this
chapter with reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
   (B)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this subchapter
shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while
actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway but shall apply to such
persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work.
(1991 Code, § 19-65)
§ 72.023 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the speed limits so long as he or she does not endanger life
or property; and
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement of turning in
specified direction.
   (C)   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the driver of any said vehicle while in motion sounds audible
signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and
when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted flashing lamp as
authorized by W.Va. Code § 17C-15-26, which is visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, except
that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be
equipped with or display a warning light visible from in front of the vehicle.
   (D)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(1991 Code, § 19-66) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.024 APPLICABILITY TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN
VEHICLES.
   Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this subchapter, except those
provisions of this subchapter which by their very nature can have no
application.
(1991 Code, § 19-67)
§ 72.025 NO INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHTS OF OWNERS OF REAL PROPERTY.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of real
property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of
the owner and not as matter of right from prohibiting such use, or from
requiring other or different or additional conditions than those specified in
this subchapter, or otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such
owner.
(1991 Code, § 19-68)
TRAFFIC, SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
§ 72.040 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND INSTRUCTIONS; OFFICIAL SIGNS
TO BE IN PROPER POSITION AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle and the motorman of any streetcar shall obey
the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto
placed in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this subchapter.
   (B)   No provision of this subchapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged
violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section
does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even
though no signs are erected or in place.
(1991 Code, § 19-69) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.041 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND INSTRUCTIONS; AT SITE OF
STREET OR HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION OR MAINTENANCE.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the traffic-control instructions of
persons authorized by the State Road Commissioner or by proper local
authorities to operate traffic-control devices, act as flaggers or operate
follow-vehicles at or near the site of street or highway construction or
maintenance work, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic,
subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle
in this subchapter. Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1991 Code, § 19-70) Penalty, see §
72.999
Editor’s note:
   For transfer of duties of State Road Commissioner to Department of Highways,
see W.Va. Code § 17-2A-1.
§ 72.042 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the
words “go”, “caution” or “stop”, or exhibiting different colored lights
successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be
used and said terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles
and pedestrians as follows:
   (A)   Green alone or “go”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited under
W.Va. Code § 17C-12-2, may proceed straight through or turn right or left
unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent
crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   Yellow alone or “caution” when shown following the green or “go”
signal.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
or “stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or “stop”
signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to
cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
   (C)   Red alone or “stop”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or “go” is
shown alone except as provided in divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) below.
      (2)   A vehicle which is stopped in obedience to a red or “stop” signal
as close as practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection, may
cautiously make a right turn but such vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other vehicular traffic
proceeding as directed by the signal at said intersection, except that local
authorities in their respective jurisdictions may by ordinance prohibit any
such right turn against a red or “stop” signal at any intersection within such
jurisdiction, which ordinance shall be effective when a sign is erected at such
intersection giving notice thereof.
      (3)   A vehicle which is stopped in obedience to a red or “stop” signal
as close as practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection on a
one-way street which intersects another one-way street on which traffic moves
to the left, may cautiously make a left turn into said one-way street but such
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk
and to other vehicular traffic proceeding as directed by the signal at said
intersection, except that local authorities in their respective jurisdictions
may by ordinance prohibit any such left turn against a red or “stop” signal at
any intersection within such jurisdiction, which ordinance shall be effective
when a sign is erected at such intersection giving notice thereof.
      (4)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Red with green arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (E)   Traffic-control signal located in a place other than an intersection.
In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a
place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be
applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any
such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (F)   Streetcars. The motorman of any streetcar shall obey the above signals
as applicable to vehicles.
(1991 Code, § 19-71) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.043 PEDESTRIAN WALKS AND WAIT SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “Walk” or
“Wait” are in place such signals shall indicate as follows.
   (A)   Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in
the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers
of all vehicles.
   (B)   Wait. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction
of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his or her
crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while
the wait signal is showing.
(1991 Code, § 19-72) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.044 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic
sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.
   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if
none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(1991 Code, § 19-73) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.045 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED DEVICES, SIGNS AND THE LIKE; SUCH DEVICES AND
THE LIKE DECLARED NUISANCE AND SUBJECT TO REMOVAL.
   (A)   (1)   No local authority or person shall place, maintain or display
upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized traffic-control device or
traffic-control signal, or any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device
which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-
control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway any traffic-control device bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
      (2)   This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highway of signs giving useful directional information and
of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (B)   Every such prohibited device, signal, sign or marking is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and the State Road Commissioner or other
authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove
the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
(1991 Code, § 19-74) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.046 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS
OR SIGNALS.
   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any
other part thereof.
(1991 Code, § 19-75) Penalty, see §
72.999
SERIOUS TRAFFIC OFFENSES
§ 72.060 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL, CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES OR
DRUGS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who:
      (1)   Drives a vehicle in this city while he or she is:
         (a)   Under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Under the influence of any controlled substance;
         (c)   Under the influence of any other drug; or
         (d)   Under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled
substance or any other drug.
      (2)   Any person who, being an habitual user of narcotic drugs or
amphetamine or any derivative thereof, drives a vehicle in this city, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who:
      (1)   Knowingly permits his or her vehicle to be driven in this city by
any other person who is:
         (a)   Under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Under the influence of any controlled substance;
         (c)   Under the influence of any other drug; or
         (d)   Under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled
substance or any other drug.
      (2)   Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person who:
      (1)   Knowingly permits his or her vehicle to be driven in this city by
any other person who is an habitual user of narcotic drugs or amphetamine or
any derivative thereof:
      (2)   Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   The fact that any person charged with a violation of divisions (A) or
(B) above, or any person permitted to drive as described under division (C)
above, is or has been legally entitled to use alcohol, a controlled substance
or a drug shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating
divisions (A), (B) or (C) above.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the term CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE shall have
the meaning ascribed to it in W.Va. Code Ch. 60-A (§§ 60-A-1-1 et seq.).
   (F)   The sentences provided herein upon conviction for a violation of this
section are mandatory and shall not be subject to suspension or probation.
   (G)   The re-enactment of this section shall not in any way add to or
subtract from the elements of the offenses set forth herein and earlier defined
in the prior enactment of this section.
(1991 Code, § 19-76) (Ord. passed 9-15-1983) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code §§ 17C-5-2(e),
17C-5-2(f), 17C-5-2(g), 17C-5-2(k), 17C-5-2(1), 17C-5-2(m)
§ 72.061 DEFINITION OF PHRASE “IN THE CITY”; PHRASES SYNONYMOUS WITH DRIVING
UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL; VALIDATION OF WARRANTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      IN THE CITY. For purposes of this city, including, but not limited to,
publicly maintained streets and highways, and subdivision streets or other
areas not publicly maintained but nonetheless open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   (B)   When used in this code, the terms or phrases, “driving under the
influence of intoxicating liquor”, “driving or operating a motor vehicle while
intoxicated”, “for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor
to drive any vehicle” or any similar term or phrase shall be construed to mean
and be synonymous with the term or phrase “while under the influence of
alcohol... drives a vehicle” as the latter term or phrase is used in §
72.060.
   (C)   From and after the effective date of this section, a warrant which
charges or alleges an offense prohibited by the provisions of §
72.060, and which warrant uses any of the terms or phrases set forth in
division (B) above shall not thereby be fatally defective if such warrant
otherwise informs the person so accused of the charges against him or her.
(1991 Code, § 19-77) (Ord. passed 3-17-1983; Ord. passed 9-15-1983)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-5-2a
§ 72.062 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   (A)   Any person who drives any vehicle upon any street or highway, or upon
any residential street, or in any parking area, or upon the ways of any state
institution, or upon the property of the County Board of Education, or upon any
property within the state park and public recreation system established by the
Director of the Department of Natural Resources pursuant to W.Va. Code § 20-4-
3, or upon any property within the city park and recreation system in willful
or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless
driving.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to those areas
which have been temporarily closed for racing sport events or which may be set
aside by the Director of the Department of Natural Resources within the state
park and recreation system for exclusive use by motorcycles or other
recreational vehicles.
(1991 Code, § 19-78) (Ord. passed 9-15-1983) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-5-3
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
§ 72.075 SPEED LIMITATIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed greater than
is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual
and potential hazards, then existing. In every event speed shall be so
controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or
other conveyance on or entering the highways in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
   (B)   (1)   Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for
compliance with division (A) above the speed of any vehicle not in excess of
the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized
shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of the limits specified in this
section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be unlawful:
         (a)   Fifteen mph when passing a school building or school grounds
abutting on a road, street or highway during school recess or while children
are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours. Such speed
restriction shall not apply to vehicles traveling on a controlled access
highway which is separated from the school or school grounds by a fence or
barrier approved by the State Road Commissioner;
         (b)   Twenty-five mph in any business or residence district; and
          (c)   Fifty-five mph on open country highways, except as otherwise
provided by this chapter.
      (2)   The speed set forth in this section may be altered as authorized in
W.Va. Code §§ 17C-6-2 and 17C-6-3.
   (C)   The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of
division (A) above, drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and
crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going
around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow
or winding roadway, and when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians
or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
   (D)   The speed limit on controlled-access highways and interstate highways,
where no special hazard exists that requires a lower speed, shall in no event
be lower than 55 mph and the speed limit specified in division (B) above shall
not apply.
(1991 Code, § 19-79) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.076 MINIMUM SPEED REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (B)   Whenever the Commissioner or local authorities within their respective
jurisdiction determine on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation
that slow speeds on any part of the highway consistently impede the normal and
reasonable movement of traffic, the Commissioner or such local authority may
determine and declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall drive a
vehicle except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
(1991 Code, § 19-80) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.077 SPECIAL SPEED LIMITATIONS; VEHICLES NOT DESIGNED FOR CARRYING
PASSENGERS AND EQUIPPED WITH PNEUMATIC TIRES.
   Subject to all other speed restrictions of this subchapter, no person shall
drive a vehicle not designed for carrying passengers and equipped with
pneumatic tires at a speed in excess of:
   (A)   Twenty mph in any business district;
   (B)   Twenty-five mph in any residence district;
   (C)   Forty mph on open country highway; and
   (D)   Trucks licensed at 8,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less shall be
permitted the same speed as passenger cars.
(1991 Code, § 19-81) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.078 SPECIAL SPEED LIMITATIONS; ALL OTHER VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle equipped with other than pneumatic
tires at a speed greater than a maximum of ten mph.
   (B)   No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated
structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater than the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure,
when such structure is signposted as provided in this section.
   (C)   The State Road Commission upon request from any local authority shall,
or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if it shall thereupon
find that such structure cannot with safety to itself withstand vehicles
traveling at the speed otherwise permissible under this chapter, the Commission
shall determine and declare the maximum speed of vehicles which such structure
can withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating such maximum
speed to be erected and maintained at a distance of 100 feet before each end of
such structure.
   (D)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this section,
proof of said determination of the maximum speed by said Commission and the
existence of said signs shall constitute conclusive evidence of the maximum
speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
(1991 Code, § 19-82) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.079 CHARGING VIOLATIONS; RULE IN CIVIL ACTIONS.
   (A)   In every charge of violation of any speed regulations in this
subchapter the complaint, and also the summons or notice to appear, shall
specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven, also the
speed applicable within the district or at the location and in the event charge
shall also be made of violation of any other provision of this subchapter, the
complaint and the summons or notice to appear shall also specify such other
offense alleged to have been committed.
   (B)   The provision of this subchapter declaring speed limitations shall not
be construed to relieve the plaintiff in any civil action from the burden of
proving negligence on the part of the defendant as the proximate cause of an
accident.
(1991 Code, § 19-83)
§ 72.080 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF SPEED BY DEVICES EMPLOYING MICROWAVES; PLACING
OF SIGNS RELATIVE TO RADAR.
   (A)   The speed of a motor vehicle may be proved by evidence obtained by use
of any device designed to measure and indicate or record the speed of a moving
object by means of microwaves, when such evidence is obtained by members of the
Department of Public Safety, by police officers of incorporated municipalities
in classes one, two and three, as defined in W.Va. Code § 8-1-3, and by the
Sheriff and his or her deputies of the several counties of the state. The
evidence so obtained shall be accepted as prima facie evidence of the speed of
such vehicle.
   (B)   In order to inform and educate the public generally that speed of
motor vehicles operating within the state is being tested by radar mechanisms,
the State Road Commission shall locate and place suitable and informative
stationary and movable signs at strategic points on and along highways in each
county of the state giving notice to the public that such radar mechanisms are
in use.
(1991 Code, § 19-84)
§ 72.081 RACING ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, or aid or abet by
serving as lookout or timer or in any other capacity whatever, any speed race,
as defined herein, on any public street or highway in this state.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      SPEED RACE.
         (a)   The operation of a motor vehicle in speed acceleration
competition with another motor vehicle or motor vehicles;
         (b)   The operation of a motor vehicle in speed acceleration
competition against time; or
         (c)   The operation of a motor vehicle in speed competition with
another motor vehicle or motor vehicles where the speed exceeds the lawful
speed limit.
(1991 Code, § 19-85) Penalty, see §
72.999
DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY, PASSING AND THE LIKE
§ 72.095 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
      (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; or
      (4)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
   (B)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed
of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall
be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
(1991 Code, § 19-86)
§ 72.096 PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one half
of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(1991 Code, § 19-87) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.097 OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLE PROCEEDING IN SAME DIRECTIONS; PASSING
ON THE LEFT GENERALLY.
   The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to these limitations, exceptions and
special rules hereinafter stated.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall give an audible signal and pass to the left thereof at a
safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until
safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his or
her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-88) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.098 OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLE PROCEEDING IN SAME DIRECTIONS; WHEN
OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT IS PERMITTED.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      (2)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in
each direction; or
      (3)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled
portion of the roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-89) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.099 OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLE PROCEEDING IN SAME DIRECTIONS;
LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.
   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless
such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every
event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the roadway
before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction.
(1991 Code, § 19-90) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.100 OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLE PROCEEDING IN SAME DIRECTIONS; FURTHER
LIMITATIONS ON DRIVING TO LEFT OF CENTER OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway where the driver’s view is obstructed within such distance as to create
a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing; and
      (3)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct or tunnel.
   (B)   The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-91) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.101 OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLE PROCEEDING IN SAME DIRECTIONS; NO-
PASSING ZONES.
   The State Road Commission is hereby authorized to determine those portions
of any highway where overtaking and passing or driving to the left of the
roadway would be especially hazardous and may by appropriate signs or markings
on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of such zones and when such signs
or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person
every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
(1991 Code, § 19-92)
§ 72.102 ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   The State Road Commission may designate any highway or any separate
roadway under its jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall erect appropriate
signs giving notice thereof.
   (B)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   (C)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of such island.
(1991 Code, § 19-93) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.103 DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith
shall apply.
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes a vehicle shall not
be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle
where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic
within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such center
lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction
the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation.
   (C)   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
(1991 Code, § 19-94) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.104 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (A)   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor truck,
registered for a gross weight of more than 8,000 pounds, bus, special mobile
equipment or any motor vehicle drawing another vehicle operating upon any
roadway outside of a business or residence district, to follow within 200 feet
of another motor truck, bus, special mobile equipment or any motor vehicle
drawing another vehicle.
      (2)   This provision shall not be construed to:
         (a)   Prevent overtaking and passing;
         (b)   Apply upon any lane specially designated for the use of motor
trucks or combinations of vehicles, or within any section of a roadway posted
or marked as a “no-passing zone”;
         (c)   Apply to any convoy of vehicles of the military service of the
United States or of this state; and
         (d)   Apply to funeral processions.
   (C)   (1)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a
business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade whether or not towing
other vehicles shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each
such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to
enter and occupy such space without danger.
      (2)   This provision shall not apply to:
         (a)   Funeral processions; or
         (b)   Any convoy of vehicles of the military service of the United
States or of this state.
(1991 Code, § 19-95) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.105 DRIVING ON DIVIDED HIGHWAYS.
   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by leaving an
intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an
opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a crossover
or intersection established by public authority.
(1991 Code, § 19-95.1) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.106 CONTROLLED-ACCESS ROADWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
(1991 Code, § 19-96) Penalty, see §
72.999
TURNING AND STARTING
§ 72.120 REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
provided in this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 19-97) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.121 RIGHT TURNS.
   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-98) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.122 LEFT TURNS ON TWO-WAY ROADWAYS.
   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on
each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be
made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the
intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway
being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion
of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
(1991 Code, § 19-99) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.123 LEFT TURNS ON OTHER THAN TWO-WAY ROADWAYS.
   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or
more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle
and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave
the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
(1991 Code, § 19-100) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.124 TURNING ON CURVE OR CREST OF GRADE PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon
any curve, or upon the approach to, or near the crest of a grade, where such
vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within 500 feet.
(1991 Code, § 19-101) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.125 STARTING PARKED, AND THE LIKE, VEHICLE.
   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(1991 Code, § 19-102) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.126 OPENING AND CLOSING OF VEHICLE DOORS.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load and unload passengers.
(Ord. O-53, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 120, passed 10-21-2010) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.127 TURNING MOVEMENTS AND REQUIRED SIGNALS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the
vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in §§
72.121 to
72.123, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway or otherwise turn
a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate
signal in the manner hereinafter provided in the event any other traffic may be
affected by such movement.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be
given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning.
   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
such signal.
(1991 Code, § 19-103) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.128 SIGNALS TO BE GIVEN BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE.
   Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means
of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device,
but when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that hand-and-arm signal would
not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle then said signals
must be given by such a lamp or lamps or signal device.
(1991 Code, § 19-104)
§ 72.129 METHOD OF GIVING HAND-AND-ARM SIGNALS.
   All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the
left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
   (A)   Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally;
   (B)   Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward; and
   (C)   Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
(1991 Code, § 19-105)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 72.140 VEHICLE APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway.
   (B)   When two vehicles enter an intersection from a different highway at
approximately the same time the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield
the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (C)   The right-of-way rules declared in divisions (A) and (B) above are
modified at through highways and otherwise as hereinafter stated in this
subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 19-106) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.141 VEHICLE TURNING LEFT AT INTERSECTION.
   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded and having given a
signal when and as required by this subchapter, may make such left turn and the
drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from said opposite
direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicles making the left turn.
(1991 Code, § 19-107) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.142 VEHICLE ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY OR STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by W.Va. Code § 17C-12-
5, at the entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles which have entered the intersection from said through highways
or which are approaching so closely on said through highway as to constitute an
immediate hazard, but said driver having so yielded may proceed.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall likewise stop in obedience to a stop
sign as required herein at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one
or more entrances thereto although not a part of a through highway and shall
proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which are
within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard, but may then proceed.
(1991 Code, § 19-108) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.143 VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private
road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on
said highway.
(1991 Code, § 19-109) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.144 OPERATION OF VEHICLES AND STREETCARS ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED
EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
equipped with at least one flashing lighted lamp of a color authorized by W.Va.
Code § 17C-15-26, which is visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a
distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle other than a police vehicle
when operated as an authorized emergency vehicle, and when the driver is giving
audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell:
      (1)   The driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and
shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to,
the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall
stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has
passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer; and
      (2)   Upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, as above
stated, the motorman of every streetcar shall immediately stop such car clear
of any intersection and keep it in such position until the authorized emergency
vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
(1991 Code, § 19-110) Penalty, see §
72.999
MISCELLANEOUS RULES
§ 72.155 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing
the key and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any
grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway.
(1991 Code, § 19-131) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.156 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(1991 Code, § 19-132) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.157 OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER’S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle or streetcar shall ride in such position as
to interfere with the driver’s or motorman’s view ahead or to the sides, or to
interfere with his or her control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle or
streetcar.
(1991 Code, § 19-133) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.158 PASSENGERS IN SEAT WITH OPERATOR.
   No more than three persons including the operator shall ride or be permitted
by such operator to ride in the seat with the operator of any motor vehicle
while said motor vehicle is being operated on the streets or highways of this
state; provided, however, that the limitation of this section shall not apply
to a truck cab or truck crew compartment properly designed for the occupancy of
four persons including the operator, and so designated on the registration card
by the Department of Motor Vehicles.
(1991 Code, § 19-134) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.159 PASSENGERS ON RUNNING BOARD.
   No passenger shall ride nor shall the operator permit any passenger to ride
on the running boards of any motor vehicle while such vehicle is being operated
on the streets or highways of this state.
(1991 Code, § 19-135) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.160 DRIVING ON MOUNTAIN HIGHWAYS.
   The driver of a motor vehicle traveling through defiles or canyons or on
mountain highways shall hold such motor vehicle under control and as near the
right-hand edge of the highway as reasonably possible and, upon approaching any
curve where the view is obstructed within a distance of 200 feet along the
highway, shall give audible warning with the horn of such motor vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-136) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.161 COASTING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a down grade shall
not coast with the gears of such vehicle in neutral.
   (B)   The driver of a commercial motor vehicle when traveling upon a down
grade shall not coast with the clutch disengaged.
(1991 Code, § 19-137) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.162 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS.
   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not
follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500
feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus
has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(1991 Code, § 19-138) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.163 CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   No streetcar or vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire
Department when laid down on any street, private driveway or streetcar track,
to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire
Department official in command.
(1991 Code, § 19-139) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.164 PUTTING GLASS AND THE LIKE ON HIGHWAY.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle,
glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any
person, animal or vehicle upon such highway.
   (B)   Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same
or cause it to be removed.
   (C)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall
remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from
such vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-140) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.165 VEHICLES PARKED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to stop, park or leave
standing unattended any vehicle on a private road or driveway or on private
property without having express or implied permission from the owner, tenant or
lessee of such land. The owner, tenant or lessee of such private road or
driveway or private property may move, or have moved, any vehicle stopped,
parked or left standing unattended on his or her private road, driveway or
private property as above prohibited without any liability for the cost of
moving any vehicle, nor shall he or she be liable to the owner of the vehicle
for any damage done to such vehicle in moving it, unless the owner, tenant or
lessee of such private road or driveway or private property was negligent in
removing or authorizing the removal of the vehicle. The owner of such vehicle
shall be responsible to the persons removing such vehicle for paying all
removal costs. Any person who removes any vehicle under the provisions of this
section shall notify the Department of Public Safety of such action, and, if
such vehicle is removed within a municipality, shall, in addition notify the
Police Department of such municipality.
(1991 Code, § 19-141) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.166 DRIVING WITHOUT INSPECTION CERTIFICATE OR LICENSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator, or both owner and
operator, of any vehicle required to be inspected under W.Va. Code § 17C-16-2
(a) to operate, or permit to be operated, such vehicle on any street or highway
without having displayed thereon a current and valid certificate of inspection
and approval or fail to produce same upon demand of any police officer.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except those expressly exempted
under W.Va. Code § 17B-2-2, to drive any motor vehicle upon any street or
highway unless such person has a valid license as an operator or chauffeur
under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 17.
(1991 Code, § 19-141.1) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.167 PROHIBITION AGAINST SKIDDING, SPINNING OF WHEELS AND EXCESSIVE NOISE.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to operate such
vehicle on or off a roadway, on public or private property, in such a manner as
to cause the skidding of such vehicle, the spinning of such vehicle’s wheels,
or the creation of excessive noise (including, but not limited to, noise
generated by a vehicle’s radio or other sound system).
(Ord. 097-08, passed 8-7-1997) Penalty, see §
72.999
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
§ 72.180 RAILROAD CROSSINGS; GENERALLY.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the
driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from
the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed until he or she can do
so safely.
      (2)   The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagger gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;
         (c)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of
the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such
railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an
immediate hazard; or
         (d)   Any approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
(1991 Code, § 19-153) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.181 RAILROAD CROSSINGS; ALL VEHICLES MUST STOP AT CERTAIN CROSSINGS.
   The Council, with the approval of the Department of Highways, is hereby
authorized to designate particularly dangerous highway grade crossings of
railroads and to erect stop signs thereat. When such stop signs are erected the
driver of any vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from
the nearest rail of such railroad and shall proceed only upon exercising due
care.
(1991 Code, § 19-154) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.182 RAILROAD CROSSINGS; CERTAIN VEHICLES MUST STOP AT ALL CROSSINGS.
   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of
any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying explosive
substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, or of any
vehicle owned by an employer which, in carrying on such employer’s business or
in carrying employees to and from work, is carrying more than six employees of
such employer, before crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad,
shall stop such vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail or such railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in
both directions along such track for any approaching train and for signals
indicating the approach of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall
not proceed until he or she can do so safely. After stopping as required herein
and upon proceeding when it is safe to do so the driver of any such vehicle
shall cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity
for changing gears while traversing such crossing and the driver shall not
shift gears while crossing the track or tracks.
   (B)   No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a
traffic-control signal directs traffic to proceed.
   (C)   This section shall not apply at street railway grade crossings within
a business or residence district.
(1991 Code, § 19-155) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.183 RAILROAD CROSSINGS; MOVING HEAVY EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating
speed of ten or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of
less than one-half inch per foot of the distance between any two adjacent
axles, or in any event of less than nine inches, measured above the level
surface of a roadway, upon or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing
without first complying with this section.
   (B)   Notice of any such intended crossing shall be given to a station agent
of such railroad and a reasonable time be given to such railroad to provide
proper protection at such crossing.
   (C)   Before making any such crossing the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same not less than 15 feet nor
more than 50 feet from the nearest rail or such railroad and while so stopped
shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching
train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall not proceed
until the crossing can be made safely.
   (D)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal or crossing gates or a flagger or otherwise of the immediate approach of
a railroad train or car. If a flagger is provided by the railroad, movement
over the crossing shall be under his or her direction.
(1991 Code, § 19-156) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.184 VEHICLES MUST STOP AT THROUGH HIGHWAYS; ERECTION OF SIGNS.
   (A)   The Council, with reference to highways under its jurisdiction, may
designate through highways and erect stop signs at specified entrances thereto
or may designate any intersection as a stop intersection and erect like signs
at one or more entrances to such intersection.
   (B)   Every such sign shall bear the word “Stop” in letters not less than
six inches in height and such sign shall, at nighttime, be rendered luminous by
steady or flashing internal illumination, by a fixed floodlight projected on
the face of the sign or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the
sign.
   (C)   Every stop sign shall be erected as near as practicable to the nearest
line of the crosswalk on the near side of the roadway.
   (D)   Every driver of a vehicle and every motorman of a streetcar
approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at
a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the
intersecting highway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting highway before entering the intersection except when directed to
proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal.
(1991 Code, § 19-157) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.185 STOPPING BEFORE EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from any alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or private driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such
roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-158) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.186 OVERTAKING AND PASSING SCHOOL BUS; HIGHWAYS WITH SEPARATE ROADWAYS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle on any street or highway upon meeting or
overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the
highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children shall
stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus when there is in operation on
such school bus flashing warning signal lights, as referred to in W.Va. Code §
17C-12-8, and such driver shall not proceed until such school bus resumes
motion or is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed, or the visual
signals are not longer actuated.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not
stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or
when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is stopped in a
loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where
pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-159) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
ACCIDENTS
§ 72.200 ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such
accident or as close thereto as possible but shall then forthwith return to and
in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he or she has
fulfilled the requirements of §
72.202. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
(1991 Code, § 19-160) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.201 ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage
to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop
such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but
shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of such
accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of §
72.202. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
(1991 Code, § 19-161) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.202 DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any
person shall give his or her name, address and the registration number of the
vehicle he or she is driving and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit
his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license to the person struck or the driver
or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with and shall render
to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the
carrying or the making arrangements for the carrying, of such person to a
physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is
apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by
the injured person.
(1991 Code, § 19-162) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.203 DUTY UPON STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is
unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and
notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the
driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave
in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name
and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking
and a statement of the circumstances thereof.
(1991 Code, § 19-163) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.204 DUTY UPON STRIKING FIXTURES UPON HIGHWAY.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage
to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take
reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such
property of such fact and of his or her name and address and of the
registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall, upon request
and if available, exhibit his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license and
shall make report of such accident when and as required in §
72.206.
(1991 Code, § 19-164) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.205 IMMEDIATE REPORT TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication,
whether oral or written, give notice of such accident to the Police Department
if such accident occurs within the city.
(1991 Code, § 19-165) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.206 WRITTEN REPORTS; REQUIRED.
   (A)   The driver, or the attorney or agent of such driver, of a vehicle
involved in an accident occurring on the public streets and highways of the
city resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total property
damage to an apparent extent of an amount set by Council from time to time
shall, within five days after such accident, forward to the Police Department a
copy of the written report of such accident required by W.Va. Code § 17C-4-7 to
be forwarded to the Department of Motor Vehicles.
   (B)   The Police Department may require any driver of a vehicle involved in
an accident of which report must be made as provided in this section to file
supplemental reports whenever the original report is insufficient in the
opinion of such Department and may require witnesses of accidents to render
reports to the Department.
   (C)   The Police Department shall provide a form for such accident report
and every accident report required under this section shall be made on such
form.
(1991 Code, § 19-166) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.207 WRITTEN REPORTS; WHEN DRIVER UNABLE TO REPORT.
   (A)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making an
immediate report of an accident as required in §
72.205 and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the
accident capable of making a report, such occupant shall make or cause to be
made such report not made by the driver.
   (B)   Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report
of an accident as required in §
72.206 and such driver is not the owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the
vehicle involved in such accident shall, within five days after learning of the
accident, make such report not made by the driver.
(1991 Code, § 19-167) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.208 GARAGES TO REPORT ACCIDENTS AND BULLET DAMAGE.
   The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any
motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in an accident of
which report must be made as provided in §
72.206, or struck by any bullet, shall report to the Department within 24 hours
after such motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number, registration
number and the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-168) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.209 ACCIDENT REPORTS TO BE CONFIDENTIAL.
   All accident reports made by persons involved in accidents or by garages
shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the
confidential use of the Department or other state agencies having use for the
records for accident prevention purposes, or for the administration of the laws
of the state relating to the deposit of security and proof of financial
responsibility by persons driving or the owners of motor vehicles; except, that
the Department may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident
when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his or her
presence at such accident. No such report shall be used as evidence in any
trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident; except, that the
Department shall furnish upon demand of any person who has, or claims to have,
made such a report or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a
specified accident report has or has not been made to the Department solely to
prove a compliance or a failure to comply with the requirement that such a
report be made to the Department.
(1991 Code, § 19-169) (Ord. passed 7-19-1979)
§ 72.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
70.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates §
72.060(A), upon conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned in the county jail or
city jail for not less than one day nor fined more than an amount set by
Council from time to time.
      (2)   Any person who violates §
72.060(B), upon conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned in the county jail or
city jail for not more than six months and shall be fined an amount set by
Council from time to time.
      (3)   Any person who violates §
72.060(C), upon conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned in the county jail or
city jail for not more than six months and shall be fined an amount set by
Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 19-76)
   (C)   Every person convicted of reckless driving, in violation of §
72.062, may be punished upon a first conviction by imprisonment for a period of
not less than five days nor more than 90 days, or by a fine of an amount set by
Council from time to time, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and on a
second or subsequent conviction may be punished by imprisonment for not less
than ten days nor more than six months, or by a fine of an amount set by
Council from time to time, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(1991 Code, § 19-78)
   (D)   Any person who fails to abide by §
72.126 shall be charged with a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined an amount set by Council from time to time or confined in the county
or regional jail for not more than 30 days.
(Ord. passed 9-15-1983; Ord. O-53, passed 7-20-2006; Ord. 120, passed 10-21-
2010)
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Registration and Licensing
   
73.01   Definitions
   
73.02   License; required
   
73.03   License; term
   
73.04   License; effect of loss, sale or destruction of bicycles
   
73.05   Inspections
   
73.06   Removal of serial number or license plate
   
73.07   Bicycle without serial number
   
73.08   Enforcement
   
73.09   Suspension of license; impoundment of bicycle
Bicycles; Operational Requirements
   
73.20   Applicability of traffic laws
   
73.21   Riding on seats; number of passengers
   
73.22   Riding in public parks
   
73.23   Carrying articles
   
73.24   Lamps and other equipment
   
73.25   Mechanical condition
   
73.26   Speed
   
73.27   Trick riding
   
73.28   Clinging to vehicles
   
73.29   Turns; stopping and starting
   
73.30   Emerging from alleys, driveways and garages
   
73.31   Fitness of operator
   
73.32   Parking regulations
   
73.33   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
Operation of Bicycles and Play Vehicles
   
73.45   Obedience to provisions; duty of parents and guardians
   
73.46   Traffic laws applicable to persons riding bicycles
   
73.47   Riding on bicycle seats; carrying more than one person on bicycle
   
73.48   Clinging to vehicles
   
73.49   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
73.50   Carrying articles
   
73.51   Lamps and other equipment on bicycles
All-Terrain Vehicles
   
73.65   Prohibition of operation and use of all-terrain vehicles
 
   
73.99   Penalty
REGISTRATION AND LICENSING
§ 73.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BICYCLE. A vehicle with two tandem wheels, neither of which is less than
16 inches in diameter, with solid or pneumatic tires, having a steering bar or
wheel and a saddle seat and propelled by human power.
      DEALER IN BICYCLES. Any person engaged in the sale of bicycles at retail
or wholesale.
      LICENSE PLATE. A metal plate or a tag or decalcomania issued by the city
for a bicycle, and bearing the license number of such bicycle.
      LICENSES. Any person who procures from the city a license plate for a
bicycle and an accompanying registration card.
      OPERATING. The use, putting into action or causing to function a bicycle
by a person mounted thereon.
       RENTAL AGENCY. Any person engaged in the business of offering for rental
and renting bicycles for hire by the public.
   (B)   In addition to the above definitions, any applicable definitions of
state law of this subchapter shall be deemed to be included herein.
(1991 Code, § 19-32) (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)
§ 73.02 LICENSE; REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Application for registration and license for a bicycle shall be
made by the bicycle owner in writing, in duplicate, upon forms furnished by the
Police Department. Such application shall be signed by the owner, provided,
that if the owner is a person under the age of 18 years, such application shall
be signed by the parent or legal guardian of such minor owner.
      (2)   The application shall state:
         (a)   The full name and addresses of the owner and, if the owner is
under the age of 18, shall state the full name and address of the parent or
legal guardian of the owner;
         (b)   The name of the manufacturer;
         (c)   The serial number;
         (d)   Size;
         (e)   Number of speeds (if applicable);
          (f)   Model;
         (g)   Style (boys or girls);
         (h)   Color; and
         (I)   Date ownership acquired.
      (3)   The application for registration and license shall be filed with
the Police Department. At the time of presenting the application the bicycle to
be registered and licensed shall be brought to the Police Department for
inspection and examination. Upon filing such application the applicant shall
pay a license fee of an amount set by Council from time to time.
   (B)   A member of the Police Department shall examine the bicycle and, if
the member finds the mechanical condition thereof such that it can be safely
operated and further finds that the statements made in the application are
true, the member shall mark the application “approved” and attach his or her
signature thereto. One application form so approved shall be kept on file at
the Police Department and the other shall be returned to the applicant and the
duplicate forms so completed and approved shall constitute the registration
card for each bicycle.
   (C)   Following registration, a member of the Police Department shall affix
a license decal upon the bicycle so registered. Such license decal shall
display a license number and “CITY OF ELKINS, WVA”. The license shall be
entered upon the registration card.
(1991 Code, § 19-33) (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)
§ 73.03 LICENSE; TERM.
   Each license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be for a period of one
year, to be renewed by owner at the end of 12-month period after issued. The
person in whose name the license is issued is the owner of the licensed
bicycle.
(1991 Code, § 19-34) (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)
§ 73.04 LICENSE; EFFECT OF LOSS, SALE OR DESTRUCTION OF BICYCLES.
   (A)   When any bicycle which has been registered and licensed, as herein
provided, is lost, sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed of, the owner shall
immediately surrender to the Police Department the registration card issued
therefor, and in the case of sale or other transfer of ownership such
registered owner shall furnish the name and address of the new owner.
   (B)   Immediately upon the sale or other transfer of ownership of a
registered and licensed bicycle, the new owner shall apply to the Police
Department for a new registration and license in the name of the new owner.
Upon filing such an application and the payment of a fee of an amount set forth
by Council from time to time, the new owner shall be issued a registration
card.
   (C)   The number of any license surrendered as provided herein, except where
the bicycle has been sold or ownership otherwise voluntarily transferred by the
owner, shall not be reissued.
(1991 Code, § 19-35) (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)
§ 73.05 INSPECTIONS.
   Any member of the Police Department is authorized to inspect any bicycle at
any reasonable time, for the purpose of making a check on the license plate,
license number and serial number, and for the purpose of determining the
mechanical condition of the bicycle.
(1991 Code, § 19-36) (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)
§ 73.06 REMOVAL OF SERIAL NUMBER OR LICENSE PLATE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the serial number of any bicycle registered
hereunder or to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any decal or registration
card during the time in which the decal or registration card is in force. The
Chief of Police is hereby authorized to stamp legible numbers on the frame of a
bicycle, for identification purposes, upon which no serial number can be found
or upon which the serial number is illegible or insufficient for identification
purposes.
(1991 Code, § 19-37) (Ord. passed 9-4-1986) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 BICYCLE WITHOUT SERIAL NUMBER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the city or any dealer in
bicycles operating in the city to purchase, receive in trade or otherwise
acquire any bicycle from which the serial number on the frame has been removed,
destroyed, mutilated or altered, without first reporting such defect to the
Chief of Police.
(1991 Code, § 19-39) (Ord. passed 9-4-1986) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief of Police shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 19-40) (Ord. passed 9-4-1986)
§ 73.09 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; IMPOUNDMENT OF BICYCLE.
   The Chief of Police may revoke or suspend for a period of 30 days any
bicycle license for any violation of any provision of this subchapter, or if
any applicable provision of the statutes relating to traffic; and, in addition,
the Chief of Police may impound the bicycle of any such violator for a period
of not less than ten nor more than 90 days.
(1991 Code, § 19-41) (Ord. passed 9-4-1986) Penalty, see §
73.99
BICYCLES; OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 73.20 APPLICABILITY OF TRAFFIC LAWS.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights
and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by
this chapter, except as to special regulations in this section and except as to
those provisions of this chapter which, by their nature, can have no
application.
(1991 Code, § 19-48) (Ord. passed 4-7-1966)
Cross-reference:
   Parking bicycles in metered parking spaces, see §
71.29
   Riding of bicycles on sidewalks, see §
93.004
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-11-2
§ 73.21 RIDING ON SEATS; NUMBER OF PASSENGERS.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereon.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
(1991 Code, § 19-49) (Ord. passed 4-7-1966) Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-11-3
§ 73.22 RIDING IN PUBLIC PARKS.
   Bicycles may be operated on walks in public parks, but in single file only.
Under all circumstances, the rider shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
using the walk, and due and proper care shall, at all times, be exercised by
the rider for pedestrians. When approaching a pedestrian on the sidewalk, the
speed of a bicycle shall be reduced to a speed which is no greater than is
necessary to continue the operation of the bicycle without the rider
dismounting, and shall not be increased until the pedestrian has been passed.
No bicycle shall be operated upon any sidewalk in any other portion of the
city.
(1991 Code, § 19-50) (Ord. passed 4-7-1966) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.23 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry a package, bundle or article which
prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(1991 Code, § 19-51) (Ord. passed 4-7-1966) Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-11-6
§ 73.24 LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Every bicycle, when in use at night, shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front, which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
by the State Department of Motor Vehicles which shall be visible from 50 feet
to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of the lawful upper beams of the
headlamps on motor vehicles. A lamp emitting a red light, visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear, may be used in addition to the red reflector.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet; except, that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person
use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(1991 Code, § 19-52) (Ord. passed 4-7-1966) Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-11-7
§ 73.25 MECHANICAL CONDITION.
   No person shall operate a bicycle which is not in such mechanical condition
that it can be safely operated.
(1991 Code, § 19-53) (Ord. passed 4-7-1966) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.26 SPEED.
   No bicycle shall be operated, at any time, at a higher speed than is
reasonable or proper, and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable
regard to the safety of the rider and of other persons and property.
(1991 Code, § 19-54) (Ord. passed 4-7-1966) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.27 TRICK RIDING.
   No person shall, while operating a bicycle, indulge or engage in any kind of
trick or unsafe riding.
(1991 Code, § 19-55) (Ord. passed 4-7-1966) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.28 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall cling or attach himself or herself or
the bicycle to any other moving vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-56) (Ord. passed 4-7-1966) Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-11-4
§ 73.29 TURNS; STOPPING AND STARTING.
   (A)   The operator of a bicycle on a roadway, when making a right turn,
shall follow the right-hand edge of the roadway; the operator of a bicycle on a
roadway, when making a left turn, shall approach the point of turning in the
traffic lane nearest the center of the roadway.
   (B)   No operator of a bicycle shall start, slow down, stop or attempt to
turn without first indicating such movement as provided by state law.
(1991 Code, § 19-57) (Ord. passed 4-7-1966) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.30 EMERGING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS AND GARAGES.
   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, garage or
private sidewalk shall stop the bicycle immediately prior to driving onto or
across a public sidewalk or onto or across a public sidewalk line projected
across an alley, and shall exercise extreme care in making such movements.
(1991 Code, § 19-58) (Ord. passed 4-7-1966) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.31 FITNESS OF OPERATOR.
   No person shall operate a bicycle while under the influence of any
intoxicating liquor or drugs, or while physically or mentally unfit to safely
operate a bicycle.
(1991 Code, § 19-59) (Ord. passed 4-7-1966) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.32 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Bicycles, when parked in the business district, shall be parked in zones or
places designated and marked for that purpose. It shall be unlawful to park any
bicycle beside buildings so as to interfere with pedestrians or along roadways
where they may interfere with traffic or with persons getting into or out of
motor vehicles. No person other than the owner or operator shall move or in any
manner interfere with any bicycle properly parked; nor shall any person
interfere with or in any manner hinder any person from properly parking a
bicycle; except, that members of the Police and Fire Departments may move or,
when proper, prevent the parking of a bicycle when, in the judgment of the
police officer or firefighter, his or her action is necessary to properly
safeguard persons or property.
(1991 Code, § 19-60) (Ord. passed 4-7-1966) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.33 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as is practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle, or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast, except on paths or parts of a roadway which are set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.
   (C)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-61) (Ord. passed 4-7-1966) Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 17C-11-5
OPERATION OF BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES
§ 73.45 OBEDIENCE TO PROVISIONS; DUTY OF PARENTS AND GUARDIANS.
   (A)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this subchapter.
   (B)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(1991 Code, § 19-118) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.46 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLICABLE TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this chapter, except as to special regulations in this subchapter
and except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can
have no application.
(1991 Code, § 19-119)
§ 73.47 RIDING ON BICYCLE SEATS; CARRYING MORE THAN ONE PERSON ON BICYCLE.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
(1991 Code, § 19-120) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.48 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any streetcar or vehicle
upon a roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-121) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.49 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the road way as practicable, exercising due core when passing
a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
   (C)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
   (D)   Bicycle helmets.
      (1)   Minors, under the age of 16, must wear a helmet while riding a
bicycle on public property.
      (2)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this section.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AUTHORIZE. To permit and/or to condone. AUTHORIZATION can be determined
either by commission or omission of actions.
      BICYCLE. Every device which does not have a motor attached and which is
propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem
wheels either of which is more than 20 inches in diameter,
      HELMET. A protective, hard gear, designed for the purpose of protecting
the skull in the event of an accident.
      KNOWINGLY. To have knowledge of or to be aware of actions occurring.
      MINORS UNDER THE AGE OF 16. Any minor who has not yet reached the age of
16 years old, until, but not including the day of said minor’s sixteenth
birthday.
      RIDING. Being on the bicycle and pedaling it to move.
(1991 Code, § 19-122) (Ord. passed 8-18-1994) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.50 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(1991 Code, § 19-123) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.51 LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
by the Department which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300
feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on
a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use
upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(1991 Code, § 19-124) Penalty, see §
73.99
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
§ 73.65 PROHIBITION OF OPERATION AND USE OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
   (A) The riding, operation or other use of all-terrain vehicles for
transportation or recreational purposes, within or upon the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parking lots and other governmentally-owned, leased or controlled
property situated within the corporate limits of the city is prohibited.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, it shall not be
an offense for any person to lawfully ride, operate or otherwise use an all-
terrain vehicle upon any private property located within the corporate limits
of the city.
   (C)   Nothing contained within this section is intended to create, nor shall
be construed as to create or form the basis for, any civil or administrative
liability whatsoever on the part of the city, or any of it officers, employees
or agents, for any injury or damage resulting to any person whomsoever as a
consequence of any action or inaction on the part of the city, relating in any
manner to the enforcement or non-enforcement of this section by the city’s
officers, officials, employees or agents.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. As set forth in W.Va. Code § 17-A-1-1(ii).
(Ord. O2001-03, passed 6-21-2001) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to
time for each offense.
(1991 Code, § 19-42)
   (B)   Any parent or guardian of any minor under the age of 16 who knowingly
allows such minor to ride a bicycle without wearing a helmet, in violation of §
73.49, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 19-122)
   (C)   (1)   Any violation of §
73.65(A) constitutes the commission of a misdemeanor criminal offense, and the
Police Department of the city, or any other officer of any other police agency
exercising proper jurisdiction within the corporate limits of the city, is
hereby authorized and empowered to issue a citation and to charge any person
who commits a violation of said §
73.65(A), jurisdiction thereof being in the Municipal Court of the city.
      (2)   Any person being convicted of a first offense established hereunder
shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time, plus
applicable court costs.
      (3)   Any person convicted of a second offense established hereunder
shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time, plus
applicable court costs.
      (4)   Any person convicted of a third or further offense established
hereunder shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time, plus
applicable court costs.
(Ord. passed 9-4-1986; Ord. passed 8-18-1994; Ord. O2001-03, passed 6-21-2001)
CHAPTER 74: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
74.01   Pedestrians subject to traffic regulations; powers of local authorities
   
74.02   Pedestrians’ right-of-way in crosswalks
   
74.03   Crossing at other than crosswalks
   
74.04   Drivers to exercise due care
   
74.05   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks
   
74.06   Pedestrians on roadways
   
74.07   Persons working on streets and highways
§ 74.01 PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS; POWERS OF LOCAL
AUTHORITIES.
   (A)   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals at
intersections as provided in §
72.042, unless required by local ordinance to comply strictly with such
signals, but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges
and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
   (B)   Local authorities are hereby empowered by ordinance to require that
pedestrians shall strictly comply with the directions of any official traffic-
control signal and may by ordinance prohibit pedestrians from crossing any
roadway in a business district or any designated highways except in a
crosswalk.
(1991 Code, § 19-111)
§ 74.02 PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave
a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle
which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. This provision
shall not apply under the conditions stated in §
74.03(B).
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-112)
§ 74.03 CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
(1991 Code, § 19-113)
§ 74.04 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(1991 Code, § 19-114)
§ 74.05 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
(1991 Code, § 19-115)
§ 74.06 PEDESTRIANS ON ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon
a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway or
its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction.
   (C)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 19-116)
§ 74.07 PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to persons engaged in
maintenance or construction work on a street or highway whenever he or she is
notified of their presence by an official traffic-control device or flaggers.
(1991 Code, § 19-117)
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Stop intersections
      
II.   One-way streets
      
III.   Speed limits
      
IV.   Restricted turns
SCHEDULE I. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
Intersection Type of Stop Ord. No. Date Passed
Intersection                             Type of Stop Ord. No. Date Passed
Central Street and Worth Avenue          2-way        O2002-03 - -2002
Davis Street and Delaware Avenue         3-way        -        7-16-1992
Eighth Street and Gorman Avenue          2-way        O2002-04 - -2002
Gorman Avenue and Eighth Street          3-way        -        5-16-1991
Kerens Avenue and Second Street          4-way        O2000-13 1-4-2001
Lavalette Avenue and Fifteenth Street    4-way        -        4-2-1992
Lavalette Avenue and Ward Avenue         4-way        -        10-21-1993
Livingston Avenue and Fifteenth Street   2-way        -;       1-7-1993;
                                                      237      5-18-2017
Orchard Avenue and Pleasant Avenue       4-way        096-09   8-1-1996
Patricia Avenue and Graceland Drive      3-way        -        8-17-1995
Second Street and Henry Avenue           4-way        O-010    2-6-2004
South Kerens Avenue and Tenth Street     4-way        209      5-5-2016
Sylvester Drive and Robin Hood Lane      3-way        O-040    1-19-2006
Taylor Avenue and Fifteenth Street       4-way        -        1-7-1993
Thirteenth Street and South Henry Avenue 4-way        -        5-16-1991
 
   The traffic signal at the intersection of South Davis Avenue and Thirteenth
Street shall be removed and a stop sign shall be installed on Thirteenth
Street.
(Ord. passed 1-6-1994) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   The vehicular traffic on Fifth Street shall be restricted to one-way
traffic east to west from Davis Avenue and Railroad Avenue only. The flow of
traffic on the remainder of Fifth Street shall remain two- way.
   (B)   Two-way vehicular traffic flow on an unnamed alley between Orchard
Street and State Street shall be changed to one-way in a southerly direction
from the intersection of Orchard Street to State Street with a stop sign
erected at the intersection of said alley and State Street.
(Ord. passed 8-15-1991; Ord. 193, passed 5-7-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE III. SPEED LIMITS.
Roads and Streets Restricted Area Speed Limit Ord. Date Passed
Roads and Streets      Restricted Area        Speed Limit Ord.      Date Passed
                       From its intersection
Barron Avenue          with Wilcox Street to  15 mph      O2001- 07 10-18-20 01
                       its intersection with
                       Eleventh Street
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Bell Street            including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Boundary Avenue        including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
Boundary Avenue        Between Sycamore       15 mph      288       9-2-2021
                       Street and High Street
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Boyd Street            including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
Bridgewater Estates                          15 mph      O2000-10  8-3-2000
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Buffalo Street         including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Cherry Street          including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Church Lane            including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Court Street           including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
Diamond Street         Avenue (but not        15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       including Randolph
                       Avenue), and the
                       city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Earle Street           including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Elm Street             including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Fayette Street         including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Gay Street             including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Guy Street             including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
High Street            including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Howe Avenue            including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
Glendale Park                                10 mph      081       - -2008
                       From its intersection
Gorman Avenue          with Eighth Street to  15 mph      O98-05    8-20- 1998
                       its intersection with
                       Reed Street
Grace Circle (Highland                       15 mph      199       9-3-2015
Meadows)
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Key Street             including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Kirk Street            including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Locust Street          including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       From its intersection
                       with West Central
Lough Street           Street to its          15 mph      O98-03    7-2-1998
                       intersection with
                       Yokum Street
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Marro Drive            including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
Northview Drive                              15 mph      199       9-3-2015
(Highland Meadows)
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Oak Street             including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Park Street            including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Paule Street           including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       From its intersection
Pine Street            with Pleasant Avenue   15 mph      O2000-09  8-3-2000
                       to its intersection
                       with Grant Street
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Prospect Street        including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
Railroad Avenue        Between First and      15 mph      079       8-21-2008
                       Fourth Streets
Riverbend Park                               10 mph      081       - -2008
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
Slaughterhouse Hill    Avenue (but not
Road                   including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Summit Street          including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Sugar Hill Lane        including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Terrace Avenue         including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Thorne Avenue          including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Vine Street            including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Vista Avenue           including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Weese Street           including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       Bounded by Sycamore
                       Street (but not
                       including Sycamore
                       Street), Randolph
                       Avenue (but not
Woodford Drive         including Randolph     15 mph      349       1-8-2026
                       Avenue), Diamond
                       Street (including
                       Diamond Street), and
                       the city's eastern
                       boundary
                       From its intersection
                       with Lough Street to
                       its intersection with
Yokum Street           Wilmuth Avenue (at     15 mph      O98-03    7-2-1998
                       which intersection
                       Wilmuth Avenue is
                       presently an unopened
                       street)
Fines For Speeding Violations
Mph in Excess of Speed Limit Fine
Fines For Speeding Violations
Mph in Excess of Speed Limit Fine
0—15                       An amount set forth by Council from time to time
16—20                      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
21—25                      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
26—30                      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
31—35                      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
36—40                      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
 
(Ord. passed 11-21-1991)
Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE IV. RESTRICTED TURNS.
   A left hand turn from Harrison Avenue into the parking lot of the Youth
Health Services building for all south bound traffic is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1995)
CHAPTER 76: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking
SCHEDULE I. PARKING.
Road Area Restricted Ord. Date Passed
Road      Area Restricted                                                              Ord.                  Date
                                                                                                             Passed
County    No parking on north side beginning at milepost 0.17 a point at the
Route 9   intersection with Davis and Elkins College Drive, located 0.17 miles east of                       - -
(Sycamore the intersection with U.S. 33 Randolph Avenue, and thence proceeding in an   087                   2008
Street)   easterly direction to milepost 0.24, a point 290 feet east of the
          intersection with Buffalo Street, a total distance of 345 feet
Davis
Avenue
bridge    No parking at any time within 50 feet of each point of entrance upon the     -                     9-20-
over the  approaches                                                                   (1991 Code, § 19-11) 1962
Tygarts
Valley
River
Eleventh  From South Davis Avenue to South Kerens Avenue                               O2000-11              8-17-
Street                                                                                                       2000
Fifth     No parking on south side from Fifth Street’s intersection with Railroad                          12-4-
Street    Avenue to its intersection with that alley running parallel to, and between, O97-11                1997
          Railroad Avenue and Davis Avenue
Gorman    No parking from Reed Street to the former Ninth Street                       -                     7-2-
Avenue                                                                                                       1992
North     No parking on the east side from the junction of North Randolph Avenue with                        11-4-
Randolph  Heavner Avenue and thence running north for a total distance of 686 feet     O99-12                1999
Avenue
         No parking from Stoddard Avenue to Maple View Drive                          O2000-07              7-20-
                                                                                                             2000
Park      2 spaces for public vehicular parking on south side between its intersection O2000-02              2-17-
Street    with Randolph Avenue; maximum parking period of 1 hour                                             2000
Pine      No parking on north side from Pine Street’s intersection with Grant Street O98-02                7-2-
Street    to its intersection with Pleasant Avenue                                                           1998
         No parking on south side for a distance of 200 feet from the intersection of O2000-12              9-7-
          Pine Street with Pleasant Avenue                                                                   2000
Porter
Avenue    No parking within 50 feet of the corner                                      -                     7-16-
and Main                                                                                                     1992
Street
                                                                                                             5-2-
Poston    No parking on north side between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. from   -;                    1991;
Place     Monday through Friday                                                        -                     11-21-
                                                                                                             1991
Randolph  No parking on the north side beginning at milepost 9.34, the junction of
Avenue    U.S. 33 and Gay Street; thence along the north side of U.S. 33 a total       O99-11                11-4-
(U.S. 33) distance of 528 feet to milepost 9.44, the junction of U.S. 33 and High                            1999
          Street
          No parking on the south side beginning at milepost 9.36, a point 150 feet
         east of the junction with Gay Street; thence along the south side of U.S. 33 O99-11                11-4-
          a total distance of 390 feet to milepost 9.44, the junction of U.S. 33 and                         1999
          High Street
Route 33- No parking along and along the sides of east of the intersection of U.S.     -                     7-20-
55        Route 219-250-55 and Route 33                                                                      1995
South                                                                                                        2-6-
Davis     No parking on east side between Blaine Avenue and Whiteman Avenue            O-010                 2004
Avenue
U.S.
Route
219-250-  No parking in the sides from Chenoweth Creek Road to the Upper Glenmore Loop                       7-20-
55        Road                                                                         -                     1995
(Beverly
Five-
Lane)
 
   The monthly rental for each leased parking space within the city shall be an
amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(Ord. O03-004, passed 6-17-2003)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
93.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Keeping of livestock, fowl and dangerous wild animals
   
90.03   Cruelty, poisoning and injury to animals
   
90.04   Birds and wild fowl
   
90.05   Disposal of dead animals
   
90.06   Hitching or staking animals on streets or property of another
   
90.07   Slaughtering
   
90.08   Animals running at large
   
90.09   Tethering
   
90.10   Barking or howling
   
90.11   Procedure on complaint of an animal that is vicious, dangerous or
infected with a potentially harmful communicable disease
Impoundment
   
90.30   Enforcement and state law applicable
Waterfowl
   
90.40   Purpose and intent
   
90.41   Prohibited acts
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Animals on sidewalks, see §
93.004
   Disposition of carcasses generally, see §
91.021
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate or prohibit the keeping of animals and fowl,
see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(26)
   Diseases among domestic animals, see W.Va. Code §§ 19-9-1 et seq.
   General stock law, see W.Va. Code §§ 19-18-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS WILD ANIMAL. A mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian or aquatic animal,
including a hybrid, that is dangerous to humans, other animals or the
environment due to its inherent nature and capability to do significant harm.
WILDLIFE, as defined by this code, LIVESTOCK, as defined in this code, and
DOMESTIC ANIMALS, as defined in this section, are excluded.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. An animal which, through extremely long association with
humans, has been bred to a degree which has resulted in genetic changes
affecting the temperament, color, conformation or other attributes of the
species to an extent that makes it unique and distinguishable from a wild
individual of its species, and includes and animal that has been bred as a
companion animal.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any person authorized by this chapter or state law to
enforce the provisions hereof, or of state law and specifically including any
officer of the Police Department.
   FEED OR FEEDING. To place or deposit, scatter or distribute any type of food
or sustenance with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing waterfowl,
both migrating and domestic.
   FOWL. Any chicken, duck, goose, turkey, guinea fowl or pigeon.
   LIVESTOCK. Any hog, pig, goat, cow, horse, pony, emu, alpaca or other hoofed
animal.
   MIGRATORY WATERFOWL. Includes those species of birds commonly known as
ducks, geese, swans and other waterfowl falling under the jurisdiction of the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023)
§ 90.02 KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK, FOWL AND DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall keep any livestock or dangerous wild animals within
the city. This section shall not apply to hogs or pigs kept at commercial stock
yards to be sold at auction.
   (B)   No person shall keep any fowl within the city except as provided for
in §
152.180.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023)
§ 90.03 CRUELTY, POISONING AND INJURY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person within the city shall cruelly or needlessly beat, torture,
mutilate, kill, overload or overdrive any domestic animal or fowl, nor
willfully deprive any domestic animal or fowl of necessary sustenance or
shelter. All provisions of the West Virginia Code that are applicable to and
within the city are hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   No poisoned meat nor any poisonous substance shall be cast into any of
the streets, public places, lots or buildings in the city for the purpose of
destroying dogs or other animals.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to enact this section, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(27)
   Malicious killing of, and cruelty to, animals, see W.Va. Code §§ 61-3-27,
61-8-19
   Malicious killing of animals by poison or otherwise, see W.Va. Code § 61-3-
27
§ 90.04 BIRDS AND WILD FOWL.
   No person shall, at any time, kill or injure any wild bird or fowl of any
kind or destroy the nests or eggs of any wild bird or fowl. This section shall
be administered and enforced by the Enforcement Officer in compliance
specifically with the provisions of the W. Va. Code § 20-2-5 and all provisions
of the West Virginia Code that are applicable. Any action that is taken to
catch or kill wild birds or fowl is not prohibited by this section, if such
action is taken pursuant to a state or federal sanctioned program.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Definitions as to game birds, protected birds and unprotected birds, see
W.Va. Code § 20-1-2
   Hunting and killing of birds generally, see W.Va. Code §§ 20-2-1 et seq.
§ 90.05 DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   The procedure upon finding the carcass of a dead animal within the city
shall immediately contact the Enforcement Officer and state the location
thereof. If it is a domestic animal, the Enforcement Officer shall attempt to
contact the owner. If the owner is not known, or if it is not a domestic
animal, the Enforcement Officer shall notify the Operations Department and the
dead animal will be removed and disposed of by the Streets Department. If the
dead animal is located on the property of the owner, the owner shall be
responsible for the removal and disposal of the dead animal in an appropriate
manner.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023)
§ 90.06 HITCHING OR STAKING ANIMALS ON STREETS OR PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stake out any animal on the property
of another without such property owner's consent, or upon any street or public
place in the city or upon property belonging to the city.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 SLAUGHTERING.
   No person shall keep any slaughterhouse or slaughter any animals within the
city.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   Any person who owns, keeps or harbors animal within the city shall
keep such animal confined to the premises owned or occupied by him or her and
shall not permit such animal to run at large; provided, that animal shall not
be deemed to be at large when held on leash by and under the control of a
responsible person.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of an animal
to:
      (1)   Knowingly or willfully allow his or her animal to defecate on
private property of other persons without their consent or the consent of
persons having control of the premises; and
      (2)   Knowingly or willfully allow his or her animal to defecate on
public property; except that defecation by an animal on public property shall
not constitute a violation of this section if the owner of the animal
immediately removes the material defecated and disposes of it in a safe and
sanitary manner.
      (3)   Knowingly or willfully fail to periodically, properly and
completely collect and dispose of any and all animal fecal excrement
accumulating upon the premises of such owner. Detection of odor from the animal
fecal excrement which constitutes a nuisance as determined by an Enforcement
Officer from any neighboring property shall be deemed to be prima facie
evidence of such, animal’s owner or other persons failure to abide by this
section and shall be subject to penalties under this chapter.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 TETHERING.
   (A)   No person shall tether an animal:
      (1)   When the outside temperature, as measured on site by the
Enforcement Officer, is equal to or greater than 90°F or equal to or less than
20°F;
      (2)   In such a manner as to cause injury, strangulation or entanglement
on fences, trees or other human-made or natural obstacles;
      (3)   For a continuous period of time; or
      (4)   That is sick or injured.
   (B)   Animals may be restrained by means of a trolley system, or a tether
attached to a pulley on a cable run, if the following conditions are met.
      (1)   Only one animal may be tethered to each cable run.
      (2)   The tether must be attached to a properly fitting collar or harness
worn by the animal, with enough room between the collar and the animal's throat
through which two fingers may fit. Choke collars and pinch collars are
prohibited for purposes of tethering a dog to a cable run. There must be a
swivel on at least one end of the tether to minimize tangling of the tether
with stoppers on either side of the cable to ensure the animal is not able to
entangle himself or herself.
      (3)   The tether and cable run must be of adequate size and strength to
effectively restrain the animal. The size and weight of the tether must not be
excessive, as determined by the Enforcement Officer, considering the age, size
and health of the animal.
      (4)   The length of the tether from the cable run to the animal's collar
should allow access to the maximum available exercise area and should allow
continuous access to water and shelter. The trolley system must be of
appropriate configuration to confine the animal to the owner's property, to
prevent the tether from extending over an object or an edge that could result
in injury or strangulation, and to prevent the tether from becoming tangled
with other objects or animals. The tether must be long enough for the animal to
move around or be able to urinate or defecate in an area separate from where it
must eat, drink or lie down and allows the animal convenient access to food,
water, dry ground or shelter. No vegetation or obstacles can restrict the
movement of the animal on the tether.
   (C)   (1)   All tethered animals must have access to shelter which is
defined as any natural or artificial area which provides protection from the
direct sunlight when that sunlight is likely to cause heat exhaustion. Metal
barrels as well as any uninsulated metal structures are prohibited for use as
shelter.
      (2)   Animal shelter shall be a wind-proof and moisture-proof structure
and shall include four walls, a roof, a door flap for winter and a solid floor
raised off the ground, containing a sufficient quantity of suitable dry bedding
material.
      (3)   The containment area of any shelter shall be free of accumulated
debris so that the animal shall be free to walk or lie down without coming in
contact with any such waste or debris. A suitable method of draining shall be
provided to eliminate excess water or moisture inside the shelter.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 BARKING OR HOWLING.
   No person shall keep or harbor any dog, cat or other animal within the city
which, by frequent and habitual barking, howling, yelping, crying or squalling
creates unreasonably loud and disturbing noises of such character, intensity
and duration as to disturb the peace, quiet and good order of the city. Any
person who shall allow any dog, cat or other animal habitually to remain, be
lodged or fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure which he or she
occupies or owns, shall be considered as harboring such dog, cat or other
animal. Any person in violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be
fined in accordance with §
90.99(D).
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 PROCEDURE ON COMPLAINT OF AN ANIMAL THAT IS VICIOUS, DANGEROUS OR
INFECTED WITH A POTENTIALLY HARMFUL COMMUNICABLE DISEASE.
   Procedure upon complaint that an animal is vicious, dangerous or infected
with a potentially harmful communicable disease shall be as follows.
   (A)   (1)   Upon complaint to the Judge of the Municipal Court of the city,
that an animal is vicious or dangerous, as defined in division (B) below, or
infected with a potentially harmful communicable disease, it shall be the duty
of the Judge to immediately summon the owner or keeper of the animal to answer
the complaint.
      (2)   In the instance of a complaint of an animal infected with a
potentially harmful communicable disease, the Judge shall immediately notify
the owner or keeper of such allegedly infected animal that such animal be
exposed to any public place whereby the health of humans or animal may be
affected; nor shall such animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the
owner or keeper of such animal except under the supervision of the Enforcement
Officer of the city. The Judge may order proper testing be completed on the
alleged infected animal, by a licensed veterinarian, to determine if the animal
is in fact infected with a potentially harmful communicable disease.
      (3)   If, upon hearing, the Judge finds that such animal is vicious,
dangerous or infected with a potentially harmful communicable disease, he or
she may order a fine or may order the animal a menace to public safety and
order the animal be destroyed to prevent injury and/or death to the public, The
destruction of said animal shall occur immediately, absent a stay of such
destruction pending appeal.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DANGEROUS or VICIOUS. Refers to and includes any animal:
         (a)   With a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings
or other domestic animals; or
         (b)   Which attacks human beings or other domestic animals without
provocation.
   (C)   Upon finding of the Judge of the Municipal Court that an animal is
vicious, dangerous or infected with a potentially harmful communicable disease,
and ordered destroyed, the owner or keeper of such animal shall be liable for
all costs incurred by the city, associated with said owner's or keeper of the
animal's prosecution under this section.
   (D)   Upon finding of the Judge of the Municipal Court that an animal is
vicious, dangerous or infected with a potentially harmful communicable disease,
and ordered destroyed, and if the owner or keeper of said animal appeals the
Municipal Court Judge’s ruling, said animal shall be impounded, at the cost and
expense of the animal's owner or keeper, until such appeal hearing is
concluded. If the owner or keeper of such animal fails to pay the costs and
expenses within ten days, the animal shall be deemed surrendered.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 90.30 ENFORCEMENT AND STATE LAW APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Enforcement Officer. For these purposes, the Enforcement Officer shall have and
exercise such powers as may be reasonably necessary, including those specified
for humane officers of counties in W. Va. Code Ch. 7, Art. 10 and all
provisions of W. Va. Code Ch. 7, Art. 10 which are applicable to and within the
city are hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023)
WATERFOWL
§ 90.40 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and the intent of this subchapter to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the community and its waterfowl, both migratory and
domestic. It is further the purpose of this subchapter to control the feeding
of waterfowl, both migratory and domestic.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023)
§ 90.41 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall feed, cause or permit the feeding of waterfowl, domestic or
migratory, within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any owner or keeper of an animal who violates §
90.11, and whose animal is not ordered destroyed, shall be fined an amount set
forth by Council from time to time, and ordered to pay court costs.
   (C)   (1)   Any person caught violating §
90.09 in the first instance shall be given a warning, stating what section of
the city code he or she is violating and how to comply with the violated
section. The person shall be subject to a follow-up visit by the Enforcement
Officer, at a later time that is adequate to allow the person to correct the
violation, to determine if the person is in compliance with said city code
section.
      (2)   Any person caught violating §
90.09 after being given a warning as specified in division (C)(1) above is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount
set forth by Council from time to time or confined in jail not more than 30
days, or both.
      (3)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
90.09 forfeits his or her interests in any animal and all interest in the
animal vests in the Randolph County Humane Society and is responsible for any
costs incurred by the Randolph County Humane Society as a result.
      (4)   The Enforcement Officer may exercise discretion in citing violators
pursuant to §
90.09. In determining whether to cite under §
90.09, the Enforcement Officer shall consider the overall condition of the dog,
and whether the alleged violator is in substantial compliance with §
90.09.
   (D)   The owner of any animal in violation of §
90.10 shall, upon conviction of such violation, be fined an amount set forth by
Council from time to time.
   (E)   Any person or persons violating any provision of §§
90.40 through
90.41 shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of an amount set forth by
Council from time to time per offense, together with the costs of said
prosecution. Upon conviction of any subsequent offense under the provisions of
§§
90.40 through
90.41, the person or persons shall pay a fine of an amount set forth by Council
from time to time per offense, together with the costs of said prosecution.
Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-6-2023)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Operation of coin-operated music devices between 12:00 midnight and 7:
00 a.m.
   
91.002   Places of assignation, prostitution, gambling and the like
   
91.003   On another’s premises
   
91.004   Unlawful acts; extent of jurisdiction
   
91.005   Unlawful acts; enumerated
   
91.006   Stagnant water and putrid matter
   
91.007   Supplemental nature of chapter
Garbage, Refuse and Weeds
   
91.020   Definitions
   
91.021   Disposition of carcasses and offensive matter
   
91.022   Prohibited disposition of refuse generally
   
91.023   Contamination of water supply
   
91.024   Lawful disposal of refuse
   
91.025   Duty of property owner to remove rubbish and cut grass and weeds
   
91.026   Notice to remove or cut grass and weeds; removal by city
Abandoned/Derelict Vehicles
   
91.040   Definitions
   
91.041   Exceptions
   
91.042   Declared a health hazard
   
91.043   Duty to owner to remove from private property
   
91.044   Duty of owner to remove from public property
   
91.045   Notification
   
91.046   Removal of derelict vehicles on private property
   
91.047   Removal of vehicles from public property
   
91.048   Reclamation
   
91.049   Sale of impounded vehicle
   
91.050   Disposition of unsold vehicles
   
91.051   Disposition of proceeds of sale
   
91.052   Unlicensed motor vehicles
   
91.053   Trailers
   
91.054   Immunity
Noise
   
91.065   Declaration of policy
   
91.066   Definitions
   
91.067   Prohibited activities and exemptions
   
91.068   Measurement, penalties and enforcement
   
91.069   Federal law
Abatement
   
91.080   Enforcement officers; inspections
   
91.081   Enforcement officers; right of entry
   
91.082   Notice to cease and desist
   
91.083   Notice to abate; appeal
   
91.084   Recourse of city when notice to abate is ignored
   
91.085   Service of written notices; confirmation of oral notices
   
91.086   Subchapter does not prohibit arrest
 
   
91.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Abandonment of refrigerators and the like, see §
130.001
   Sewers and sewage disposal generally, see
Ch. 52
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to provide for the elimination of hazards to the public
health and safety and to abate or cause to be abated anything which in the
opinion of the Council is a public nuisance, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(23)
   Disposal of abandoned or junked motor vehicles, vehicle tires and household
appliances, see W.Va. Code §§ 17-24A-3 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001 OPERATION OF COIN-OPERATED MUSIC DEVICES BETWEEN 12:00 MIDNIGHT AND 7:
00 A.M.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or offer or maintain for
public use any coin-operated device, machine or mechanism to procure or
reproduce music or singing between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(1991 Code, § 12-1) (Ord. passed 8-1-1957) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.002 PLACES OF ASSIGNATION, PROSTITUTION, GAMBLING AND THE LIKE.
   Whoever shall erect, establish, conduct, maintain, use, own or lease any
building, structure or place for the purpose of lewdness, assignation,
prostitution, gambling, illegal sale of whiskey, or indecent exposure of the
person on such premises, or whoever permits profane, vulgar or obscene language
upon any such premises, whereby such language may be heard by adjoining
neighbors or persons upon the street, shall be guilty of a nuisance, and the
building, structure or place, or the ground upon which such lewdness,
assignation, prostitution, gambling, illegal sale of whiskey, profane, vulgar
and obscene language, or indecent exposure of the person on such premises is
conducted, permitted, carried on, continued or exists, and the furniture,
musical instruments and contents of such structure are hereby declared to be a
nuisance, and may be abated as herein provided.
(1991 Code, § 12-2) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.003 ON ANOTHER’S PREMISES.
   No person shall create a nuisance on the lot of another.
(1991 Code, § 12-3) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.004 UNLAWFUL ACTS; EXTENT OF JURISDICTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, harbor, commit, maintain or
suffer to be caused, harbored, committed or maintained any nuisance as defined
by the statute or common law of this state or as defined by this code or other
ordinance of the city at any place within the city, or at any place beyond the
city limits which is owned by the city or over which the city has a right-of-
way, or at any other place beyond the city limits but within one mile thereof
and not in any other incorporated municipality, and whereon the powers and
authority granted by this chapter cannot be reasonably and efficiently
exercised by confining the exercise thereof within the corporate limits of the
city.
(1991 Code, § 12-4) Penalty, see §
91.999
Statutory reference:
   Extraterritorial jurisdiction of Council, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-12-5(43) and
8-12-19
§ 91.005 UNLAWFUL ACTS; ENUMERATED.
   (A)   The following acts when committed or conditions when existing, within
the city or within the area surrounding the city and within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, as provided in §
91.004 are hereby defined and declared to be nuisances:
      (1)   An act committed or aided or assisted to be committed by any
person, or substance, being or thing kept, maintained, placed or found in or
upon any public or private place, which is injurious or dangerous to the public
health or safety;
      (2)   All buildings, bridges or other structures of whatever character
kept or maintained or which are permitted by any person owning or having
control thereof to be kept or maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous,
unhealthful, injurious or annoying to the public;
      (3)   All properties with vegetation growing thereon being lawns, weeds,
shrubs, trees and appendages of, or to realty kept or maintained, or which are
permitted by any person owning or having control thereof to be kept or
maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous, unhealthful, injurious, unsightly
or annoying to the public;
      (4)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water and all foul or dirty water or
liquid when discharged through any drain, pipe or spout or when thrown into or
upon any street, public place or lot, to the injury or annoyance of the public;
      (5)   All obstructions caused or permitted on any street or sidewalk, to
the danger or annoyance of the public, and all stones, rubbish, dirt, filth,
slops, vegetable matter or other offensive article thrown or placed by any
person on or in any street, sidewalk or other public place, which, in any way,
may cause any injury or annoyance to the public;
      (6)   All sidewalks, gutters or curbstones permitted to remain in an
unsafe condition or out of repair;
      (7)   All stables, cattle yards, hog, sheep or cow pens or yards for
poultry or other places where animals are kept, permitted by the owner thereof
or the person responsible therefor to be in such a condition as to become
offensive, annoying or injurious to the public;
      (8)   All houses, buildings, structures or enclosures used for special
storage of powder, dynamite or other explosive or highly flammable substances
or gases, except those maintained pursuant to a permit issued by a competent
authority;
      (9)   Any litter, trash, garbage or refuse or any abandoned, unlicensed
motor vehicle or any part thereof, which is or may be offensive to the
neighborhood or citizens generally, or which may afford a harboring or breeding
place for vermin, insects, reptiles or rodents, or which, in any way, may
constitute a fire, health or safety hazard;
      (10)   Any trees, shrubbery and the like growing on private property, the
roots of which clog or choke any public sewer belonging to the city, or damage
the streets or sidewalks of the city;
      (11)   Collections of water which are or are likely to become breeding
places for mosquitoes;
      (12)   Accumulation of manure from horses, mules, cows, chickens or other
animals or birds or accumulations of any other material in which flies may
breed;
      (13)   Any closet not connected with a city sewer and which is not fly-
proof below the seat;
      (14)   Common drinking cups in public places;
      (15)   Common or roller towels in public places;
      (16)   Open wells and springs within the city;
      (17)   Animals dead within the city, other than those slaughtered for
human consumption; and
      (18)   Improperly constructed or managed swimming pools or public bathing
places.
   (B)   The nuisances described in this section shall not be construed as
exclusive, and any act of commission or omission and any condition which
constitutes a nuisance by statute or by common law of the state, when
committed, omitted or existing within the city or within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Council, as provided by §
91.004, is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance.
(1991 Code, § 12-5) (Ord. passed 5-2-1974; Ord. passed 7-6-1989) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.006 STAGNANT WATER AND PUTRID MATTER.
   No person owning or in possession of any lot, house, building or enclosure
shall allow or suffer to exist in or upon such premises any stagnant water,
animal or vegetable matter or other substance liable to become putrid,
offensive, annoying or unhealthful. Persons owning or in possession of any real
estate shall provide proper and adequate drainage therefor so that no
offensive, baneful or disagreeable liquids shall flow or seep into any street.
Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(1991 Code, § 12-6) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.007 SUPPLEMENTAL NATURE OF CHAPTER.
   Various nuisances are defined and prohibited in other chapters of this code,
and it is the intent of the Council in enacting this subchapter, to make it
supplemental to those other chapters in which nuisances are defined and
prohibited; and the provisions of this subchapter relating to the abatement of
nuisances shall be regarded as alternate methods and procedures for the
abatement of nuisances in those instances where other methods and procedures
for abatement are provided.
(1991 Code, § 12-7)
GARBAGE, REFUSE AND WEEDS
§ 91.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. All putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes, including
vegetable and animal offal and the carcasses of small animals, kitchen and
table refuse, swill and every accumulation of both animal and vegetable matter
that attends the preparation, decay or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds or
vegetables and all such substances from all public and private establishments
and from all residents, but excluding recognizable industrial byproducts.
   REFUSE. Garbage and trash.
   TRASH. All nonputrescible wastes, including discarded and abandoned
articles.
(1991 Code, § 9-1) (Ord. passed 6-15-1950; Ord. passed 12-5-1968)
Cross-reference:
   Burning paper, refuse and the like in streets, see §
92.003
   Sewers and sewage generally, see
Ch. 52
Statutory reference:
   Authority of the Council to prohibit the accumulation and require the
disposal of garbage and refuse, and to provide for the elimination of public
health and safety hazards and to abate nuisances, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(10),
(23)
§ 91.021 DISPOSITION OF CARCASSES AND OFFENSIVE MATTER.
   (A)   No person shall allow any dead animal or any decaying substance of any
kind, or any filth, brush, garbage, trash or waste of any kind to remain on his
or her premises or on any premises under his or her control, or cast such
matter upon the land or lot of another or upon any street, lot, park or public
place.
   (B)   No person, who was the owner or custodian thereof, shall permit the
carcass of any dead animal to remain in the city after receiving notice that
such animal is dead. Such owner or custodian shall promptly, at his or her own
expense, cause the carcass of such animal to be removed to beyond the city
limits and buried at least three feet under ground or, in lieu thereof, shall
cause the carcass to be removed to the sanitary landfill site operated by the
Sanitation Department.
(1991 Code, § 9-2) (Ord. passed 5-5-1960) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.022 PROHIBITED DISPOSITION OF REFUSE GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or scatter any garbage,
trash, ashes or other refuse over or upon any premises, street, sidewalk,
gutter or drain, public or private or adjacent thereto and with or without the
intent to later remove or burn such matter, or to suffer or permit the
accumulation of refuse on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or
her to become or remain offensive, unsanitary or unsightly, or unsafe to public
health or hazardous as to fire.
(1991 Code, § 9-3) (Ord. passed 6-15-1950) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.023 CONTAMINATION OF WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit or to cause to
be thrown or deposited or to permit to be thrown or deposited any refuse,
sewage or pollutant into any well, cistern, spring, reservoir or other source
of water supply to any person or into any stream running through or adjacent to
the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump into the Tygarts Valley
River or onto the banks thereof, between the upper and lower flood control dams
within the corporate limits of the city any trash, weeds, grass or debris,
garbage or other refuse which would be carried downstream and stop up the
outlet tubes in the protection dam.
(1991 Code, § 9-4) (Ord. passed 2-17-1949; Ord. passed 6-15-1950) Penalty, see
§
91.999
§ 91.024 LAWFUL DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit the lawful
disposal of garbage, trash or other refuse at places designated for such
purposes by governmental authority, or to prohibit such disposal in standard
domestic incinerators constructed for the purpose, which have been inspected by
and approved as safe by the Fire Chief.
(1991 Code, § 9-5) (Ord. passed 6-15-1950)
§ 91.025 DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER TO REMOVE RUBBISH AND CUT GRASS AND WEEDS.
   Every person owning or occupying any lot, tract or parcel of land or
property including the premises located between the sidewalk and roadway,
whether vacant or occupied, within the city, shall keep the property free from
and remove therefrom any dirt, rubbish, debris, weeds, brush, trees, plant
growth, filth, grass or any other deleterious material which may cause blockage
in the city storm sewers of which may endanger or injure neighboring property
or health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city, and every person
owning or occupying any lot, tract or parcel of land or property within the
city shall cause the grass, weeds, brush, trees, plant growth, filth or any
other deleterious material thereon to be cut at such other times as the Mayor,
or the Chief of Police, Code Enforcement Officer or his or her authorized
representative may direct to prevent such lot, tract or parcel of land from
becoming unsightly, unwholesome, offensive or a menace to health or safety.
(Ord. O-017, passed 6-17-2004) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.026 NOTICE TO REMOVE OR CUT GRASS AND WEEDS; REMOVAL BY CITY.
   (A)   In the event that any person owning or occupying any lot, tract or
parcel of property within the city including the premises located between the
sidewalk and roadway fails to perform his or her duty to cut or remove dirt,
rubbish, debris, weeds, brush, trees, plan growth, filth, grass or any other
deleterious material therefrom, as required in §
91.025, the Mayor, Chief of Police, Code Enforcement Officer or his or her
authorized representative shall give or cause to be given in writing to any
person owning or occupying such lot, land or property, notice to remove such
dirt, rubbish, debris, weeds, brush, trees, plant growth, filth, grass or any
other deleterious material from such lot or parcel of land, within 72 hours
from the date of the serving, mailing, posting or publication of the notice
provided for herein.
   (B)   Unless within 72 hours provided for in division (A) above, the dirt,
rubbish, debris, weeds, brush, trees, plant growth, filth grass or other
deleterious material is removed from such lot, land or property as directed by
such notice, the Mayor or the Chief of Police, or his or her duly-appointed
representative, shall have the option to either:
      (1)   Cause a citation and/or warrant to be issued against any person
owning or occupying such lot, tract or parcel of land; and/or
      (2)   Cause the same to be removed by the agents or employees of the
city, or otherwise as he or she may decide, in which event the Code Enforcement
Officer shall report the cost of cutting and removal to the City Clerk, who
shall immediately cause to be mailed a bill, voucher, or statement of such cost
to the person owning or occupying such lot, land or property and the bill,
voucher or statement shall be due within ten days of the date of date of
mailing the bill, voucher or statement. If payment for such bill, voucher or
statement is not made to the city within 30 days of the mailing of the same,
the city may place a lien on the violator’s property in the amount of the
unpaid bill, voucher or statement. If agents or employees of the city are
required to cut and remove the dirt, rubbish, debris, weeds, brush, trees,
plant growth, filth, grass or other deleterious material from such lot, land or
property, the city shall charge a fee of $100 per hour for every hour or
portion of an hour that agents or employees of the city were utilized to
complete the cutting and removal of said materials.
   (C)   The notice referred to in division (A) above shall be sufficient and
shall be deemed to have been given when a written notice is delivered in person
to the owner or occupant, or deposited in the United States mail addressed to
the owner or occupant at his or her last known address or by posting notice in
a conspicuous place on the property which is reasonably calculated to give
notice to the property owner, or by any of the methods prescribed for the
service of process issued by the Clerk of a Circuit Court of the state.
   (D)   No error in the name of the property owner, the description of the
property nor in the materials designated to be cut and removed shall affect the
validity of any such notice, provided that from the description of such lot,
land or property, the identity thereof may be established within reasonable
certainty.
   (E)   The payment of the amount so chargeable to the owner shall not relieve
him or her of any fine imposed under the provisions of this subchapter or
constitute a defense against any violation of the provisions of this section.
Each day of failure to comply with the provisions of this section after 72
hours’ notice to do so, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. O-017, passed 6-17-2004; Ord. 177, passed 3-6-2014; Ord. 222, passed 9-
15-2016)
ABANDONED/DERELICT VEHICLES
§ 91.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES. A motor vehicle shall be deemed to have been
abandoned for the purpose of this section in the following circumstances:
      (1)   It has been left unattended upon a street or highway in violation
of a statutory law or ordinance regulating or prohibiting parking for a period
of 24 hours;
      (2)   It is left unaccompanied on property owned or operated by the city
or on any street or highway for a period of not less than 48 hours; or
      (3)   It is left unaccompanied on private property for a period of not
less than 30 days, in derelict condition.
   DERELICT VEHICLE. A motor vehicle shall be deemed DERELICT for the purposes
of this section if the vehicle is inoperable, partially wholly dismantled,
wrecked, junked, or of similar condition, for a period exceeding 30 days.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.041 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   A vehicle in an enclosed building, garage or carport;
   (B)   A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise;
   (C)   A vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in
a lawful place and manner by the city; and
   (D)   A vehicle shall not be declared abandoned or derelict pursuant to this
subchapter if such vehicle is in operable, running condition, which is validly
licensed and registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.042 DECLARED A HEALTH HAZARD.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the Council authorizes the Mayor, Chief
of Police or his or her assigns to declare any abandoned or derelict motor
vehicle remaining on private property for in excess of 30 days a health hazard.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.043 DUTY TO OWNER TO REMOVE FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any wrecked, junked,
discarded, partially dismantled non-operable motor vehicle to remain on such
property for more than 30 days.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.044 DUTY OF OWNER TO REMOVE FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   If a motor vehicle is abandoned or derelict on a public street or highway,
it shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of such motor vehicle to
cause the removal thereof immediately.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.045 NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complaint concerning abandoned/derelict vehicles, as
defined in this subchapter, the Mayor, Chief of Police or his or her assign
will investigate such complaint. If, in his or her judgment a violation has
occurred, the Mayor, Chief of Police or his or her assign shall cause to be
delivered or mailed to the owner of the property upon which the conditions
exist a notice stating the reasons why the conditions may constitute a
violation and that a hearing will be held before a Municipal Judge at a place
therein fixed, not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the delivery or
mailing of the notice. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right
to file an answer to the notice and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
evidence at the place and time fixed in the notice. Any person desiring to do
so may attend such hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being
heard. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in such hearings.
   (B)   If a determination is made that such conditions constituting a public
nuisance exist, the Mayor, Chief of Police or his or her assign shall notify,
in writing, the owner of the premises in question of the conditions
constituting such public nuisance and shall order the prompt abatement thereof
within 30 days from the receipt of such written notice.
   (C)   Exceptions to this procedure are abandoned or unlicensed vehicles on
public property where action shall be taken within 48 hours of notification of
the nuisance and unidentified vehicles when corrective action shall be taken by
the Police Department immediately.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.046 REMOVAL OF DERELICT VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The Chief of the Police Department, or Mayor, or their assigns, upon notice
of violation, may cause a written notice of such violation to be served upon
the owner, tenant, occupant, lessee and/or owner of the motor vehicle, that
such motor vehicle shall be removed within 30 days after receipt of notice. Any
motor vehicle not removed after such notice shall be removed from such land to
an impounding area heretofore designated by the Council and therein impounded.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.047 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Whenever any motor vehicle is abandoned on a public street or highway, or on
property owned or operated by the city, any such vehicle may be removed and
impounded under the direction of the Chief of Police or his or her assigns,
after 48 hours, to a storage garage or area as designated by the Council.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.048 RECLAMATION.
   Upon notification by the Police Department, the owner of an impounded motor
vehicle may, upon furnishing satisfactory evidence of his or her identity and
of his or her ownership of the vehicle, obtain a release from the Police
Department, and upon payment of towing and storing charges, and any fines or
penalties, remove such motor vehicle from the impounding area.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.049 SALE OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   Should the owner of an impounded motor vehicle fail or refuse to pay the
costs above mentioned or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be
unknown and unascertainable after a diligent search, and after written notice
to him or her at his or her last known address if his or her identity is known,
and to the holder of any lien on record in the office of the State Department
of Motor Vehicles against such vehicle, the Chief of Police or his or her
designee may, after holding such vehicle for 30 days and after having the value
thereof determined by three disinterested automobile dealers or garage and
after giving 20 days’ notice to the State Department of Motor Vehicles, such
notice to include all information which can be reasonably ascertained to
identify such vehicle, dispose of the same by private or public sale and shall
forward the proceeds of such sale to the City Treasurer.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.050 DISPOSITION OF UNSOLD VEHICLES.
   Whenever any motor vehicle which has been removed pursuant to this
subchapter shall remain unsold for a period of 60 days from and including the
day of its removal, such vehicle may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by
the city official charged with its safekeeping. Notice of any such destruction
or disposition shall be given the State Department of Motor Vehicles, such
notice to include all information on which can be reasonably ascertained to
identify such vehicle.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.051 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE.
   The proceeds of the sale of a motor vehicle covered in this subchapter,
after all costs of removal, storage, investigation and sale, and satisfaction
of any liens on record on the vehicle have been deducted therefrom and after
any fines or penalties have been paid, shall be held by the City Treasurer for
up to 30 days and paid to the registered owner, after providing satisfactory
evidence of his or her identify upon demand. If the owner does not appear to
claim the remainder of the proceeds within 30 days after disposal of the
vehicle, the funds shall be deposited into the city’s General Fund and the
owner’s rights therein shall be forever extinguished.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.052 UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person shall park, store or leave or permit the parking or storage of any
unlicensed motor vehicle of any kind, for a period in excess of 48 hours,
whether attended or not, upon any private property within the city, unless the
vehicle is enclosed within a building, garage, carport, or further, is
connected with and essential to the operation of a business enterprise
conducted in a lawful place and manner and properly licensed. The Chief of
Police, upon notice of a violation, may cause either personal or written notice
of such violation to be served upon the owner, tenant, occupant, lessee and/or
the owner of the motor vehicle.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.053 TRAILERS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be applicable to trailers or wagons
in a wrecked, junked, discarded, abandoned, partially dismantled, non-operable
or otherwise derelict condition.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 91.054 IMMUNITY.
   Neither the city nor any person shall be held to answer in any civil or
criminal action to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession
of any abandoned, lost or stolen vehicle for disposing of such vehicle as
contemplated by this subchapter.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004)
NOISE
§ 91.065 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   This subchapter is enacted to prevent excessive sound that may jeopardize
the health, welfare or safety of the citizens of the city or degrade the
quality of life. It is neither the purpose not intent of this subchapter to
unduly interfere with the freedoms of speech or religion. This subchapter shall
be known as the “City of Elkins Noise Ordinance”.
(Ord. 210, passed 5-19-2016)
§ 91.066 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on
a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is
designated dB(A) or dBA.
   CITY. The jurisdictional limits of the City of Elkins, West Virginia
   DECIBEL. The symbol for which is dB, means a unit for measuring the volume
of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the
pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20
micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter).
   DWELLING. A residence or abode, including, but not limited to, a house,
mobile home, condominium, apartment or other structure used as a home.
   DYNAMIC BRAKING SYSTEM. A device used primarily on trucks for the conversion
of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the
purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes, said devices sometimes
known as ENGINE BRAKES.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or a saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contract with the
ground, excluding a tractor.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle including passenger cars, trucks,
truck-trailers, semi-trailers, recreational vehicles, campers and racing
vehicles.
   MUFFLER. A properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for
abating the count of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is part
of the normal configuration of the equipment.
   NOISE. Any sound of such character, level or duration:
      (1)   Which may be injurious to human health or welfare;
      (2)   Which unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life or
property throughout the city or in any portion thereof;
      (3)   Which disturbs the good order or quiet of the community; or
      (4)   Which annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivity.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument which includes a microphone, amplified, RMS
detector, integrator or time average, output meter and weighting networks used
to measure sound pressure levels. Such instrument shall be used for measurement
of the intensity of sound and calibrated in decibels as standardized by the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Readings shall be made on a dB(A)
scale.
(Ord. 210, passed 5-19-2016; Ord. 217, passed 8-4-2016)
§ 91.067 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Noise prohibited generally. Subject to the exceptions contained
herein, no person shall make, continue or cause to be made any noise as
prohibited herein or alternatively make, continue or cause to be made any noise
exceeding the limitations established herein.
   (B)   Noise prohibited: motor vehicles, motorcycles.
      (1)   No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street or
highway shall amplify from within the motor vehicle the sound produced by a
radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument used
for entertainment, so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 25
feet or more from the motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be
removed or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair
or replacement, any muffler or sound dissipative device on a motor vehicle,
motorcycle or motorboat operated within the city.
      (3)   No person shall operate, or permit the operation within the city of
any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat without factory installed mufflers
or their equivalent; provided that if no factory installed or equivalent
muffler was present at the time of manufacture of the motor vehicle, motorcycle
or motorboat, then sound emanating from the motor vehicle, motorcycle or motor
boat, shall be effectively muffled in a reasonable manner by equipment so
constructed and used to muffle sound.
      (4)   No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon
any motor vehicle or motorcycle operated within the city.
      (5)   No person in actual physical control of a motor vehicle within the
city shall use a dynamic braking system unless said use is necessary to prevent
or avoid an accident that may cause property damage, injury or loss of life.
This provision shall not apply to fire trucks or other emergency vehicles, or
any school bus equipped with a dynamic braking system.
   (C)   Exemptions.
      (1)   The following are exempt from the provisions of this subchapter:
         (a)   Noise resulting from emergency or necessary maintenance work as
performed by the city, or the United States of America or any of their
political subdivisions, or public utility companies, including, but not limited
to, any work of any kind on roads, streets, bridges, alleys, city-owned
cemetery, rights-of-way or government owned property;
         (b)   Noise resulting from any emergency vehicle, when responding to
an emergency call or acting in time of emergency, or during training exercises
and maintenance, or from any school bus;
         (c)   Noise from any emergency signaling device;
         (d)   Noise from a burglar or fire alarm installed on any building,
motor vehicle or other property so long as the alarm terminates its operation
within five minutes of its activation; provided that it shall be deemed
reasonable for an activated alarm to continue to operate if a crime or fire is
in progress at or near the property and/or until law enforcement or other
emergency personnel have responded to a legitimate call for assistance related
in any way to the property at which the activated alarm is located;
         (e)   Noise from domestic power tools, landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, agricultural equipment and standby generator self-test
verifier but only when operated between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
during weekdays and weekends. Lawn mower racing is never deemed to be an exempt
activity pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter;
         (f)   There are no restrictions against using generators to provide
power when power has been interrupted to a home or homes, whether that
interruption is due to a widespread power event, restricted to a local event
(including, but not limited to, damage to the power supply to a home or homes)
or is intentional related to maintenance, repair or other upgrades. However,
generator self-tests may only occur during the hours specified in division (C)
(1)(e) above;
         (g)   Noise from commercial or industrial power tools, landscaping and
yard maintenance equipment, and agricultural equipment on a residential
property or within 250 feet of a residential property line when operated on
commercial or industrial property, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
on weekdays and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends and
legal holidays;
         (h)   Noise from church or chapel bells and chimes when used as part
of any religious observance or service or for national celebrations or public
holidays, and those bells and chimes that are presently installed and in use;
provided said use is reasonable and for a church-related purpose;
         (i)   Noise generated during the normal course of business by any
properly licensed commercial or industrial enterprise operating lawfully within
an area properly zoned for said enterprise;
         (j)   Noise from construction, drilling, earthmoving, excavating or
demolition activity provided all motorized equipment used in such activity is
equipped with functioning mufflers;
         (k)   Noise from snow blowers, snow throwers and snow plows when
operated with a muffler for the purpose of snow removal;
         (l)   Noise generated in situations within the jurisdiction of the
Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration;
         (m)   Noise generated from city-sponsored or approved celebrations or
events, including, but not limited to, parades, outdoor concerts, festivals and
athletic events;
         (n)   Noise generated from any school, higher education and community
sponsored or approved celebrations or events, including, but not limited to,
outdoor concerts or band festivals and outdoor athletic events and practices;
         (o)   Noise produced by a governmental body or employee thereof in the
performance of any governmental function;
         (p)   Noise generated from athletic events or practices;
         (q)   Noise generated from airplanes, helicopters or other piloted
vehicles arriving to or departing from the city’s Airport Authority and Davis
Medical Center;
         (r)   Noise generated from railroads operating within the city;
         (s)   Noise generated from fireworks authorized by the city;
         (t)   Noise generated during events promoted by the County Convention
and Visitors Bureau, Elkins Main Street and the Mountain State Forest Festival;
and
         (u)   Noise generated during events promoted by Davis and Elkins
College upon the college campus, or otherwise authorized by the city.
      (2)   For the purposes of the exemptions contained in divisions (C)(1)(a)
and (C)(1)(m) above, all celebrations and events held during the annual
Mountain State Forest Festival, or any college sanctioned events held upon the
campus of Davis and Elkins College, or school and higher education approved
shall be presumed to be “city-sponsored or approved”. County Convention and
Visitors Bureau and Elkins Main Street events are also presumed to be “city-
sponsored and approved” and are specifically exempt from the foregoing
prohibitions. Any list of presumed city-sponsored or approved and school and
high education approved celebrations and events listed under this division (C)
is not intended to be exclusive.
(Ord. 210, passed 5-19-2016) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.068 MEASUREMENT, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Any noise that exceeds a noise level of 83 dBA calculated on a distance from
the point of generation of the noise source of not less than 25 feet shall be
prima facie evidence of a noise prohibited by §
91.067. Noise resulting in a decibel reading or calculation less than 83 dBA
from 25 feet also constitutes a prohibited noise activity pursuant to §
91.067. Furthermore, there is no specific decibel measurement requirement to
establish a violation of any noise prohibited by §
91.067.
(Ord. 210, passed 5-19-2016) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.069 FEDERAL LAW.
   The Council of the city specifically recognizes the existence and
application of the Federal Noise Pollution and Abatement Act of 1972, popularly
known and referred to as the Noise Control Act of 1972, 42 U.S.C. §§ 4901 et
seq. The provisions of this subchapter are intended to supplement the federal
law and applicable rules and regulations established therefrom and as are
administered by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 210, passed 5-19-2016)
ABATEMENT
§ 91.080 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief and the
Building Official to cause inspections to be made, from time to time, within
the city and, when such officers deem it in the interests of the city so to do,
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as provided in §
91.004, to determine whether any condition exists or any activity is being
practiced which constitutes a nuisance; and each such officer shall cause an
investigation to be made, upon written complaint made by any responsible
person.
   (B)   Each officer mentioned in division (A) above shall, for the purposes
of this chapter, be designated as an “enforcement officer”.
(1991 Code, § 12-8)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to provide for the abatement of nuisances, see W.Va.
Code § 8-12-5(23)
§ 91.081 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Enforcement officers shall have the right to enter upon private premises for
the purposes specified in §
91.080, upon proper identification and in compliance with all applicable
provisions of law. Unless it appears probable that advance warning would defeat
the purpose of such entry, the occupants of premises to be entered shall be
given reasonable notice in advance and, in any case, it shall be unlawful for
any owner or occupant to prevent such entry which is sought to be made in
compliance with law.
(1991 Code, § 12-9) Penalty, see §
91.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to provide for entering and inspecting private premises
to enforce city ordinances, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-15
§ 91.082 NOTICE TO CEASE AND DESIST.
   If, at any time, an enforcement officer shall find that an activity or
practice which constitutes a nuisance is occurring within the city or within
the area surrounding the city and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of
the city as provided by §
91.080, he or she shall, promptly and by the most expeditious means, notify the
violator to cease and desist such nuisance forthwith.
(1991 Code, § 12-10)
§ 91.083 NOTICE TO ABATE; APPEAL.
   If, at any time, an enforcement officer shall find that a condition which
constitutes a nuisance exists within the city or within the area surrounding
the city within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as provided by §
91.080, he or she shall give notice in writing to the owner, occupant or person
in charge of the premises upon which such condition exists, stating therein the
condition which constitutes a nuisance, and directing such addressee to remedy
the condition within the time stated in such notice, which shall be not more
than ten days; and it shall be unlawful for any such owner, occupant or person
in charge to fail to comply with the terms of such notice; provided, that any
owner, occupant or person in charge may, within two days from the service
thereof, appeal to the Council, in which case the terms of such notice shall be
stayed pending action of the Council, which action shall be final; provided
further, that if the enforcement officer shall state in such notice that the
condition which constitutes a nuisance is such as to be an imminent hazard to
the health, safety or welfare of the public or of any person within or near the
premises upon which such nuisance exists, the addressee shall comply with the
terms of such notice.
(1991 Code, § 12-11) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.084 RECOURSE OF CITY WHEN NOTICE TO ABATE IS IGNORED.
   (A)   Upon the failure of any person to whom notice has been given pursuant
to §
91.083 to comply with the terms of such notice or with the terms imposed by the
Council on appeal, as the case may be, the enforcement officer shall forthwith
direct the appropriate city officer to remedy the condition which is the
subject of such notice, and the expense incurred by the city in so doing shall
be charged to the addressee of such notice, as well as to the owner of the
premises which is the subject of such notice, jointly or severally, to be
collected as city taxes or in any other manner authorized by law for the
collection of money due the city.
   (B)   Abatement by the city of any condition which constitutes a nuisance
and reimbursement to the city of expenses incurred thereby shall not bar
prosecution for maintenance of a nuisance.
(1991 Code, § 12-12)
§ 91.085 SERVICE OF WRITTEN NOTICES; CONFIRMATION OF ORAL NOTICES.
   (A)   Written notices provided for in this subchapter may be served in any
manner authorized by law for the service of process in civil cases, including
service by publication against nonresidents and parties unknown or whose
address is unknown.
   (B)   Oral notices given pursuant to §
91.082 shall promptly be confirmed in writing, which shall be served as
provided in division (A) above.
(1991 Code, § 12-13)
§ 91.086 SUBCHAPTER DOES NOT PROHIBIT ARREST.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit any police officer
from arresting any person for committing or maintaining a nuisance when such
arrest is made pursuant to law.
(1991 Code, § 12-14)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any property owner or occupant of such property who is convicted of a
violation of §
91.025 shall for a first conviction thereof be fined $50 and for a second or
subsequent conviction, such person shall be fined at least $100 but not more
than $500.
   (C)   Any person violating any section of §§
91.040 through
91.054 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For every day such violation shall
thereafter exist, it shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense; and if
found guilty of such misdemeanor, be punishable upon conviction by a fine not
exceeding $50 or by imprisonment of not more than 30 days, for each violation.
   (D)   Any person found guilty before the Municipal Court of the city of
violating any provision of §§
91.065 through
91.069 shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor offense, and shall be
punished by fine as follows: $100 for the first offense within a 24-month
period; $200 for the second offense within a 24-month period; $300 for a third
offense within a 24-month period; $400 for a fourth offense within a 24-month
period; and $500 for a fifth and each subsequent offense within a 24-month
period. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which said
violation occurs shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. O-013, passed 3-18-2004; Ord. O-017, passed 6-17-2004; Ord. 210, passed
5-19-2016)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.001   Installation of storage tanks for certain flammable liquids
prohibited; exception
   
92.002   Outdoor fire; burning for disposal
   
92.003   [Reserved]
   
92.004   Wood-burning stoves and chimneys
Fire Prevention Code
   
92.015   Adopted; filed; applicability; short title
   
92.016   Administration and enforcement
   
92.017   Definitions
   
92.018   [Reserved]
   
92.019   Storage of explosives, flammable liquids and gases, district
established; approval of building permits
   
92.020   Modifications
   
92.021   Appeals
Fire Department
   
92.035   Fire Chief; office established; powers and duties generally
   
92.036   Fire Chief; power as to repair or removal of fire hazards
   
92.037   Firefighter’s Civil Service Commission
   
92.038   Using or tampering with city fire equipment
   
92.039   Riding upon fire apparatus
   
92.040   Obedience to officers at scene of fire
   
92.041   Key lock box system
Firemen’s Pension and Relief Fund
   
92.055   Establishment and maintenance
   
92.056   Board of Trustees
Fire Protection Service Assessments
   
92.070   Legislative purpose; maintenance
   
92.071   Definitions
   
92.072   Administration
   
92.073   Rates; fees; charges established
   
92.074   Billing and collection of fees
   
92.075   Charge or fee debt due city
   
92.076   Assessment; rules and regulations generally
   
92.077   Charges are responsibility of property owner; owner’s responsibility
   
92.078   Protests
   
92.079   Fire service fee Appeal Board
   
92.080   Exemptions
   
92.081   Restricted use of revenues; future rates and charges
 
   
92.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building Code, see §§
150.035,
150.036
   Giving false alarms and reports, see §
130.005
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to enact ordinances to provide for the elimination of
hazards to the public safety and to abate public nuisances, see W.Va. Code § 8-
12-5(23)
   Authority of Council to enact ordinances to prevent injury to the public or
individual from anything dangerous; to regulate the keeping of gunpowder and
other combustibles; and to make regulations guarding against danger or damage
by fire, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(13) to (15)
   Authority to enact ordinances to protect the public safety, see W.Va. Code §
8-12-5(44)
   Plenary power of Council to provide for the prevention and extinguishment of
fires, see W.Va. Code § 8-15-1
   State Fire Prevention and Control Act, see W.Va. Code §§ 29-3-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.001 INSTALLATION OF STORAGE TANKS FOR CERTAIN FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install in any residential
district of the city, as designated on the official zoning map of the city, any
fuel storage tank for the purpose of storing flammable liquids for use as motor
vehicle fuels. The term FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS shall include gasoline and all other
petroleum products used as fuel for motor vehicles; provided, however, that
nothing herein contained shall prohibit any person from installing a fuel
storage tank for the purpose of storing fuel heating oil to be used solely for
the furnishing of heat to dwellings or buildings located on the property on
which such storage tank is installed.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to administer and enforce
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 8-5) (Ord. passed 7-5-1979) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.002 OUTDOOR FIRE; BURNING FOR DISPOSAL.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   Fires to dispose of natural, untreated, and unprocessed
materials (such as tree trimmings, grass, leaves, and similar garden waste) are
permitted inside the city limits on the following days and times:
            1.   5:00 p.m. Thursdays to 7:00 a.m. Fridays.
            2.   5:00 p.m. Fridays to 7:00 a.m. Saturdays.      
            3.   5:00 p.m. Saturdays to 7:00 a.m. Sundays.
         (b)   All such fires are to be fully extinguished by 7:00 a.m.
      (2)   (a)   Prior to such fires, a permit must be applied for and
received from the Chief of the Elkins Fire Department or a designee thereof.
The Fire Chief shall have discretion in issuing these permits and may require
changes to the proposed burning plan as necessary to reduce the risk of harm to
life and property.
         (b)   Before such fires are ignited, the area immediately surrounding
the material to be burned shall be cleared of other flammable material for a
distance sufficient to ensure that the fire will be contained. This safety
strip shall in no event measure less than ten feet from all sides of the
material to be burned.
         (c)   Fires shall be attended at all times. The issuance of permits
does not relieve holders thereof from their responsibility to monitor wind and
other conditions that may necessitate the cancelling or early extinguishing of
otherwise permitted fires. Elkins Fire Department personnel also have the
authority to order the extinguishing of any fire, permitted or not, when in
their judgment it poses a risk to life or property.
   (B)   Fires to dispose of non-natural materials, including but not limited
to paper, garbage, lumber and other construction debris, and other refuse, are
prohibited, even if contained in a burn barrel or similar container.
   (C)   Fires to clear grasslands or forests are prohibited.
   (D)   Small fires set for the purpose of food preparation or for providing
light or warmth, the area around which has been cleared of flammable materials
in the manner described above, are allowed whenever wind and other conditions
do not render them unsafe.
   (E)   Any person who sets or causes to be set any fire in violation of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
   (F)   Any person who sets or causes to be set any fire that escaped the
safety strip and causes damage to the lands or property of another is guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount set forth
by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 8-6) (Ord. passed 3-7-1963; Ord. 296, passed 3-3-2022)  Penalty,
see §
92.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 20-3-5
§ 92.003 [RESERVED].
§ 92.004 WOOD-BURNING STOVES AND CHIMNEYS.
   (A)   Building permit required. No owner, agent or tenant in the city shall
commence with the installation of any outside wood- or coal-burning stove or
appliance unless such person first obtains a building permit from the Building
Inspector.
   (B)   Prohibition against burning trash, refuse or other debris in boiler
units or otherwise. No person shall within the city burn either in a boiler
unit or other container any trash, plastics, debris, garbage, refuse, gasoline,
rubber, materials treated with petroleum products, or materials other than wood
and/or coal and/or coke and/or wood pellets or other commercially produced
products devised specifically for burning in fireplaces, stoves or boiler
units.
   (C)   Smoke stacks. All smoke stacks for boiler units shall extend one foot
or more above the highest point of the roof to which the smoke stack is
attached or the building which the boiler serves. Furnaces should be located no
less than 100 feet from any residence not served by the furnace. If located
within 100 feet to 300 feet to any residence not served by the furnace, the
stack should be at least two feet higher than the peak of that residence.
   (D)   Boiler units. No wood- and/or coal- and/or coke-burning boiler unit
may be used within the city for any purpose during the warm months between the
dates of May 1 through October 1.
(Ord. 068, passed 11-1-2007) Penalty, see §
92.999
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 92.015 ADOPTED; FILED; APPLICABILITY; SHORT TITLE.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be known as the city’s Fire Prevention Code and
there is hereby adopted, and incorporated by reference as if set out at length
herein, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known
as the State Fire Code, including all statutes, codes and requirements
referenced therein, as adopted and thereafter amended, by the State Fire
Commission pursuant to W.Va. Code § 29-3-5, except such portions as are herein
modified, and from the date on which this section takes effect, the provision
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
   (B)   The Code adopted by this section shall be known and may be cited as
the “Fire Prevention Code”.
(1991 Code, § 8-8) (Ord. passed 7-1-1965; Ord. passed 4-2-1970; Ord. passed 9-
17-1992; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate the erection, construction, repair or
alteration of structures of wood or other combustible material see W.Va. Code §
8-12-13
   Authority of city to require permit for construction, alteration or repair
of buildings or equipment, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-14
   Authority of Council relating to buildings, safety hazards and nuisances
generally, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(23), (28)
   Authority of State Fire Marshal to promulgate rules relating to buildings,
see W.Va. Code §§ 29-3-4a, 29-3-4b
   Authority to inspect private premises, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-15
   Fire Prevention and Control Act, see W.Va. Code §§ 29-3-1 to 29-3-30
§ 92.016 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The Fire Prevention Code, as adopted under §
92.015, shall be administered and enforced by the City Fire Chief, or any
member of the City Fire Department deputized by the State Fire Marshal.
(1991 Code, § 8-9) (Ord. passed 9-17-1992; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010)
§ 92.017 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MUNICIPALITY. As used in the Fire Prevention Code, adopted by this
subchapter, it shall be construed to mean the City of Elkins.
(1991 Code, § 8-10) (Ord. passed 9-17-1992; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010)
§ 92.018 [RESERVED].
§ 92.019 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES, FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND GASES, DISTRICT
ESTABLISHED; APPROVAL OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by this
subchapter, in which the storage of explosives and blasting agents is
prohibited. The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by
this subchapter, in which the storage of Class I liquids in outside, above-
ground tanks, is prohibited.
   (B)   Petroleum gas. The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, as
adopted by this subchapter, in which the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum
gas is restricted, and hereby established as follows: from the railroad tracks;
south on Randolph Avenue to High Street; west on High Street to Davis Street;
north on Davis Street to Savannah Street; south on Savannah Street to the
Tygart Valley River; west along the Tygart Valley River to Railroad Avenue;
north on Railroad Avenue to Randolph Avenue.
   (C)   Inspection. The City Fire Chief or his or her representative shall
inspect and approve all building permits in this area.
(1991 Code, § 8-12) (Ord. passed 9-17-1992; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010)
§ 92.020 MODIFICATIONS.
   The City Fire Chief, with approval of the Council, shall have the power to
add to, or delete there from, provisions of the City Fire Prevention Code when,
in the opinion of the City Fire Chief, the best interest of the general public
and the city will thus be served. The City Fire Chief, with approval of the
Council, may modify any of the provisions of the City Fire Prevention Code upon
application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized
agent, of any property or installation affected thereunder, when there are
practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
Code, provided that the spirit of the Code shall be observed, public safety
secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such additions,
deletions or modifications, when granted, allowed or ordered by the City Fire
Chief, with approval of the Council, shall be entered upon the records of the
Department, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
(1991 Code, § 8-13) (Ord. passed 9-17-1992; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010)
§ 92.021 APPEALS.
   Whenever the City Fire Chief or his or her representative shall disapprove
an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, the applicant may
appeal the decision of the City Fire Chief to the Council, within 30 days from
the date the decision is appealed.
(1991 Code, § 8-14) (Ord. passed 9-17-1992; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 92.035 FIRE CHIEF; OFFICE ESTABLISHED; POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (A)   (1)   The office of Fire Chief is hereby established.
      (2)   The Fire Chief shall be the Chief of the Fire Department and the
commanding officer thereof, and shall be responsible to the Mayor and the
Council for the administration, training, discipline, morale and effective
deployment and utilization of the members of the Department and for the
maintenance and effective deployment and utilization of the property, equipment
and apparatus of the Fire Department.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall have all such powers as may be necessary and
lawful to meet the responsibilities imposed upon him or her by this section,
including, but not limited to, the following.
      (1)   He or she shall have absolute command, control, management,
assignment to duties and supervision of every officer, member and employee of
the Fire Department during a fire, at all practices and drills and during all
hours when such personnel are on duty.
      (2)   He or she shall have absolute control, authority and command of the
police officers present at the scene of any fire during the time and
continuance of any fire or conflagration, and all orders issued by him or her
to such police officers and to other persons present shall be by them
explicitly obeyed and performed.
      (3)   He or she shall have supervision over the engine houses, trucks and
all apparatus and equipment belonging to the Fire Department. He or she shall
be responsible for the serviceable condition of all equipment belonging to the
Fire Department and he or she shall be responsible that every piece of fire
apparatus is equipped at all times with the necessary wrenches and all other
equipment belonging to that piece of apparatus and necessary to the successful
fighting of fire.
      (4)   He or she shall have supervision over all repairs to apparatus and
the charge of all supplies, and shall issue them, at his or her own discretion
or upon the authority of the Council, to the units of the Fire Department,
taking from such units the receipts of the commanding officer of the unit to
which the supplies are issued. He or she shall have sole control, management
and command at fires and alarms of fire over all apparatus and equipment
belonging to the Fire Department. Whenever any purchases are to be made and
when the fire apparatus used by the Department requires attention or repairs,
he or she shall make a report and recommendations to the Council unless the
repairs needed are of a character which will require immediate attention.
      (5)   He or she shall have authority to direct the pulling down or
destroying of any fence, house, building or other thing, if deemed necessary to
prevent the spreading of a fire.
      (6)   (a)   He or she shall be responsible for the keeping of necessary
records for the Fire Department, which records shall be subject to the
inspection of the Mayor and the members of the Council at any time.
         (b)   Such record shall list and note, inter alia, the state of repair
of all property belonging to the Fire Department.
         (c)   He or she shall record, and communicate monthly to the Council,
a report of all fires occurring since the previous report, the units and
personnel responding to alarms, the loss and insurance as far as has been
ascertained, the causes of any such fires and such suggestions as he or she may
deem advisable to bring the number of fires to a minimum.
         (d)   He or she shall also keep at his or her office such books or
other records as the Council may prescribe.
(1991 Code, § 8-16)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to give authority to Fire Department officers to pull
down structures when deemed necessary to prevent spread of fire, see W.Va. Code
§§ 8-15-1, 8-15-2
   Authority of Council to provide for the prevention and extinguishment of
fires, to procure proper engines and implements, to provide for the
organization, equipment and government of a volunteer or paid Fire Department
and the like, see W.Va. Code § 8-15-1
   Authority of local Fire Departments, see W.Va. Code Ch. 29, Art. 3A
   Authority to use fire equipment three miles beyond city limits, see W.Va.
Code § 8-15-3
   Paid Fire Departments and civil service, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-15-9 et seq.
   Volunteer fire companies, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-15-4 to 8-15-8
§ 92.036 FIRE CHIEF; POWER AS TO REPAIR OR REMOVAL OF FIRE HAZARDS.
   Whenever the Fire Chief, acting in his or her capacity as assistant to the
State Fire Marshal, shall find any building or other structure on property of
any kind, or any other object of any kind or any place or condition which, for
want of repairs or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or from any other
cause or condition or for any reason whatever, is especially conducive or
liable to fire or liable to cause a fire and which is so located or constructed
as to endanger it or other property or life, he or she shall order such
condition or thing to be remedied or such building or buildings, structures or
property to be repaired and remedied and, if not so repaired and remedied, to
be torn down and removed, and he or she shall proceed to enforce his or her
order according to the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 29, Art. 3.
(1991 Code, § 8-17) (Ord. passed 11-15-1962)
§ 92.037 FIREFIGHTER’S CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Firefighter’s Civil Service Commission, existing immediately prior
to the effective date of this code, is hereby continued in full force and
effect; and all the pertinent provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 8-15-11 through 8-15-
27, inclusive, are hereby adopted by the Council and made applicable to the
regular members of the Fire Department who are paid on a full-time basis from
city funds and to applicants for such regular membership.
   (B)   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under the Municipal Home
Rule Pilot Program, under W.Va. Code § 8-1-5a, the city hereby declares itself
to be exempt from the requirement that no more than two of the members of its
Fire Civil Service Commission be members of the same political party as
required by W.Va. Code § 8-15-12.
   (C)   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under the Municipal Home
Rule Program, authorized by W.Va. Code § 8-1-5a, the Firemen’s Civil Service
Commission may accept applications for entry-level civil service fire
positions, regardless of veteran status or previous or current paid fire
service, for applicants, who are at the time of their application, no more than
40 years old.
(1991 Code, § 8-18) (Ord. passed 3-3-1960; Ord. 232, passed 3-2-2017; Ord. 306,
passed 9-15-2022)
Editor’s note:
   The Firefighter’s Civil Service Commission was established in this city for
regular, full-time paid members of the Fire Department, under the provisions of
W.Va. Code prior Ch. 8, Art. 6A, since superseded by the sections mentioned in
the text of this section.
§ 92.038 USING OR TAMPERING WITH CITY FIRE EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment of the city for any
private purpose, nor shall any person willfully and without proper authority
remove, take away, tamper with, keep or conceal any tool, piece of equipment,
appliance or other article used in any way by the Fire Department.
(1991 Code, § 8-19) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.039 RIDING UPON FIRE APPARATUS.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to ride upon any fire
apparatus of the city at any time; and no person, other than those assigned to
such apparatus, shall be authorized to ride thereon while such apparatus is
responding to a fire alarm, except by authority of the Fire Chief.
(1991 Code, § 8-20) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.040 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICERS AT SCENE OF FIRE.
   Every person present at the scene of a fire shall be subject and obedient to
the orders of any police officer or member of the Fire Department there present
as to any matter relating to the extinguishment of the fire, the removal and
protection of property or the maintenance of order; and it shall be unlawful
for any person present at the scene of any fire to disobey any such lawful
order of any police officer or member of the Fire Department there present.
(1991 Code, § 8-21) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.041 KEY LOCK BOX SYSTEM.
   (A)   Structures where required. The following structures shall be equipped
with a key lock box:
      (1)   Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm
system and/or automatic suppression system, or any other structure that is
required by NFPA Life Safety Code 101 to be so equipped;
      (2)   Commercial or industrial property protected by a locked fence or
gate and where immediate access to the property is necessary for life, safety
or firefighting purposes; and
      (3)   This section shall not apply to residential one- and two-family
dwellings, however, key lock boxes may be installed.
   (B)   Type. The Fire Chief shall designate the type of key lock box system
to be implemented within the city and shall have the authority to require all
structures subject to this section to use the designated system. The Fire Chief
shall be the sole source of forms to order key lock boxes. The rapid entry key
box shall be installed in a location approved by the Chief of the Fire
Department.
   (C)   Key box contents. The rapid entry key boxes shall contain the
following labeled keys:
      (1)   Keys to locked points of egress, whether on interior or exterior of
such buildings;
      (2)   Keys to the locked mechanical rooms;
      (3)   Keys to the locked elevator rooms;
      (4)   Keys to the elevator controls;
      (5)   Keys to any fence or secured areas;
      (6)   Keys to any other areas as directed by the Fire Chief; and
      (7)   Any box containing more than 15 keys shall include a floor plan.
   (D)   Newly constructed structures; installation. All newly constructed
structures subject to this section shall have the key lock box installed and
operational prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. All structures in
existence on the effective date of this section and subject to this section
shall have 12 months from the effective date of this section to have a key lock
box installed and operational.
   (E)   Fire Chief; duties. The Fire Chief shall be authorized to implement
rules and regulations for the use of the lock box system.
(Ord. 084, passed - -2008; Ord. 160, passed 11-5-2012) Penalty, see §
92.999
FIREMEN’S PENSION AND RELIEF FUND
§ 92.055 ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   A Firemen’s Pension and Relief Fund is hereby established, pursuant to
the authority of W.Va. Code § 8-22-16, for the purposes enumerated in W.Va.
Code Ch. 8, Art. 22. Such fund shall consist of gifts, grants, devises and
bequests of money and real and personal property, upon such terms as to the
investment and expenditure thereof as may be fixed by the grantors thereof or
determined by the Board of Trustees of the Fund, plus other funds, assessments
and levies, as provided in W.Va. Code § 8-22-19.
   (B)   (1)   The existing pension plan for firefighters employed by the city,
as established, is hereby closed to new entrants, in accordance with the
authority provided in W.Va. Code § 8-22-16(e).
      (2)   The city shall utilize the optional method of financing the
unfunded actuarial accrued liability of the existing Firemen’s Pension and
Relied Fund as provided in W.Va. Code § 8-22-20(e).
      (3)   Newly hired firefighters shall be enrolled in a retirement plan
created in W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 22A and approved and administered by the
State Consolidated Public Retirement Board.
      (4)   All current active member, retirees and other beneficiaries covered
by the existing Firemen’s Pension and Relief Fund shall remain covered by that
plan and shall be paid all benefits of that plan in accordance with applicable
provisions of the West Virginia Code.
(1991 Code, § 8-22) (Ord. passed 5-7-1953; Ord. 191, passed 3-19-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Federal Social Security benefit, see §
30.03
   Participation of city in state employment employees’ retirement system, see
§
30.04
Editor’s note:
   This subchapter was enacted in 1953 pursuant to authority of the then W.Va.
Code Ch. 8, Art. 6; and all references herein to the West Virginia Code have
been revised so as to refer to the West Virginia Code as in effect upon the
cut-off date of this city code.
Statutory reference:
   Duty of Council to levy annual tax for fund, see W.Va. Code § 8-22-19
   State law relating to municipal firemen’s pension and relief funds, see
W.Va. Code §§ 8-22-16 to 8-22-28
§ 92.056 BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   The Board of Trustees of the Firemen’s Pension and Relief Fund shall be
composed and have the powers and duties provided for such boards by W.Va. Code
§§ 8-22-17 and 8-22-18.
(1991 Code, § 8-23)
FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE ASSESSMENTS
§ 92.070 LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE; MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Fire protection service shall be continued, maintained and improved by
the city, in part, at the charge and expense of the owners of buildings and
structures of every kind and nature within the municipal corporate limits and
outside the municipal corporate limits within the Fire Service District (First
Due Area) of the City Fire Department as designated by the State Commission and
State Fire Marshal, which owners are declared to be the users and beneficiaries
of such fire services as contemplated by W.Va. Code § 8-13-13.
   (B)   The charges and expenses with respect to each of such users as set out
in this subchapter shall be based and imposed, in part, upon recognition of the
following legislative findings. The size of a nonresidential structure and a
multiple-family residential unit structure, as reflected by the total square
feet, is a factor which affects the cost of providing fire protection and,
therefore, the fees imposed hereunder are related in part to the size of the
building.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014)
§ 92.071 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DUAL RESIDENTIAL UNIT STRUCTURE. Any structure or unit which is insurable as
a permanent dwelling, and used or intended by the nature of its design and
construction to be used as a two- (separate) family dwelling by persons for
living or sleeping quarters, and having only two units within such structure,
but shall not include unit structures intended primarily for transient lodging,
including without limitation, hotels, motels, rest homes and hospital rooms.
Such structure shall include, but not be limited to, duplexes.
   FACTORY BUILT HOME. Modular homes, mobile homes, house trailers and
manufactured homes.
   FIRE CHIEF. The City of Elkins Fire Chief.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. The paid Fire Department of the City of Elkins and all
firefighters serving as volunteers within said Department.
   FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES. Specifically, and the scope of the services
contemplated as being provided by the City Fire Department and charged for
through the fire protection service fee program described in this subchapter;
including, but are not limited to: response to fires; motor vehicle accidents;
entrapment; extrication; high-angle rescue; gas leaks; downed power lines;
arcing electrical equipment; aircraft standby; lock-outs; smoke removal; animal
rescue; public service; and/or unauthorized burning.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL UNIT STRUCTURE. A residential unit structure
having more than two-family dwellings or units within such structure. Such
structure shall include, but not be limited to, apartment buildings,
condominiums, townhouses or boarding houses. Such structure shall exclude
hotels, motels, tourist homes and the like.
   NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT STRUCTURE. All other buildings not included within the
definitions of residential unit structure. Such structures shall include, but
not be limited to, all commercial establishments, schools, churches, government
buildings and the like. If a structure has multiple uses such as residential
and commercial, it will be classified as a NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT.
   OWNER. The owner of record of any tract or parcel of real estate, as
reflected by the records maintained in the office of the Clerk of the County
Commission of Randolph County but may also include the grantee or transferee of
any interest in any real estate by unrecorded deed, or by an owner-financed
sale evidenced by written agreement, such as a “land contract”; provided that
the parties to any such transaction are required to notify the Treasurer as to
which party to any such transaction shall be responsible to pay any fire
service fees due and payable pursuant to this subchapter.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT STRUCTURE.
      (1)   Any structure or unit which is insurable as a permanent dwelling
and used or intended by the nature of its design and construction to be used as
a single-family dwelling by persons for living or sleeping quarters, but shall
not include unit structures intended primarily for transient lodging, including
without limitation, hotels, motels, rest homes and hospital rooms.
      (2)   It shall also not include cabins, camps or other structures that
are:
         (a)   Intended by the nature of their design and construction for
occasional, seasonal use;
         (b)   Actually used in a manner that is nonremunerative to the owner;
and
         (c)   Assessed by the County Assessor at a value less than $25,000.
   SQUARE FOOTAGE. All space within a building including all attics, basements
and garages attached or detached, and all utility buildings upon the premises
of the property owner shall be included in as part of the total SQUARE FOOTAGE
in determining the fire protection service assessment provided for in this
subchapter. SQUARE FOOTAGE shall be fixed and determined by the City Collector
and Treasurer, and in fixing and determining SQUARE FOOTAGE, the City Collector
and Treasurer may make, or cause to be made, such reports, investigations,
surveys and measurements as be requisite and, as an said, may consult the
SQUARE FOOTAGE records maintained by the State Tax Department and the Assessor
of the county.
   TOTAL SQUARE FEET. The sum as measured by the exterior dimensions of each
structure on a lot multiplied by the number of stories, also including enclosed
porches, finished basements, garden centers, finished attics, detached garages
utility buildings and car washes with roofs. The following shall not be
included in the calculation of total square footage: canopies for banks,
hotels, gas stations and retail stores.
   TREASURER. The City of Elkins Treasurer.
(Ord. 049, passed 7-6-2006; Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014; Ord. 195, passed 7-2-
2015; Ord. 203, passed 10-8-2015; Ord. 208, passed 3-17-2016)
§ 92.072 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Treasurer or his or her duly authorized representative is hereby
empowered to make such rules and regulations not in conflict with the
provisions of this subchapter relative to the offering and providing of fire
protection services as are necessary to protect the property or the safety or
health of the public, and no persons shall fail to comply with any such rule
and regulation so promulgated.
   (B)   The Treasurer shall administer all sections of this subchapter dealing
with financing, billing, collection and the like and is determined to carry out
the provisions of all sections of this subchapter dealing with the same.
   (C)   The Treasurer is hereby empowered to adjust, settle or cancel any
charge or fee required or made under this subchapter or any controversy which
may arise in the administration of this subchapter. However, such exercise of
authority by the Treasurer shall be in a uniform manner, and not exercised in a
capricious or arbitrary fashion and a written or electronic record shall be
kept of any and all such adjustments, settlements or cancellations.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014)
§ 92.073 RATES; FEES; CHARGES ESTABLISHED.
   The fees or charges levied, imposed and assessed pursuant to this subchapter
for the maintenance, continuance and improvement of fire protection utility
services, within corporate limits and outside of the corporate limits but
within the First Due Area, shall be as follows:
 
Owner - dual-residential unit structure $100 per year per unit
                                        $0.05 x gross square feet minimum $100
Owner - multiple-family residential     per year (total number of square feet
unit structure                          contained in the structure multiplied
                                        by $0.05 per year)
                                        $0.05 x gross square feet minimum $100
Owner - nonresidential unit structure   per year (total number of square feet
                                        contained in the structure multiplied
                                        by $0.05 per year)
Owner - single-family residential unit  $100 per year
 
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014; Ord. 195, passed 7-2-2015; Ord. 203, passed 10-8-
2015)
§ 92.074 BILLING AND COLLECTION OF FEES.
   (A)   All fees and charges for fire protection services shall be billed and
collected by the Treasurer and will be assessed to the owner as of July 1.
   (B)   Charges for the fire protection service may be billed on a monthly,
quarterly or annual basis as determined by the Treasurer and all charges shall
be billed in advance of the services being rendered.
   (C)   To avoid the late payment penalty imposed by §
92.999, payment for any fire protection service fee imposed by this subchapter,
shall be paid within 20 days of the date of the bill for services is mailed.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014; Ord. 195, passed 7-2-2015) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.075 CHARGE OR FEE DEBT DUE CITY.
   The fees or charges provided for by this subchapter shall be a debt due the
city. The city may collect any such fee or charge and all accrued penalties by
action against the owner of property against whom the service charges have been
assessed by action before the Magistrate Court of the county or by appropriate
proceedings in the Circuit Court of the county.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014)
§ 92.076 ASSESSMENT; RULES AND REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
   The Treasurer shall make and promulgate, from time to time, suitable
regulations governing the services hereby provided, the making of statement of
accounts, the collection thereof, and such other rules and regulations as he or
she may deem proper or necessary for the enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014)
§ 92.077 CHARGES ARE RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNER; OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Each and every property owner of residential unit structures, dual
residential unit structures, multiple-family residential unit structures and
nonresidential unit structures shall be responsible for the payment of the fire
protection service fee charges assessed, imposed and levied under this
subchapter.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner or owners of all buildings
and structures to notify the Treasurer of any change in ownership and other
items requested by the Treasurer within 30 days of such change.
   (C)   (1)   The city will utilize square footages supplied by a combination
of county records, measurement by city employees and/or information supplied by
the property owners for purposes of billing this fire fee. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the building to review these square footages and
notify the city of any changes within 60 days of the billing. Failure to notify
the city of discrepancies will void the owner’s right for reduction of previous
billings.
      (2)   (a)   If the owner determines that the city is not billing at
sufficient square footage, the owner must notify the city within 60 days or the
owner will be subject to a penalty.
         (b)   The penalty shall be the lesser of:
            1.   All fire fees for the duration of owner’s ownership of the
property from the enactment of this subchapter, plus penalties and interest at
the highest rates allowed by law; or
            2.   Five years of fire fees, plus penalties and interest at the
highest rates allowed by law.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014)
§ 92.078 PROTESTS.
   The owner of any such building above feeling aggrieved by a charge or fee
for fire protection service may protest the same by giving written notice under
oath to the Treasurer setting forth his or her objections on or before 35 days
after the billing date. The owner shall present information and documentation
to the Treasurer concerning his or her objections with regard to the charge or
fee for fire protection service. The Treasurer shall consider the information
and documentation and make a determination concerning the appropriate charge or
fee to be assessed. If the owner is not satisfied with the Treasurer’s
determination, the owner may continue the protest by notifying the Treasurer in
writing and paying a non-returnable filing fee of $50. Upon receipt of such
protest, the Treasurer shall report the same to the Fire Service Fee Appeals
Board, which shall set a date within 30 days of the filing of the protest for a
hearing thereon. Any such owner shall have the right to be heard concerning
such protest in person or by an attorney at such hearing The Fire Service Fee
Appeals Board shall render its decision based on the record made at the hearing
within a reasonable time, giving notice in writing of its decision to all
parties concerned. Any decision made by the Fire Service Fee Appeals Board
shall not have any bearing on the valuation placed on property by the County
Assessor. The amount, if any, due the city under such decision shall be due and
payable 30 days after service of the decision. Any person aggrieved by such
decision may, within 30 days from the service of the decision, file a petition
duly verified with the Circuit Court of the county, requesting review by
certiorari; otherwise, such decision becomes final and conclusive.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014; Ord. 195, passed 7-2-2015)
§ 92.079 FIRE SERVICE FEE APPEAL BOARD.
   There is hereby established a Fire Service Appeals Board consisting of three
members, one shall be a member of Council appointed by the Mayor, one shall be
the Fire Chief and the third shall be a resident of the city appointed by
Council. The members’ terms, except for the Fire Chief, shall be for a term of
three years. Any vacancy for whatever cause shall be filled as soon as
possible, but no longer than 30 days after the vacancy occurs.
(Ord. 195, passed 7-2-2015)
§ 92.080 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No structure or building shall be exempt from the fees imposed by this
subchapter, whether the title or ownership thereof and therein be vested in the
United States of America, the state or any political subdivision thereof, or
whether the property is used for educational, literary, scientific, religious,
charitable or cemetery purposes, or otherwise be exempt from the payment of
real property taxes under the provisions of Article X of the West Virginia
Constitution.
   (B)   Residential property owners and tenants of rental properties may apply
for hardship reductions and/or exemptions from this fee by following procedures
that may be adopted or amended from time to time by the Council via resolution.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014; Ord. 208, passed 3-17-2016)
§ 92.081 RESTRICTED USE OF REVENUES; FUTURE RATES AND CHARGES.
   All revenues received from the collection of fire protection fees provided
in this subchapter shall be used only to defray the cost of and the
continuance, maintenance and improvement of fire protection services provided
by the Fire Department and no part of such revenues shall be used for any other
municipal purpose. Any future adjustment of the rates and charges imposed by
this subchapter shall be determined by applying the same percentage adjustment
equally to all rates and changes imposed by this subchapter.
(Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014)
§ 92.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of §
92.002 shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount set forth by Council from
time to time for each offense.
(1991 Code, § 8-6)
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §
92.004 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of an
amount set forth by Council from time to time. Each day that a violation
continues to exist without correction, shall constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   (1)   Any person or corporation, or responsible officer of the
corporation, who violates any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code,
adopted under §§
92.015 through
92.021, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time or imprisoned not
more than 30 days, or both fined and imprisoned.
      (2)   Each and every day during which any illegal erections,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or use continues after
knowledge or official notice that the same is illegal shall be deemed a
separate offense.
      (3)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions, where applicable.
(1991 Code, § 8-15)
   (E)   Any property or building owner failing to comply with, or in violation
of, the terms of §
92.041 after notice from the Fire Chief, shall be subject to a fine of an
amount set forth by Council from time to time for noncompliance.
   (F)   Regarding §§
92.074, any charge for service remaining unpaid 20 days after the billing date
shall be deemed delinquent and a late payment penalty of an amount set forth by
Council from time to time of the unpaid charge for that billing shall be
assessed. In the event that any such delinquent charge remains unpaid for 12
months, an additional penalty equal to interest at the rate of an amount set
forth by Council from time to time per annum of the billing shall be assessed.
   (G)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§
92.070 through
92.081, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be fined an amount set
forth by Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 3-7-1963; Ord. passed 9-17-1992; Ord. 068, passed 11-7-2007; Ord.
084, passed - -2008; Ord. 110, passed 4-1-2010; Ord. 160, passed 11-5-2012;
Ord. 178, passed 6-19-2014; Ord. 195, passed 7-2-2015)
CHAPTER 93: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.001   Seating at Mountain State Forest Festival
   
93.002   Harmful or offensive matter
   
93.003   Conducting trade or business
   
93.004   Animals or bicycles on sidewalks
   
93.005   [Reserved]
   
93.006   Duties of owners and occupants as to sidewalks
   
93.007   Obstructions
   
93.008   Openings in sidewalks
   
93.009   Guttering of porches and balconies
   
93.010   Matters incidental to street improvements; connection standards
   
93.011   Matters incidental to street improvements; notice to make connections;
failure to make connections
   
93.012   Permanent improvements requested by petition
Construction and Repair of Sidewalks
   
93.025   Obligation of owner; exception
   
93.026   Obligation of owner; failure to comply
   
93.027   Liability of adjacent property owners
   
93.028   Construction standards
   
93.029   Permit; form
   
93.030   Permit; required; fee
   
93.031   Permit; determination of Public Works Director
   
93.032   Permit; determination of Public Works Director; approval; certificate
   
93.033   Record of permits and certificates
   
93.034   Applications to have sidewalk grades and lines established
Excavations
   
93.045   Permit required
   
93.046   Excavations near streets, sidewalks and public places
   
93.047   Permit; application
   
93.048   Permit; prerequisites; surety
   
93.049   Companies operating under city franchise
   
93.050   Manner of work; restoration of surface
   
93.051   Required safeguards; footbridges
   
93.052   Bridges over excavations in roadways
   
93.053   Safeguards relating to sidewalk excavations
   
93.054   Handling, conveyance and disposition of dirt
   
93.055   State permit
Street and Alley Abandonment Procedures
   
93.070   Legislative intent
   
93.071   Authority
   
93.072   Procedure
   
93.073   Deposit of costs; fees non-returnable
   
93.074   Grounds for disapproval
   
93.075   Division of abandoned public way
   
93.076   Quitclaim deed
Trees
   
93.090   Certain trees prohibited
   
93.091   Tree guidelines
   
93.092   Definitions
   
93.093   Creation and establishment of City Tree Board
   
93.094   Term of office
   
93.095   Compensation
   
93.096   Duties and responsibilities
   
93.097   Operation
   
93.098   Tree species to be planted
   
93.099   City Arbor Day
   
93.100   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property
   
93.101   Tree planning meetings
   
93.102   Review by the Council
   
93.103   Liability
Outdoor Dining in Public Places
   
93.115   Outdoor dining rules and regulations
   
93.116   Compliance with federal, state, and local laws and regulations
   
93.117   Definitions
   
93.118   Permit process
   
93.119   Standards for outdoor dining areas
   
93.120   Additional requirements
   
93.121   Denial or revocation of permit
 
   
93.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Board of Parks and Recreation Commissioners, see §§
33.050 through
33.060
   Burning paper, refuse and the like in streets, see §
92.003
   Exhibiting stallion, jack or bull on streets and the like, see §
90.11
   Grades and elevations, see §§
10.08 through
10.12
   Loitering generally, see §
130.012
   Parking Authority, see §§
33.110 through
33.116
   Public Works Director, see §
32.19
   Spitting in public, see §
130.017
   Staking cows or other animals on streets or property of another, see §
90.10
   Street carnivals, parades or exhibitions, see §
130.018
   Vehicles and traffic generally, see Title VII
Statutory reference:
   Assessments by city to improve streets and sidewalks, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-
18-1 et seq.
   Authority of city to layoff, construct, repair and the like, streets,
sidewalks, gutters and the like, and to keep them free from obstructions and
the like, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(1) to (5)
   Authority of city to provide for the regulation and control, acquisition,
care, management and use of the city’s streets, alleys, ways and property, see
W.Va. Code § 8-12-2
   Low cost street and sidewalk improvements, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-17-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.001 SEATING AT MOUNTAIN STATE FOREST FESTIVAL.
   (A)   The placing of chairs for viewing the Mountain State Forest Festival
scheduled parades shall, insofar as they are placed between the curb of any
street on the parade route and the property of any person abutting the parade
route, be placed only with the permission, direction and control of such
abutting property owner, subject only to the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Chairs shall be so placed as to leave the sidewalk abutting the parade
route clear and unobstructed for normal pedestrian traffic.
   (C)   Chairs shall not be placed in the traveled portion of any street.
   (D)   No person shall sell chairs or seating for any consideration for the
viewing of parades without written permission of the Council. Such permission
shall be for no longer than one year at a time. Sales of chairs and seating
shall be only by religious, charitable or non-profit organizations.
   (E)   By granting the right to place chairs or seating upon that portion of
the public street right-of-way adjacent to any abutting owner’s property, the
city shall assume no liability or responsibility for injuries of parade
spectators or users of the rights granted herein.
(1991 Code, § 18-1) (Ord. passed 9-7-1972) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.002 HARMFUL OR OFFENSIVE MATTER.
   No person, except as authorized by this code or other ordinance, order or
regulation of the Mayor or Council, shall drop, place, throw or suffer to
remain or cause to be dropped, placed, thrown or suffered to remain upon any
street or other public place any glass, bottles, scrap-iron, nails, tacks,
paper or offensive matter of any kind.
(1991 Code, § 18-2) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.003 CONDUCTING TRADE OR BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person shall, without the consent of the Council, perform any work
of any character pertaining to his or her trade or business or the trade or
business of another, upon any public street, sidewalk, park or public square
within the city.
   (B)   No person, without the consent of the Council, shall at any time sell,
offer or expose for sale at public auction any goods, wares, merchandise or
property of any kind upon any street; except, that this requirement shall not
apply to officers of the law in making sales under the process of a court or in
discharge of their official duties.
(1991 Code, § 18-3) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.004 ANIMALS OR BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall lead, ride or drive any horse or other livestock along
or upon any of the sidewalks or footwalks.
   (B)   No person shall ride any bicycle upon any sidewalk within the city;
provided, that riders of bicycles, when dismounted, may walk their bicycles
along the sidewalks in single file.
(1991 Code, § 18-4) (Ord. 340, passed 1-23-2025) Penalty, see §
93.999
Cross-reference:
   Operation of bicycles generally, see §§
73.20 through
73.33
§ 93.005 [RESERVED].
§ 93.006 DUTIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS AS TO SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of each owner or occupant of any building or lot
which abuts upon any street upon which there is a brick, stone, concrete, board
or other type pavement or sidewalk to keep such pavement or sidewalk clean and
free from obstruction of every kind and, when necessary, such person shall
remove the snow and ice therefrom at least once each day and shall sweep such
pavement or sidewalk at least once each day; except, that it shall not be
necessary to sweep any such pavement or sidewalk on Sunday.
   (B)   It shall further be the duty of each owner and occupant of any
building or lot which abuts upon any street upon which there is a brick, stone,
concrete, board or other pavement or sidewalk to remove the dirt, paper,
sweepings and refuse of any kind therefrom, nor shall such owner or occupant
sweep or place any paper, sweepings, dirt, debris or any other refuse into the
city streets, but shall remove such sweepings from such pavement or sidewalk.
(1991 Code, § 18-6) (Ord. passed 5-18-1950) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.007 OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   Enumerated. No person shall in any way obstruct any street, sidewalk,
public footwalk, public park or square or any other public place. Obstructions,
within the meaning of this section, shall include, but not be limited to, cut
or fallen trees within the bounds of a public road or walkway which interfere
with travel thereon; limbs of trees which have fallen or branches of trees
overhanging so as to interfere with travel thereon and use thereof; landslides;
carcasses of animals; lumber, wood or logs piled within the bounds of a public
right-of-way, park or square; machinery, vehicles, conveyances and implements
abandoned or habitually placed within the bounds of a public right-of-way, park
or square; fences, buildings or other obstructions within the bounds thereof;
ashes, cinders, earth, stone or other material placed thereon or in any ditch
or waterway along any such public right-of-way; water diverted from its regular
course so as to injure or endanger a public right-of-way; pipe lines,
telegraph, telephone or other poles and wires connected therewith constructed
or erected on a public right-of-way, public park or square which interfere with
the use thereof; or any other thing which will prevent the easy, safe and
convenient use of such public right-of-way, park or square.
   (B)   Prohibited; injunction. Such obstructions so placed and left within
the boundaries of any such public right-of-way, park or square are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and, in addition to other remedies provided by
this subchapter and other chapters of this code, the city may apply to the
Circuit Court of the county for an injunction to abate such nuisance.
   (C)   Obligation as to removal or repair.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of land situated
along any public right-of-way or abutting any public park or square to remove
all obstructions within the boundaries of such public right-of-way, park or
square which have been placed thereon by himself or herself or with his or her
consent.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of all telephone, telegraph or other power or
communication companies to remove and reset telephone, telegraph and other
poles and the wires connected therewith when such poles or wires constitute
obstructions to the use of a public right-of-way, park or square.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of all pipe line companies whose lines have
been laid across or along any public right-of-way, park or square for the
purpose of transporting natural gas, oil, water or other substance, to fill up
all excavations made thereby so that the surface or pavement overlying such
excavation is, in all respects, in as good condition as it was before the
excavation was made.
   (D)   Removal or repair by city.
      (1)   Notice. If such obstructions or poles, wires or pipe lines are not
removed or such poles and wires reset or such excavations are not properly
filled and maintained within ten days after the service of a notice by the city
upon any such owner or occupant requesting such correction to be made, the
Council, by its duly designated agent, shall cause such obstructions and such
poles, wires or pipe lines to be removed and reset or such repairs on the
excavations to be made, as may be necessary to return such pavements or
surfaces to their original condition.
      (2)   Costs. The Council shall assess the cost of removing obstructions
and removing and resetting piles and wires, or such repairs as are necessary to
faulty excavations pursuant to this section, against any owner, occupant,
company or corporation neglecting to perform its duty imposed by the provisions
of this section. The Council shall cause to be served upon such owner, occupant
or company a written notice stating that, at the time and place specified
therein, the Council proposes to assess such cost against such owner, occupant
or company neglecting to perform such duty. Such notice shall be served at
least ten days prior to the time specified therein. If directed against a
corporation, such notice may be served as other notices or processes are served
under W.Va. Code Ch. 56. At the time and place specified, the Council shall
hear the parties interested and shall thereupon complete the assessment, as
provided by W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 18.
(1991 Code, § 18-7) (Ord. passed 3-3-1959; Ord. passed 3-19-1959) Penalty, see
§
93.999
§ 93.008 OPENINGS IN SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall, without the consent of the Council, build any cellar door,
window way, coal hole or other opening of any kind into or through any sidewalk
or footwalk; and where any such way, hole or opening exists in any sidewalk or
footway with the consent of the Council. Such opening shall never, under any
circumstances, be left open so that pedestrians might fall therein, nor shall
it at any time be opened if there is danger of pedestrians falling therein,
unless someone is stationed to warn pedestrians of the danger during the time
such aperture is open.
(1991 Code, § 18-8) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.009 GUTTERING OF PORCHES AND BALCONIES.
   It shall be the duty of every person who owns property upon which there is a
house or other building which has a porch or balcony which protrudes or extends
over the street or sidewalk to have such porch or balcony properly spouted or
equipped with gutters; and if the owner fails or refuses to properly spout such
porch or balcony within ten days after being duly notified so to do, he or she
shall be subject to such penalties as are provided by §
93.999.
(1991 Code, § 18-9) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.010 MATTERS INCIDENTAL TO STREET IMPROVEMENTS; CONNECTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Whenever the city shall determine to permanently pave or improve any
street, 30 days before the paving shall be begun, property owners having gas,
water, sewer or other lines or conduits in the street where the paving is to be
done shall connect or have their property connected with such lines and
conduits, and where such connections have already been made, all property
owners shall have examined or examine and test the connections thoroughly, and
renew or repair them wherever such renewal or repair is deemed necessary by the
Public Works Director, and put them in good order and condition; and, at least
two feet below the surface, all the way from the mains to the inner side of the
curb line and where deemed necessary by the Public Works Director, shall fit
the pipe with the new valves, cut-offs, and the like of the weight, thickness,
diameter and style prescribed by the Public Works Director. These connections
shall be of such size and according to such regulations as are prescribed by
the Council or the Public Works Director and shall extend from the respective
lines to a point beyond the curb line.
   (B)   One such connection shall be made in front of every lot abutting on
the proposed permanent pavement or improvement and, in the business section of
the city, such connections shall be spaced more closely as directed by the
Council or Public Works Director, but such connections shall be no less than 25
feet apart. Where a permanent improvement is to be made along the side of any
corner lot, such connection shall be made as may be required by the Council or
Public Works Director upon notice. Where a permanent pavement or improvement is
to be made along vacant land not laid off into lots, the connections shall be
made at intervals of 40 feet; provided, that in such cases where the Council is
satisfied that there is no probability of the land being laid off into lots in
the future, the connections may be more distantly spaced.
(1991 Code, § 18-11)
§ 93.011 MATTERS INCIDENTAL TO STREET IMPROVEMENTS; NOTICE TO MAKE CONNECTIONS;
FAILURE TO MAKE CONNECTIONS.
   Notice to property owners to make connections with gas, water, sewer or
other lines and conduits prior to the construction of permanent pavements or
improvements may be made by service of notice upon the respective property
owners or may be given by publication, in a newspaper published in the city,
for two successive weeks, designating therein the streets along which the
permanent improvements are to be made and if, after giving such notice, the
property owner fails to install such connections within 30 days after notice is
served or within 30 days after the first issue of notice appears in such
newspaper, the city may put in the necessary connections, and the expense
thereof shall be assessed against the abutting property and the owners thereof
and placed in the hands of the City Collector and Treasurer for collection, and
such expenses may be collected, with interest, as are taxes, and the costs
shall be a lien upon such abutting property; provided, that the failure of the
city to give notice in either form shall not release the property owners from
the obligation of putting in connections prior to the construction of a
permanent pavement or improvement. In no event shall any property owner be
permitted to connect with or use any connections until the cost thereof has
been paid to the city; but this last provision shall not release any property
owner from the payment of the costs thereof even if he or she does not use such
connection.
(1991 Code, § 18-12)
§ 93.012 PERMANENT IMPROVEMENTS REQUESTED BY PETITION.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   All permanent improvements to streets, roads or alleys
requested by petition of persons owning property abutting such streets, roads
or alleys shall be made in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by
the city.
         (b)   Such plans and specifications shall provide for adequate grading
and drainage, including the construction of curbs and gutters in such cases as
curbs and gutters are deemed necessary to properly preserve and protect the
paving or surfacing improvements so made.
      (2)   In those cases where curbs and gutters are not deemed necessary to
properly preserve or protect the paving and surface improvements contemplated,
the city may construct said improvements, as herein provided, without curbs and
gutters, and shall thereafter maintain said improvements, pursuant to division
(C) below.
   (B)   In the event that the petition for improvements is directed only to
the paving or surfacing of the streets, roads or alleys and does not request
curbs, gutters or related improvements, and the plans and specifications for
the project require the construction of curbs, gutters or related improvements,
then the city will so advise the petitioners. If the petitioners agree that
these related improvements are necessary and are willing to pay for the same,
then petitioners will submit an amended petition requesting the city to
construct such curbs, gutters or related improvements as are necessary;
thereafter, the city will make the improvements requested by the petition or
amended petition.
   (C)   Where the permanent improvements are made by the city in accordance
with division (B) above, the city will bear the expense of resurfacing such
street, road or alley in the future when such resurfacing becomes necessary.
   (D)   In the event that the petition for surfacing or paving improvements
does not request any improvements other than the actual surfacing or paving of
any street, road or alley, and in the event that is determined by the city that
curbs, gutters or related improvements are necessary to preserve and protect
the surfacing or paving so requested and the petitioners, being so advised,
refuse to submit an amended petition as set forth in division (B) above and
decline to agree to bear the expense of such improvements, then the city will
proceed to make the improvements only as requested by the petition.
   (E)   Where improvements are made in accordance with division (D) above, the
city shall not bear the expense of resurfacing or repaving the street, road or
alley so improved at such time as such resurfacing or repaving might become
necessary.
   (F)   Any of the foregoing provisions notwithstanding, the city will
continue to perform ordinary and routine maintenance of all streets, roads and
alleys within the city.
   (G)   This section applies only to petitions for the surfacing or paving of
those streets, roads or alleys which heretofore have not been permanently
improved by surfacing or paving with asphalt or concrete.
(1991 Code, § 18-12.1) (Ord. passed 5-18-1978; Ord. 006, passed 9-4-2003)
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS
§ 93.025 OBLIGATION OF OWNER; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of all persons owning land or lots which front
upon a street which is maintained and kept by the city to put down and keep in
good repair a suitable sidewalk or footwalk along the entire part of such land
or lot which fronts upon any such street.
   (B)   When, in the opinion of the Council, it has become necessary, the
property owner shall repave the sidewalk, in such a manner, of such width and
of such suitable material as the Council shall direct; provided, that before
any permanent sidewalk or footwalk is laid, it shall be the duty of the Public
Works Director to fix the grade thereof, and such sidewalk shall be laid in
conformity to such grade; and should the city, after the walk is laid, change
the grade, the cost of laying a new walk to conform to such changed grade shall
be paid by the city, as well as all damages the owner of the land or lot may
sustain by reason of such change of grade.
   (C)   The Public Works Director, after establishing of the grade of any such
walk shall report to the Council at the next regular meeting or sooner, if the
Council shall so require, what is necessary for the protection and preservation
of such walks to be laid in pursuance of this subchapter; and the Council,
having made such provision for the protection and preservation of the walks as
it deems necessary and proper, may thereupon direct that such walks be laid.
(1991 Code, § 18-13) (Ord. 097-03, passed 3-26-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Assessments by city to improve streets and sidewalks, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-
18-1 et seq.
   Low cost street and sidewalk improvements, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-17-1 et seq.
§ 93.026 OBLIGATION OF OWNER; FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   Notice; authority of city. If at any time any sidewalk or footwalk
needs repair, or if any land or lot owner fails to build such walk or repave
any walk when repaving, in the opinion of the Council, has become necessary, it
shall be the duty of the Mayor to cause the owner of the land or lot adjacent
thereto to be notified in writing of such need of laying or repair of the walk
and of the character of repaving needed to be done and, if such repairs are not
made by the land or lot owner within ten days after the service of such notice
or if such new walk is not laid or repaving done within 30 days after the
service of such notice, the Council shall then have the power and authority to
repair or repave any such sidewalk or footwalk.
   (B)   Alternate arrangements. The Council shall have the authority and it
shall be within it sole discretion whether to repair or repave such walk by
force account or by contract.
      (1)   Force account. If the Council elects to repair or repave the walk
by force account, it shall keep an accurate account of the labor and materials
used in making such repairs or repavement, which statement of costs shall be
filed in the office of the City Clerk.
      (2)   Contract. If the Council determines to repair or repave by
contract, the Council shall advertise for bids by publication in one of the
newspapers of the city once a week for not more than two weeks, and all
contracts let in pursuant of such advertisement shall be to the lowest
responsible bidder; but nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
Council rejecting any and all bids made in pursuant of such advertisement.
   (C)   Costs. After any sidewalk is repaired, constructed or repaved in
pursuance of the power herein granted, the cost thereof shall be paid out of
the city treasury in the first instance and the Council, after allowing such
costs, shall lay an assessment against the lot benefitted thereby, with a
penalty of an amount set forth by Council from time to time added, and this
assessment shall be placed in the hands of the City Collector and Treasurer, to
be collected by him or her from such land or lot owner as city taxes are
collected; and the cost of such work shall be a lien against such land or lot
abutting on such walkway, taking priority over all other liens, except taxes,
and shall be enforced as city taxes and assessments are enforced against real
estate, or by other appropriate procedure.
   (D)   Fines. If the owner of any such land or lot, after having been given
notice by the Mayor, as herein provided, to lay, repave or repair said sidewalk
shall fail to do so within the time as herein provided, the Mayor may cause any
such land or lot owner to be summoned before the Municipal Court Judge to show
cause why a fine should not be imposed for such failure to repair, repave or
construct the sidewalk as herein provided.
   (E)   Service of notices to nonresidents. If the owner of any such land or
lot is not a resident of the city, the notice to him or her required by this
regulation may be served upon him or her as notices are served under the laws
of this state.
(1991 Code, § 18-14) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.027 LIABILITY OF ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to relieve the adjacent
property owner from liability for personal injury or property damage sustained
by any person on account of any sidewalk becoming out of repair, and it shall
be the duty of the property owner to keep the sidewalk adjacent to his or her
property repaired, in good order, free and clean and, in case any damage is
sustained by the city or recovered against it on account of such sidewalk not
being kept repaired, in good order, free and clean, the damages, including
costs and expenses, shall be recoverable by the city from the adjacent property
and the owner thereof. In case any suit is brought against the city by any
person on account of any sidewalk being out of repair, it shall be the duty of
the Mayor to notify the owner of the property adjacent to the sidewalk where
the accident on which such suit is based is alleged to have occurred, and such
property owner shall have the right to employ counsel and to come in and defend
the suit if he or she so desires; provided, that the provision for the giving
out of notice by the Mayor is only directory, and shall not preclude the right
of the city to recover as aforesaid from the property owner, although such
notice is not given.
(1991 Code, § 18-15)
§ 93.028 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   No permanent sidewalk or footwalk shall be constructed within the city by
any person unless it conforms to the specifications therefor on file in the
office of the Mayor of the city; provided, that under special circumstances the
Council may, by an order entered of record, specify any change or variation
from such specifications. All permanent sidewalks or footwalks built by the
city, where the owners have failed to construct them, shall be built in
accordance with those specifications; but if any variation is made in the
construction of such sidewalks by the city, such variation shall not deprive
the city of its right to recover the cost of the construction of the sidewalk,
and such variation in the specifications shall be deemed to have been made
under the authority of the Council if the sidewalks, after being so
constructed, are accepted from the contractor by the Council.
(1991 Code, § 18-16)
§ 93.029 PERMIT; FORM.
   Prior to the construction of any sidewalk outside the property lines of any
street in the city, there shall be secured from the City Clerk a sidewalk
permit, made out in substantially the following form:
ORIGINAL.
Sidewalk Permit
No. _____________   Elkins, W. Va., ________________ 20_____________
    PERMIT is hereby issued to ___________________ owner and __________________
contractor, subject to the ordinances of the City of Elkins, West Va., and the
approval of the Public Works Director, to construct a concrete sidewalk
____________ feet in width, and ____________ feet in length, in front of Lot
____________, Block ____________, of ____________ Subdivision, abutting and
fronting on ____________ Street, Avenue, in the City of Elkins, West Va.
   Sidewalk to be built to conform to the lines, grades and specifications of the
City of Elkins, West Va., and subject to the inspection and approval of the Public
Works Director.
   This permit to be void upon the date of the advertisement of the lot or lots
herein specified for public letting, providing the actual work of placing concrete
walk shall not have been begun on that date.
 
      ___________________________ City Clerk.
      Elkins, W. Va., ________________ 20_____________
   The walk in front of Lot ____________, Block ____________, of ____________
Subdivision, abutting and fronting on ____________ Street, Avenue, in the City of
Elkins, West Va., conforms to the lines and grades given by this office and are, to
the best of my information, constructed in accordance with the City specifications.
   Grade and Line given __________________
Inspected ____________      ____________ Public Works Director
Page ____________ Sidewalk Record.
 
(1991 Code, § 18-17)
§ 93.030 PERMIT; REQUIRED; FEE.
   The permit fees shall be as set forth by the Council.
(1991 Code, § 18-18)
§ 93.031 PERMIT; DETERMINATION OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.
   Forty-eight hours previous to the construction, repair or opening of any
sidewalk, a notice shall be given the Public Works Director in order that the
proper lines and grades may be established. No sidewalk shall be constructed,
repaired or opened unless the lines and grades are either determined by or
subjected to the inspection or supervision of the Public Works Director, as he
or she may direct.
(1991 Code, § 18-19)
§ 93.032 PERMIT; DETERMINATION OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR; APPROVAL; CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   Upon the completion of the construction, repair or opening of the
sidewalk, such permit shall be approved by the Public Works Director and, at
the same time, a certificate shall be given, governing the amount of work done
in the construction, repair or opening of such sidewalk, if desired by the
property owner or the contractor.
   (B)   The certificate given shall be in substantially the following form:
Dist. No. _____________   Elkins, W. Va., ________________ 20_____________
   THIS IS TO CERTIFY, that the sidewalk on the ___________________ Street,
Avenue, frontage of ___________________ of Lot No ___________________ Block No.
___________________ owned ___________________ by ___________________ was finished
________________ 20____________, by _________________, under contract dated
________________ 20____________, in accordance with the specifications of the
City of Elkins and under my supervision and inspection. The walk is_______ feet
in length and ________ feet in width, and contains ___________ square feet,
which, at the contract price of ______________ cents per square foot, amounts to
$_________________. I hereby accept the walk subject to the approval of the Mayor
and Council of the City of Elkins.
   Extra: _______________________________________
          _______________________________________
   Public Works Director.
   THIS IS TO CERTIFY, That the excavation or embankment has been measured and
calculated on the above described walk and found that there is due the contractor
for excess excavation or embankment as follows:
Cubic yards Excavation at ________________ per cubic yard, $________________
Cubic yards Embankment at ________________ per cubic yard, $________________
Cubic yards Rock at ________________ per cubic yard, $________________
Total cost of improvement, $________________
   ________________ Public Works Director.
   Recorded in the office of the City Clerk of Elkins, West Virginia, in Sidewalk
Record Book ________________ Page ________________
(Public Works Director’s Note Book ________________ Page ________________)
 
(1991 Code, § 18-20)
§ 93.033 RECORD OF PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES.
   A record of the sidewalk permits and certificates of work done shall be kept
in the office of the City Clerk and in the office of the Public Works Director,
for inspection at all times. At the time of the determination of the grades and
lines such determinations shall be fully described and set forth by the Public
Works Director and entered in a record kept for that purpose.
(1991 Code, § 18-21)
§ 93.034 APPLICATIONS TO HAVE SIDEWALK GRADES AND LINES ESTABLISHED.
   Any citizen desiring that sidewalk or other grades and lines be established
shall make application, in writing, to the Council, on a form to be determined
by the Public Works Director and, should the Council see fit to establish the
grade and lines requested, the application shall be referred to the Public
Works Director, with instructions to establish such grades and lines and to
make report back to the Council, in writing, on the back of the application,
giving the grades and lines as established upon true meridian and elevation
above sea level, as established by the United States geological survey.
(1991 Code, § 18-22)
Cross-reference:
   Grades and elevations generally, see §§
10.08 through
10.12
EXCAVATIONS
§ 93.045 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut into or otherwise damage or
excavate any street, sidewalk or public place within the city for the purpose
of connecting property with water, sewer or gas lines thereunder or for any
other purpose, except pursuant to a permit as provided by this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 18-23) Penalty, see §
93.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to provide for the opening and excavation of streets,
sidewalks and public places belonging to the city, and to regulate the
conditions under which such openings may be made, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(2)
§ 93.046 EXCAVATIONS NEAR STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall, without a permit so to do and except in compliance with all
provisions of this subchapter, make any excavation whatever upon or within ten
feet of any street, sidewalk, footwalk, public park or square; nor shall
excavation of any kind be made upon the land of another without his or her
consent; and any person making an excavation within ten feet of any street,
sidewalk or footwalk shall keep such sidewalk or footwalk so protected that
persons and property cannot fall therein, except by breaking through proper and
sufficient guard rails or other adequate protection.
(1991 Code, § 18-24) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.047 PERMIT; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring, for any purpose, to cut, open or otherwise
excavate any street, sidewalk or public place, paved or unpaved, in the city
shall apply to the Public Works Director for a permit so to do.
   (B)   The application shall be in form as prescribed by the Public Works
Director and shall contain such pertinent information as may be required by him
or her including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The purpose of the proposed excavation;
      (2)   The site at which the work is to be done;
      (3)   The date work is to begin and the expected duration of the work;
and
      (4)   The name and address of the person for whose benefit the proposed
work is to be done and who shall be responsible for all required safeguards,
the diligent prosecution of the work, the restoration of the surface, the
payment of all expenses incurred and the compliance with all requirements of
this subchapter.
   (C)   The application shall be signed by such person responsible or by
someone authorized by him or her or by the plumber or other contractor employed
by him or her to do the work.
(1991 Code, § 18-25)
§ 93.048 PERMIT; PREREQUISITES; SURETY.
   (A)   No excavation permit shall be granted, unless it appears, to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director, that the excavation is necessary to
the health, safety or welfare of the person upon whose behalf the excavation is
to be made; and the connection of property to a water, sewer or gas main shall
be deemed sufficient under this section.
   (B)   No excavation permit shall be granted until the applicant therefor or
someone on his or her behalf has made a cash deposit or given bond to the city
in such amount as may be deemed by the Public Works Director sufficient to
cover the cost of safeguards, disposal of excavated dirt and the like, and
restoration of the surface of the place of excavation so as to place it in as
good a condition as it was in prior to the making of the excavation. Each such
bond shall be payable to the city, shall have corporate surety, shall be
approved by the City Attorney and shall be conditioned that the work be
diligently and skillfully prosecuted, barring unforeseeable circumstances
beyond control of the person doing the work, that all necessary safeguards be
maintained, that all excavated materials not required for refill be disposed of
as provided by this subchapter, that the surface of the place of excavation and
not less than ten feet in all directions from the outer perimeter thereof be
placed in as good condition as it was in immediately prior to the commencement
of the work and to the reasonable satisfaction of the Public Works Director
that all requirements of this subchapter shall be complied with, and that any
defective work which appears within five years from the date of acceptance of
the restoration by the Public Works Director shall be subject to repair by the
city at the expense of the permit holder.
(1991 Code, § 18-26)
§ 93.049 COMPANIES OPERATING UNDER CITY FRANCHISE.
   Any gas, water or other company, operating under a franchise from the city
and which, in the course of its business and the exercise of its franchise
rights, finds it necessary to tear up the streets and such sidewalks, at
numerous locations shall not be required in such cases to make the deposit
herein required; but immediately upon the tearing up of any street or
sidewalks, such company shall notify the Public Works Director, and shall
repair the surface to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director and shall
in all other respects comply with the provisions of this subchapter; and, in
the case of failure on the part of any such company to comply therewith, the
Public Works Director shall repair the site of the excavation and the company
shall immediately pay the cost thereof and shall be subject to fine for failure
to comply; provided, that where any location is torn up by any company and the
provisions of this subchapter are not complied with, in addition to the
liability of the company itself, the individuals actually tearing up the street
or sidewalk or the person failing to carry out the provisions of this
subchapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by §
93.999.
(1991 Code, § 18-27) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.050 MANNER OF WORK; RESTORATION OF SURFACE.
   Any person making an excavation shall do the work carefully and
professionally and shall diligently prosecute such work to completion without
undue delay. Materials used and methods employed in filling, tamping and
closing excavations and in restoring the surface shall comply with all
requirements of the Public Works Director.
(1991 Code, § 18-28)
§ 93.051 REQUIRED SAFEGUARDS; FOOTBRIDGES.
   All excavation sites shall be provided with all necessary safety devices to
protect persons and animals from falling into ditches or pits. Such devices
shall include, inter alia, warning signs, lamps and barricades; and, where
practicable, secure planking for pedestrians to cross upon, which shall be well
lighted, the entire way, between sunset and sunrise.
(1991 Code, § 18-29) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.052 BRIDGES OVER EXCAVATIONS IN ROADWAYS.
   Between sunset and sunrise, upon bridges for maintaining traffic over
excavations, the roadway shall be indicated by a sufficient number of lights so
as to clearly identify the course of the roadway and the edges thereof; and the
edges of the bridge itself shall be indicated by red lights or flares.
(1991 Code, § 18-30) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.053 SAFEGUARDS RELATING TO SIDEWALK EXCAVATIONS.
   All persons causing any excavations to be made for sidewalks shall have the
place of excavation properly graded and protected and shall properly barricade
such place for the protection of the public. Whenever necessary, they shall, at
their own expense, properly erect masonry or steel construction or a retaining
wall sufficient to properly support the adjoining earth. Such retaining wall
shall be properly coped or provided with an iron railing to guarantee safety to
the public.
(1991 Code, § 18-31) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.054 HANDLING, CONVEYANCE AND DISPOSITION OF DIRT.
   (A)   No person engaged in excavating or having charge or control of
excavation or who may be engaged in or may have charge or control of conveying
material from excavations shall deposit or permit to be deposited, in any
manner, upon the surface of a sidewalk or any paved street or other public
place, by placing, spilling, dropping or tracking from wheels of vehicles or
from the feet of animals, any earth, clay, mud, sand, gravel or other excavated
material; and all such sidewalks, streets and public places adjacent to
excavations or traversed by vehicles in the process of conveying material from
such excavation or in returning from the place of deposit to the place of
excavation, shall be covered with planking so far as may be required to prevent
any mud, earth, clay or other material from the excavation or from the place of
deposit from reaching the surface of such roadway.
   (B)   The excavations referred to in this section include those made on
private as well as public property.
(1991 Code, § 18-32) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.055 STATE PERMIT.
   No permit shall be granted under this subchapter to excavate within any
street or right-of-way which is a part of the state highway system except upon
display to the engineer of a permit so to do, issued by a competent authority
of the state.
(1991 Code, § 18-33)
STREET AND ALLEY ABANDONMENT PROCEDURES
§ 93.070 LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   Council finds and declares that within the city there are one or more
streets, alleys and public rights- of-way that have not, do not or will not in
the future serve any public purpose; that exist only by means of appearance on
plats or maps of sections of the city; that it would be in the best interest of
the city to abandon and vacate such streets, alleys and public rights-of-way,
thereby absolving any actual or contingent liability; and that would otherwise
permit more appropriate land use within the city thereby promoting orderly
development of the city.
(Ord. 185, passed 11-20-2014)
§ 93.071 AUTHORITY.
   Council, pursuant to the authority granted it by the Charter and the West
Virginia Code, reserves the right to close, abandon, discontinue for public use
any part or all of any street, alley, land, road or other designated travel way
presently owned by or dedicated to the city.
(Ord. 185, passed 11-20-2014)
§ 93.072 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any landowner whose land abuts on any street, alley, lane, road or
other designated travel way seeking to close, abandon, discontinue for public
use any part or all of such right-of-way shall file with the City Clerk:
      (1)   A petition to Council;
      (2)   The petition shall be accompanied by an engineer’s or surveyor’s
map of such right-of-way together with abutting property owners; and
      (3)   A list of all owners of property abutting on such right-of-way.
   (B)   Before acting to close, abandon, discontinue for public use any part
or all of such right-of- way, the Council shall accept the petition and refer
it to the Municipal Properties Committee to fix a time and place for a public
hearing on the petition. Such public hearing shall be held not less that 15
days after the date and place have been so fixed. The Municipal Properties
Committee shall cause notice of the time and place of such hearing and the
purpose thereof to be published as a Class I legal advertisement in compliance
with the provisions of W.Va. Code Art. 59-3. The notice shall be published at
least 15 days before such hearing. The applicant shall cause to be served, at
least 15 days before such hearing, in the manner provided by law for the
service of notices and process a notice showing the time, place and purpose of
such hearing, upon every owner of property, and every person holding a lien
thereon, abutting such street, alley, lane, road or other designated travel
way. The affidavit of publication of such notice shall be filed with the
Municipal Properties Committee at or before the hearing as part of the record
in the proceedings. After considering the evidence presented at the public
hearing, as well as any other documented evidence which may come before the
Municipal Properties Committee, the Committee shall report its recommendations
to Council at the next Council meeting. The recommendations of the Municipal
Properties Committee to Council may include a recommendation as to a value to
be placed on the right-of-way or portion thereof to be considered for
abandonment.
   (C) Upon receipt of the Municipal Property Committee’s recommendations,
Council shall direct the preparation of an ordinance in the manner prescribed
by law. Council shall then vote on passage or rejection of the ordinance by a
simple majority vote of the members present at a regular or special meeting at
which a quorum is present.
(Ord. 185, passed 11-20-2014; Ord. 285, passed 7-1-2021)
§ 93.073 DEPOSIT OF COSTS; FEES NON-RETURNABLE.
   The landowner shall deposit an amount set forth by Council from time to time
at the time of the filing of the petition for each quitclaim deed to cover the
administrative cost, cost of legal publication, the cost of preparation of the
deed, and recordation thereof. No part of the filing fee paid pursuant to this
section shall be returnable to the landowner or petitioner.
(Ord. 185, passed 11-20-2014)
§ 93.074 GROUNDS FOR DISAPPROVAL.
   Council will not approve an abandonment or vacation of any street, alley or
public way under the following conditions:
   (A)   If the street, alley or public way serves or is expected to serve any
public purpose;
   (B)   If any person or property, not consenting to such vacation or
abandonment, is found to suffer special damage; and
   (C)   If the vacation or abandonment unreasonably impedes the flow of
traffic.
(Ord. 185, passed 11-20-2014)
§ 93.075 DIVISION OF ABANDONED PUBLIC WAY.
   Unless otherwise agreed by the owners of the property abutting thereon, the
street, alley or public way shall be divided along the centerline, and each
abutting property owner taking such portion thereof to the centerline.
(Ord. 185, passed 11-20-2014)
§ 93.076 QUITCLAIM DEED.
   The ordinance vacating and abandoning the street, alley or public way shall
provide that the Mayor execute and deliver to the proper party a quitclaim deed
for that portion of the street, alley or public way to go to such property
owner. Any such quitclaim deed shall reserve all necessary water, sewer and
other utility easements.
(Ord. 185, passed 11-20-2014)
TREES
§ 93.090 CERTAIN TREES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or maintain upon his or
her property or upon any street adjoining thereto any tree commonly known as
the North Carolina poplar or any other shade tree which, by its nature, will
tend to plug up or damage sewers, sidewalks, streets or other property.
   (B)   If any such tree be planted after the effective date of this code, it
shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Streets to immediately cut down and
destroy it, provided, that if the Superintendent of Streets does not have
personal knowledge that such tree has been planted since that time, a notice
and proceeding, shall be had before the Council; and, if it be ascertained by
the Council that such tree was planted since the effective date of this code
then such tree shall be declared a nuisance and the owner required to abate the
nuisance.
(1991 Code, § 18-10) Penalty, see §
93.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to provide for the protection of shade and ornamental
trees, whether on public or private property, and for the removal of limbs of
trees when in a dangerous condition, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(29)
§ 93.091 TREE GUIDELINES.
   In accordance with a request made by the Elkins Main Street Project, the
city, by committee appointed by the Mayor, shall ensure that the following
guidelines are adhered to with respect to trees in the downtown:
   (A)   Flowering trees shall receive pruning;
   (B)   Application of organic fertilizer shall occur in spring and early
fall;
   (C)   Girdling of trees shall be prohibited and particular care shall be
taken in circumstances where guy wire maintenance is required;
   (D)   Mulching in spring shall occur;
   (E)   Tree areas shall be maintained weed free;
   (F)   Regular maintenance shall occur, including observation for insect
infestation and disease or fungus; and
   (G)   Necessary watering shall occur in times of drought and close
monitoring of water situation shall occur in the first three years after a tree
is planted.
(Ord. passed 3-4-1993)
§ 93.092 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELKINS TREE BOARD. The body which advises the city on matters affecting the
urban forest.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Elkins, Randolph County, West Virginia.
   PARK. Includes all public parks, the ownership and control of which as
vested in the city.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The person owning designated property as shown by the County
Assessor’s plat of the City of Elkins, as the case may be.
   PUBLIC PLACES. Includes all public rights-of-way owned by the City of
Elkins, Randolph County.
   PUBLIC TREES. All shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on any
street or any public right-of-way or grounds owned or controlled by the city.
   REMOVE. The cutting down, damaging or taking of public trees.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width of every public way or right-of-way when
any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right for the
purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and extending from the property
line to property line.
   TREE ARBORIST. The person within the committee who provides technical
expertise and advice to the City Tree Board.
   URBAN FOREST. All trees located on city-owned or controlled property.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.093 CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY TREE BOARD.
   There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the city of
which will consist of no less than six and no more than eight members, who are
citizens and residents of Randolph County recommended by the City Tree Board,
and who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.
The members will come from different interest groups including, but not limited
to, homeowners, tree professionals and City Council. Membership on Council does
not disqualify any person for appointment to the City Tree Board, if otherwise
qualified, however, not more than two members of Council may be so appointed.
At least one of the members of the City Tree Board shall be a member of
Council.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. 284, passed 7-1-
2021)
§ 93.094 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of the persons to be appointed will be three years. The term of two
members appointed to the first Board will be only one year and the term of two
members of the first Board shall be for two years. Following the terms of the
members of the first Board, the terms shall be three years. In the event that a
vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor may be appointed
for the unexpired portion of the term. Members may serve consecutive terms
without restriction. Any member who is unable or unwilling to serve on the Tree
Board may be dismissed by the Board, due to continual or consecutive absences,
by a majority vote of members present at any meeting. Replacement of any member
who is dismissed shall be done in the same manner as provided for herein.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.095 COMPENSATION.
   Members of Board will serve without compensation.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.096 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   It will be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate,
counsel, develop and administer a written plan for the care, preservation,
pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in
parks, along streets, and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented to
the Council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the
official comprehensive city tree plan. Any changes to the city tree plan shall
be presented to Council for its consideration.
   (B)   The Board will promote and supervise the establishment of a tree
inventory for public trees. The inventory should be updated as often as
practicable.
   (C)   The Board shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and
recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its
work. The Board shall report the results of its investigations to Council
within a reasonable time.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.097 OPERATION.
   The Board will choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations,
and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members will be a
quorum for the transaction of business.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.098 TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
   The City Tree Board will develop and maintain a list of desirable trees for
planting along streets in three size classes based on mature height: small;
medium; and large. Efforts will be made to ensure a sufficient diversity of
tree species. A list of trees not suitable for planting will also be created by
the Tree Board. All species of trees to be planted on public property shall be
made known to the Tree Board.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.099 CITY ARBOR DAY.
   The City Tree Board will specify a “City Arbor Day”, to be determined
annually by the Tree Board, and approved by the Council.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.100 DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The city will have the right to request the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard
to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a
potential threat to other trees within the city. The City Tree Board will
notify in writing the owners of such trees upon the recommendation of the tree
arborist. In the event that the private property owner takes no action
following the notification, the city may, with the approval of Council, proceed
to take further action if determined to be warranted to protect life and
property.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. 284, passed 7-1-
2021)
§ 93.101 TREE PLANNING MEETINGS.
   Property owners, business owners, neighborhood associations and any other
interested parties are encouraged to attend planning meetings with the Tree
Board regarding proposed planting, pruning or tree removal programs.(Ord. 076,
passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. 284, passed 7-1-2021)
§ 93.102 REVIEW BY THE COUNCIL.
   The Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and plans of
the City Tree Board. The City Tree Board shall file an annual report of its
actions with Council on or before December 31 of each year.
(Ord. 076, passed 7-3-2008; Ord. 235, passed 4-6-2017)
§ 93.103 LIABILITY.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be deemed to impose any liability
upon the city, its officers, agents or employees, nor to relieve the owner of
any private property from the duty to keep any tree on the owner’s property in
such condition as to prevent it from constituting a hazard or impediment to
travel or vision upon any street, alley or public place within the city.
(Ord. 284, passed 7-1-2021)
OUTDOOR DINING IN PUBLIC PLACES
§ 93.115 OUTDOOR DINING RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City of Elkins Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to promulgate
reasonable rules and regulations regarding the administration of the
requirements of this subchapter, to review all outdoor dining area permit
applications and to either grant or deny such permits under this subchapter.
Copies of such regulations, as amended from time to time, shall be maintained
by the Zoning Officer, posted on the city’s website and filed in the City
Clerk’s office, and shall be available to interested parties at all reasonable
times.
(Ord. 300, passed 7-28-2022)
§ 93.116 COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The operation of an outdoor dining area pursuant to a permit granted
under this subchapter shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act,
all provisions of state and local building and fire codes, as well as all state
and local health laws and regulations regarding the service and preparation of
food. The operations of an outdoor dining area shall also be conducted in
accordance with the code provisions and regulations of the West Virginia
Alcoholic Beverage Control Administration (WVABCA). Nothing in this subchapter
shall be intended to alter or abridge any applicable federal, state, and local
laws or the operator’s responsibility to comply with all code provisions and
regulations of the WVABCA.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be intended to alter or abridge the
prohibition of service of alcoholic beverages or possession thereof on public
property in the city, except that any permitted outdoor dining area operator
and patrons of permitted operator’s outdoor dining area shall be deemed to be
exempt from this prohibition during the hours of operation of the outdoor
dining area and only within the confines of said area.
(Ord. 300, passed 7-28-2022) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.117 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATOR. A person, organization, proprietorship, corporation, or other
similar entity lawfully operating a business located in the city, that
possesses a valid State of West Virginia food vendor’s permit and has been
issued an outdoor dining area permit.
   OUTDOOR DINING AREA. A confined area of the public sidewalk designated by a
site plan approved by the city through its Zoning Officer, and which area is
adjacent to operator’s building/permanent structure, where patrons may sit at
tables while consuming food and beverages, which may include any beverage
regulated by the WVABCA contingent on proper licensure by the WVABCA.
(Ord. 300, passed 7-28-2022)
§ 93.118 PERMIT PROCESS.
   (A)   An applicant for an outdoor dining area permit shall file an
application with the City of Elkins Zoning Officer. An application for an
outdoor dining area permit shall be accompanied by a $25 annual permit fee,
valid through June 30, for an outdoor dining area, and shall include: a site
plan, drawn to scale showing the layout for the outdoor dining area which
accurately depicts the existing sidewalk conditions, including sidewalk width
from building face to curb; location and dimensions of tree wells; locations of
lamp posts, traffic and parking signs, signal poles, trash receptacles,
benches, and other sidewalk features or obstructions; as well as design,
location, size and space of the dining area, chairs, tables, aisles between
tables; and if applicable, enclosures; routes of ingress and egress; clearances
between the seating area and the curb; and any such additional requirements of
the Zoning Officer with respect to type, style, or specifications of the
outdoor dining area, including those requirements subject to the approval of
the WVABCA.
   (B)   After reviewing the application and site plan, the Zoning Officer
shall determine if the proposed outdoor dining area, consistent with the
requirements of this subchapter, is reasonable, promotes safe pedestrian and
retail friendly vitality, and that there is adequate space remaining within the
public right-of-way to facilitate safe circulation of pedestrian traffic, while
promoting the overall public health, safety and welfare. Thereafter, the Zoning
Officer may approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application. The
approved plan and permit shall be posted at the operator’s premises, visible to
customers and the public. No material change to the approved plan shall be made
without prior written approval by the Zoning Officer.
   (C)   The outdoor dining area permit term shall be for one year to coincide
with the city’s fiscal year (July 1 through June 30), unless revoked prior to
expiration, and may be renewed on an annual basis. An annual permit fee of $25
shall be assessed for renewal of an existing outdoor dining area permit.
   (D)   Any operator holding a valid existing permit for a particular outdoor
dining area that continues to utilize that outdoor dining area, shall be deemed
to have re-applied for permission to use the same space for a succeeding permit
term. Such operator shall pay the applicable annual renewal permit fee,
complete all renewal paperwork and comply with any other renewal requirements
of the Zoning Officer, on or before June 30. If the operator fails to meet all
renewal requirements, then the operator's permit shall be deemed to have
expired.
   (E)   The issuance of an outdoor dining area permit does not grant or imply
vested rights to use of the area by the operator, but instead is a privilege
granted to the operator. The city retains the right to deny the issuance of a
permit or the renewal of a permit for any lawful reason. The city shall have
broad discretion to grant or revoke permits issued pursuant to this subchapter
in the interests of promoting pedestrian and retail friendly vitality, and
improving the overall public health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. 300, passed 7-28-2022) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.119 STANDARDS FOR OUTDOOR DINING AREAS.
   (A)   The outdoor dining area shall be located adjacent to the property of
an existing and lawful establishment of a permitted operator and shall be under
the responsible direction and control of that operator.
   (B)   The outdoor dining area may be open to patrons between the hours of 6:
00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. daily. In the event a permitted operator intends to
serve any beverage regulated by the WVABCA in an outdoor dining area, all code
provisions and regulations of the WVABCA regarding permitted days and hours of
service shall be followed.
   (C)   All furniture or other personal property located on the public
sidewalk/right-of-way by operator must be readily removable without damage to
the surface of public sidewalk/right-of-way. Penetrations into or permanent
fixtures placed upon the public sidewalk/right-of-way by operator are strictly
prohibited.
   (D)   The Zoning Officer shall have the authority to determine when
furniture, personal property and associated enclosures must be removed from the
public sidewalk/right-of-way.
   (E)   At least 42 inches of unobstructed corridor space must be maintained
between the outer dimension of the outside dining area and the curb or nearest
obstruction, in order to ensure a clear pedestrian passageway along the
sidewalk. In order to achieve a continuous pedestrian walkway, the pedestrian
passageway shall be a straight line, parallel to the building face or curb
line, for the entire length of the outdoor dining area.
   (F)   An unobstructed clearance of 42 inches, must be maintained between a
fire hydrant and any furniture or enclosures of an outdoor dining area.
   (G)   The outdoor dining area must be kept sanitary, neat, and clean at all
times and shall be free from the accumulation of food and litter.
   (H)   In order to control litter, the use of disposable plates and utensils
is discouraged.
   (I)   Noise from an outdoor dining area which unreasonably disturbs
neighboring commercial or residential occupants is prohibited.
   (J)   In order to serve any beverage regulated by the WVABCA in an outdoor
dining area, the designated area must be included in the floor plan for the
licensed premises as approved by the WVABCA. Any beverage regulated by the
WVABCA shall be served and consumed only on the enclosed or bounded portion of
the public sidewalk designated and permitted by the city as an outdoor dining
area. Patrons are not permitted to carry any beverage regulated by the WVABCA
out of the outdoor dining area.
(Ord. 300, passed 7-28-2022) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.120 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant must agree, in
writing, that it shall indemnify, defend, and save harmless the city, its
officers, agents, and employees, from and against all liability, claims, suits,
damages, losses, costs, attorneys’ fees and expenses of any or all types
arising out of, or related in any way to, the permitted outdoor dining area.
   (B)   The applicant shall maintain such general liability insurance with at
least $1,000,000 coverage per each occurrence and shall the name as additional
insured the city, its agents, officers, directors and employees. A copy of said
insurance policy shall be furnished to the city.
   (C)   The authorization and privilege granted by a permit approved under
this subchapter shall be terminated due to the operator’s failure to comply
with any federal, state or local laws, any unabated nuisances or whenever the
city desires to use the affected public right-of-way for any public purpose. In
the event the city shall have a public need for use of the right-of-way, or the
property affected by the right-of-way, the city may terminate the use of such
right-of-way by written notification to the applicant for the removal of any
encroachments, and the operator shall cease use of the right-of-way unless and
until such time the city has no public need for use of the right-of-way. Said
removal shall be completed by the date specified in the notice and shall be
accomplished by the applicant without cost to the city. If the applicant fails
or neglects to remove the encroachment within the time specified, the city
shall have the right to remove the encroachment, at the expense of the
operator, and shall not be liable to the operator for any loss, financial or
otherwise, or damage to the encroachment or personal property within the
encroachment area.
(Ord. 300, passed 7-28-2022) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.121 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   An outdoor dining area permit is a privilege granted to the operator
that may be revoked by the city upon finding by the Zoning Officer that the
operator has violated any federal, state or city law applicable to the outdoor
dining area or the operation thereof, including but not limited to, compliance
with all code provisions and regulations of the WVABCA, that the continued
operation of the outdoor dining area poses a threat to the health, safety or
welfare of the public, or that the outdoor dining area constitutes a public
nuisance.
   (B)   An applicant who has been denied a permit, or an operator whose permit
has been revoked may appeal the denial or revocation to the City of Elkins
Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA). The provisions of
Chapter 152 of the City of Elkins Code of Ordinances. Such appeal may be made
in writing within 30 days following the decision appealed from, on forms
available at the Zoning Officer, and shall set forth the basis on which the
person contests the decision. Within ten days of receipt of the appeal by the
BZA, the BZA shall set a date and time for a public hearing. The public hearing
shall be held within 45 days of receipt of the appeal to the BZA. The BZA shall
conduct a public hearing on the appeal and may: deny the appeal and uphold the
original order, requirement, decision or determination; grant the appeal and
overturn the original order, requirement, decision or determination; or, issue
an order which denies part of the appeal and grants part of the appeal. The BZA
shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law on which the BZA
based its decision. The decision of the BZA may be appealed by either party,
within 30 days, to the Randolph County Circuit Court, as set forth in WV Code
§§ 8A-9-l through 8A-9-7/
(Ord. 300, passed 7-28-2022) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   For any violation of §
93.006, such violator shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time
to time.
(1991 Code, § 18-6)
   (C)   If any obstruction is not removed by the person responsible therefor
causing it within ten days after written notice so to do, as provided in §
93.007, the person causing the obstruction shall, upon conviction of such
violation of §
93.007, be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time or be
imprisoned for not more than ten days, or be punished by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day such noncompliance with the provisions of §
93.007 is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall
be punishable as such hereunder.
(1991 Code, § 18-7)
   (D)   For every day such land or lot owner fails to repair, repave or
construct such sidewalk as provided in §
93.026, after being summoned before the Municipal Court Judge, as aforesaid, he
or she shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 18-14)
   (E)   Any operator who violates any provision of §§
93.115 through
93.121 article shall, upon conviction, be fined up to $100 per day. Each day
any violation of §§
93.115 through
93.121 shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 5-18-1950; Ord. passed 3-3-1959; Ord. passed 3-19-1959; Ord. 300,
passed 7-28-2022)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSES, REGULATIONS AND TAXES
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   VENDORS
      
113.   FARMERS’ MARKET
      
114.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSES, REGULATIONS AND TAXES
Section
Licenses Generally
   
110.001   Required; compliance with chapter
   
110.002   Issuance; payment of tax
   
110.003   Record, collection
   
110.004   Multiple requirement
   
110.005   Term; minimum tax
   
110.006   Exhibition
   
110.007   Limitations to privilege
   
110.008   Effect of change in partners or name of firm
   
110.009   Issuance of duplicate; fee
   
110.010   False statements
   
110.011   Unlawful acts
   
110.012   Confidentiality of statements
   
110.013   Issuance of other licenses
   
110.014   Definitions
Permits and Fees
   
110.025   Owning and operating coin-operated merchandise, service, music and
amusement devices or vending machines
   
110.026   Coin-operated laundries, coin-operated auto wash and other coin-
operated cleaning devices
   
110.027   Circuses, carnivals and other itinerant public shows; generally
   
110.028   Circuses, carnivals and other itinerant public shows; filing with
City Collector and Treasurer of list of all rides and concessions; bond for
municipal taxes
   
110.029   Trading stamps
   
110.030   Fortune-telling, mind reading and the like
   
110.031   Wholesale or subjobber dealers in cigarettes
   
110.032   Junk dealers and their agents
   
110.033   Hawkers and peddlers
   
110.034   Pawnbrokers
   
110.035   Theaters and other permanent places for public shows
   
110.036   Collection agencies
   
110.037   Employment agents
   
110.038   Bowling lanes and billiard, pool or bagatelle tables
   
110.039   Business registration certificate required
   
110.040   Itinerant vendors
   
110.041   Yard sales
   
110.042   City business license fee
Business and Occupation Tax
   
110.055   Short title
   
110.056   Purpose and intent
   
110.057   Definitions
   
110.058   Imposition of tax
   
110.059   Natural resource production
   
110.060   Selling tangible property
   
110.061   Public service or utility business
   
110.062   Contracting
   
110.063   Amusements
   
110.064   Service business or calling not otherwise classified
   
110.065   Rentals and royalties
   
110.066   Banking and other financial businesses
   
110.067   Health maintenance organizations
   
110.068   Additional credits
   
110.069   Exempt activities
   
110.069A   De minimus gross income exemption for small business
   
110.070   Tax cumulative
   
110.071   Administration generally
   
110.072   Returns; computation and payment of tax
   
110.073   Taxpayer records
   
110.074   Tax return information confidentiality
   
110.075   Erroneous computation of tax
   
110.076   Investigations
   
110.077   Assessments
   
110.078   Notice of assessment; petition for reassessment
   
110.079   Hearing procedure; decision; review
   
110.080   Injunction
   
110.081   Unpaid tax a lien; delinquency notice filing and release
   
110.082   Successor liability
   
110.083   Revocation, non-renewal of licenses and permits
   
110.084   Settlement agreements and compromises
   
110.085   Additional administrative provisions concerning contracting
   
110.086   Claims for refund or credit
   
110.087   Interest and penalty
   
110.088   Effective date
   
110.089   Publication
Municipal Sales and Use Tax
   
110.100   Council findings
   
110.101   Definitions
   
110.102   Imposition of municipal sales and service tax
   
110.103   Imposition of municipal use tax
   
110.104   Calculation of tax on fractional parts of dollar
   
110.105   State and local tax bases
   
110.106   Exceptions
   
110.107   Credit against municipal use tax
   
110.108   Tax cumulative
   
110.109   Local rate and boundary data base; changes
   
110.110   State level administration
   
110.111   Administrative procedures
   
110.112   Criminal penalties
   
110.113   Automatic updating
   
110.114   Deposit of taxes collected in General Revenue Fund
   
110.115   Effective date
   
110.116   Notification of Tax Commissioner
 
   
110.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to impose business and occupation tax on businesses and
occupations taxed by the state, see W.Va. Code § 8-13-5, as modified by W.Va.
Code § 11-13-25
   Authority of city to require a city license for anything for which a state
license is required, unless prohibited by general law, and to impose a
reasonable tax thereon not in excess of the state tax see W.Va. Code § 8-13-4,
as modified by W.Va. Code § 11-12-4
LICENSES GENERALLY
§ 110.001 REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or prosecute within the
city any business, trade, occupation, profession, calling, vocation or activity
for which the payment of any city license tax or fee is required or for which a
city license certificate is required without having paid to the city such
license tax or fee or without holding an appropriate, currently valid city
license certificate, as provided by this chapter; and the fulfillment of all
terms and conditions of such license certificate and the provisions of this
chapter relating thereto shall be conditions precedent to engaging in or
prosecuting within the city and such business, trade, occupation, profession,
calling, vocation or activity.
(1991 Code, § 6-1) (Ord. passed 6-20-1957) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.002 ISSUANCE; PAYMENT OF TAX.
   The licenses provided for in this subchapter shall be issued in the form of
a certificate by the City Collector and Treasurer to any person making proper
application therefor on forms to be prescribed and furnished by the City
Collector and Treasurer and tendering the license tax and a filing tax fee of
an amount set forth by Council from time to time for each license certificate
requested. The City Collector and Treasurer shall collect in full the proper
taxes and fees and determine to his or her satisfaction that all the conditions
precedent to the granting of such license have been fulfilled by the applicant
before issuing a certificate of license.
(1991 Code, § 6-2) (Ord. passed 5-21-1981)
§ 110.003 RECORD, COLLECTION.
   There shall be kept by the City Clerk, in a well-bound book or sturdy file
to be known and designated as the “License Record”, a record of all licenses
issued, when and to whom issued, dates of issue and duration of licenses,
license numbers and for what purposes issued, and the City Clerk shall therein
charge the City Collector and Treasurer with all licenses placed in his or her
hands for collection, with order dates and amounts, as well as any and all
transfers thereof.
(1991 Code, § 6-3)
§ 110.004 MULTIPLE REQUIREMENT.
   Except as may be provided otherwise in this code or other ordinance, any
person who, at more than one fixed place of business within the city, engages
in or prosecutes any business, profession, calling, vocation, trade or activity
for which a city license is required, or who, within the city, engages in or
prosecutes more than one type of business, profession, calling, vocation, trade
or activity for which a city license is required, shall obtain a separate
license and pay the prescribed tax or fee therefor for each such fixed place of
business and for each such business, profession, calling, vocation, trade or
activity.
(1991 Code, § 6-4)
§ 110.005 TERM; MINIMUM TAX.
   Except as may be otherwise expressly provided herein, all annual licenses
issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for a period of one
year, beginning on July 1 and ending on the following June 30; provided,
however, that the fee for any such license issued following January 1 of any
year and to expire on June 30 of such year shall be one-half of the annual
license fee prescribed in this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-5) (Ord. passed 6-20-1957; Ord. passed 7-3-1986)
§ 110.006 EXHIBITION.
   Every person to whom a license shall be issued under the provisions of this
subchapter shall keep such certificate posted in a conspicuous position in the
place where the privileges of such license are exercised; except as may be
otherwise specifically provided by this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-6) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.007 LIMITATIONS TO PRIVILEGE.
   Every license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall confer a
personal privilege only to transact the business, activity, trade, occupation,
profession, calling or vocation which may be the subject of the license and
shall not be exercised except by the person holding the license, nor be
assignable.
(1991 Code, § 6-7)
§ 110.008 EFFECT OF CHANGE IN PARTNERS OR NAME OF FIRM.
   No changes in the name of a firm, nor the taking in of one or more new
partners, nor the withdrawal of one or more members of the firm, as long as at
least one member remains the same, shall be considered as terminating the
privileges of any license granted to such partners or firm.
(1991 Code, § 6-8)
§ 110.009 ISSUANCE OF DUPLICATE; FEE.
   Any person losing, misplacing or destroying any license or certificate
issued under the provisions of this chapter may, by application to the City
Clerk, procure a duplicate thereof, upon satisfactory proof of the loss of the
original, upon the payment to the City Clerk of a fee of an amount set forth by
Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 6-9)
§ 110.010 FALSE STATEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement in
any application for a city license, a city business franchise registration
certificate, in any tax return, report or in any other statement relating to
any activity licensed by the city and which is required to be made to any city
officer or agency.
(1991 Code, § 6-10) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.011 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   Nothing in this chapter and no payment or issuance of any certificate of
license under the provisions hereof, shall be deemed to legalize any act which
otherwise may be in violation of law, or to exempt any person from any penalty
prescribed for such violation.
(1991 Code, § 6-11) (Ord. passed 6-20-1957)
§ 110.012 CONFIDENTIALITY OF STATEMENTS.
   All returns and statements made by licensees and taxpayers pursuant to this
chapter to city officers and employees shall be regarded as confidential,
except in compliance with a judicial order or as may be required by the proper
administration hereof, and no city officer, agent or employee or former city
officer, agent or employee shall divulge facts or information obtained by way
of the administration of this chapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-12)
§ 110.013 ISSUANCE OF OTHER LICENSES.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to forbid or prohibit
the issuing of city licenses for the conduct of any other business or for any
other thing for which a state license is required; but full power and authority
is reserved for the Council to adopt any other ordinances or regulations in
respect to the conduct of any other business or the operation of any other
thing within the city not enumerated in this chapter and the licensing of which
is permitted by the laws of the state.
(1991 Code, § 6-13) (Ord. passed 6-20-1957)
§ 110.014 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any business, whether a person is engaged expressly or impliedly
holds himself or herself out as engaged in business, or supplies his or her
products or a commodity or service to the public as a class or a limited
portion of the public, or sells any goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or
provides a service of any kind; provided, that BUSINESS shall not include sales
of products of the farm, garden or dairy by the producer or grower thereof;
occasional sales by societies acting for charitable, religious or benevolent
purposes; judicial sales directed by law or court order; or any business the
gross income of which is less than $4,000 per license year.
   GROSS INCOME. The gross receipts of the business received as compensation
for personal services and from trade, commerce or sales, and the value accruing
from the sale of tangible property, real or personal, or service, or both,
without any deduction on account of the cost of property sold, materials used,
labor costs, taxes or any other expense whatsoever.
(1991 Code, § 6-14)
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see W.Va. Code § 11-12-2
PERMITS AND FEES
§ 110.025 OWNING AND OPERATING COIN-OPERATED MERCHANDISE, SERVICE, MUSIC AND
AMUSEMENT DEVICES OR VENDING MACHINES.
   (A)   The annual license fee to own and operate a coin-operated baggage or
parcel checking machine or device which is used for the storage of baggage or
parcels of any character shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to
time for each section of any such device which is operated on the coin-in-the-
slot principle; the annual license fee to own and operate any coin-operated
toilet locker or device, sanitary napkin device or bed vibrator device shall be
an amount set forth by Council from time to time for every such locker or
device.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   The annual license fee to own and operate a total of 20 or
more coin-operated amusement or music devices of the following types shall be:
 
$0.01 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.05 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.10 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
Over $0.10 devices An amount set forth by Council from time to time
 
         (b)   The operator of more than one type of such devices shall pay the
highest fee prescribed.
      (2)   (a)   The license fee to own and operate less than 20 amusement or
music devices shall be upon a per device basis as follows:
 
$0.01 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.05 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.10 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
Over $0.10 devices An amount set forth by Council from time to time
 
         (b)   Any device taking more than one denomination of coin shall be
licensed on the basis of the largest denomination of coin taken or the total of
the coins necessary to make the device function or operate.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   The annual license fee to own and operate a total of 20 or
more coin-operated merchandise or service devices of the following types shall
be:
 
$0.01 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.05 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.10 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
Over $0.10 devices An amount set forth by Council from time to time
 
         (b)   The operator of more than one type of such devices shall pay the
highest fee prescribed.
      (2)   (a)   The license fee to own and operate less than 20 merchandise
or service devices shall be upon a per device basis as follows:
 
$0.01 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.05 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
$0.10 devices      An amount set forth by Council from time to time
Over $0.10 devices An amount set forth by Council from time to time
 
         (b)   Any device taking more than one denomination of coin shall be
licensed on the basis of the largest denomination of coin taken or the total of
the coins necessary to make the device function or operate.
   (D)   No license fee shall be required of stores or businesses owning and
operating such machines or devices owned by them in their own licensed stores;
provided, that where the principal business is the operation of the machines or
devices, licenses shall be obtained as outlined above.
   (E)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any pay
telephone, postage stamp vending machines or currency changing machines
operated on the coin-in-the-slot principle.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.01)
§ 110.026 COIN-OPERATED LAUNDRIES, COIN-OPERATED AUTO WASH AND OTHER COIN-
OPERATED CLEANING DEVICES.
   (A)   The annual license fee to own coin-operated devices which wash, dry,
clean or dry clean items of any description, including clothing, household
items, automotive vehicles or boats, or dispense merchandise for use in such
washing, drying, cleaning or dry cleaning, shall be an amount set forth by
Council from time to time.
   (B)   No machine or device licensed under the provisions of this section
shall be subject to the license fees and taxes imposed by §
110.025.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.02)
§ 110.027 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND OTHER ITINERANT PUBLIC SHOWS; GENERALLY.
   (A)   The license to exhibit a circus or menagerie, a circus and menagerie
combined, wild west show or other itinerant show not exhibited in a theater,
opera house or other permanent place for public shows shall be based upon the
number of railroad cars or motor trucks used to transport the property or
equipment of such shows, but not including railroad cars or motor trucks used
to transport the personnel thereof. If railroad cars are used, the fee shall be
an amount set forth by Council from time to time for each car for each day on
which any performance is given; if motor trucks are used, the fee shall be an
amount set forth by Council from time to time for each truck for each day on
which any performance is given.
   (B)   The license fee to exhibit a street or other carnival shall be an
amount set forth by Council from time to time a week for each entertainment,
performance or exhibition given at or in the vicinity of any such carnival.
Each such entertainment, performance or exhibition shall require a separate
license, whether or not shown under the same canvas and whether or not
exhibited for additional compensation; and upon any such entertainment,
performance or exhibition being concluded, so that an additional fee for
admission is charged, an additional license fee shall be required for any
further or additional entertainment, performance or exhibition. To operate any
riding device of any kind at or in the vicinity of any street or carnival show,
the fee shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time a week for
each such device.
   (C)   (1)   To keep or maintain any concession stand selling services,
goods, wares or merchandise, such as food, soft drinks, ice cream, candy floss
and the like, at or in the vicinity of such street or carnival show, the fee
shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time a week for each such
concession.
      (2)   To maintain any concession stand, such as ball games, bingo, cane
rack, penny pitch-till- you-win, striking machine, weighing machine, shooting
gallery, artful dodger, bumper, fish pond, dart game or other legitimate games
of skill, none of which shall be controlled by the operator, at or in the
vicinity of any street or carnival show, the fee shall be an amount set forth
by Council from time to time a week for each such concession.
      (3)   To operate or maintain a candy wheel or any other legitimate
merchandise wheels, when operated without control of the operator, the license
fee shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time a day.
      (4)   To operate or maintain rides of all kinds, the license fee shall be
an amount set forth by Council from time to time each a week.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.03)
§ 110.028 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND OTHER ITINERANT PUBLIC SHOWS; FILING WITH
CITY COLLECTOR AND TREASURER OF LIST OF ALL RIDES AND CONCESSIONS; BOND FOR
MUNICIPAL TAXES.
   The proprietor, professional director, manager, owner of the rides or other
person who owns the predominant percentage thereof (hereinafter referred to as
“person”) shall be responsible for the purchase and display of all applicable
licenses provided for in this subchapter. Such person shall furnish to the City
Collector and Treasurer’s office prior to the first performance at any location
a list of the rides, concessions and other attractions to be displayed along
with a statement indicating the duration of the performance at any location,
and shall post a cash bond or a surety bond in an amount set forth by Council
from time to time, the sufficiency of such surety to be solely in the
discretion of the City Collector and Treasurer or his or her authorized
representative as surety for all municipal taxes. If such person has not made
an accounting with the City Collector and Treasurer’s office within five days
after the last performance as indicated in the document filed with the City
Collector, the city may elect to forfeit the bond under the terms and
conditions thereof without further notice to the principal on the bond.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.03a) (Ord. passed 5-21-1981)
§ 110.029 TRADING STAMPS.
   The annual license fee to sell or offer for sale merchants’ trading stamps,
premium stamps or stamps or certificates of like nature, or to undertake to
redeem such stamps or certificates in money or goods, shall be an amount set
forth by Council from time to time; provided, that this section shall not apply
to any coupon or similar device issued and redeemed by a manufacturer or
packer.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.04)
§ 110.030 FORTUNE-TELLING, MIND READING AND THE LIKE.
   The annual license to act as a fortune-teller, palmist, phrenologist,
spiritualist, medium, clairvoyant, mind reader or any other person who performs
the art or profession of telling the past or forecasting the future shall be an
amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.05)
§ 110.031 WHOLESALE OR SUBJOBBER DEALERS IN CIGARETTES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CIGARETTE. Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not
containing tobacco; or any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing
tobacco which, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the
filler or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to or purchased
by consumers as a CIGARETTE.
      PACKAGE. The individual package, box or other container in or from which
retail sales of cigarettes are normally made or intended to be made.
      SALE. Selling, exchange, transfer of title, barter, gift, offer for sale
or distribution.
      SALE BY WHOLESALER OR SUBJOBBER. Any bona fide transfer of title to
cigarettes by a wholesaler or subjobber for a valuable consideration, made in
the ordinary course of trade or in the usual conduct of the wholesaler’s
business.
      SUBJOBBER or SUBJOBBER DEALER. Any person who purchases stamped
cigarettes from any other person who purchases from the manufacturer, when such
other person is located in any state which levies an excise tax on cigarettes,
and who purchases such cigarettes solely for the purpose of bona fide resale to
retail dealers or to other wholesalers.
      WHOLESALER or WHOLESALER DEALER. Any person who purchases unstamped
cigarettes directly from the manufacturer.
   (B)   The annual license fee as a wholesaler or subjobber dealer to sell
cigarettes shall be divided into three classes, as follows:
      (1)   Class A. All dealers who sell annually up to 750,000 packages of
cigarettes, an amount set forth by Council from time to time;
      (2)   Class B. All dealers who sell annually from 750,000 packages of
cigarettes to 1,500,000 packages, an amount set forth by Council from time to
time; and
      (3)   Class C. All dealers who sell annually more than 1,500,000 packages
of cigarettes, an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.06)
§ 110.032 JUNK DEALERS AND THEIR AGENTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ITINERANT JUNK COLLECTOR. Any person who gathers junk from place to place
with the aid of a cart or vehicle hand drawn or propelled, who has no fixed
place of business.
      JUNK. Old or scrap gold, copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper,
rubber, automobile parts, iron, steel and other old scrap ferrous or nonferrous
metals.
      JUNK DEALER. Any person engaged in the business of buying or selling
junk.
      JUNK DEALER’S AGENT. Any person who buys or sells junk for or on behalf
of a junk dealer, but the term shall not be construed to include any person
regularly employed upon a salary by a regularly licensed junk dealer engaged in
such business within the city.
      NONRESIDENT JUNK DEALER or NONRESIDENT JUNK DEALER’S AGENT. Any person
who acts as a junk dealer or junk dealer’s agent who is a nonresident of the
city, and any firm so engaged whose members are nonresidents of the city, and
any corporation which has not been admitted to hold property and transact
business in the city.
   (B)   The annual license fee to act as a resident junk dealer shall be an
amount set forth by Council from time to time; to act as a junk dealer’s agent,
an amount set forth by Council from time to time; to act as a nonresident junk
dealer or his or her agent who buys or solicits for the purchase of junk within
the city, an amount set forth by Council from time to time; and to act as an
itinerant junk collector, an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.07)
§ 110.033 HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS.
   (A)   (1)   The annual license fee to act as a hawker and peddler, if the
person licensed travels without a vehicle, shall be an amount set forth by
Council from time to time, if he or she travels with a motor vehicle of not
more than one-half ton capacity, an amount set forth by Council from time to
time; if he or she travels with a vehicle of more than one-half ton capacity,
but not exceeding one ton capacity, an amount set forth by Council from time to
time; if he or she travels with a vehicle of more than one ton capacity, but
not exceeding two tons capacity, an amount set forth by Council from time to
time; and if he or she travels with a vehicle of more than two tons capacity,
an amount set forth by Council from time to time; and the person licensed shall
pay at the same rate for each and every motor vehicle so used. Such person
shall carry his or her license in some conspicuous place in his or her vehicle
or about his or her pack.
      (2)   When used in this section, the term SALE shall mean and include
both sales for money payment or for barter, and offers to make any such sale
and offers to render any service or the rendering thereof.
      (3)   Any person who shall carry goods, wares or merchandise from place
to place, either in person or by agent or employee, and sell, for delivery at
the same time, any such goods, wares or merchandise to any purchaser, at
wholesale or retail, and any person who shall solicit for the purpose of
rendering any service, shall be deemed a hawker or peddler under this section.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who sells
any goods, wares or merchandise to be delivered in the future; or to any of the
following who offer immediate delivery of the goods, wares or merchandise being
sold:
      (1)   Any person or persons engaged within this county in the business or
calling of agriculture, horticulture or grazing, who sells or sell individually
or collectively, one or more for the other or others, the products derived from
his, her or their business or calling aforesaid;
      (2)   Any person engaged in the maintenance or operation of a retail
merchandise store to exchange goods, wares or merchandise from such store for
agricultural, horticultural or grazing products, or to resell any such products
received in due course of such business; nor to any other retail business
concern, established and operating continuously for one year or more within
this state in the sale of any product or products over regular route;
      (3)   Any wholesaler or jobber selling soft drinks or nonintoxicating
beer for which he or she is duly licensed under other provisions of this code;
      (4)   Any person who sells petroleum products, ice, wood, meat, milk, ice
cream, bread, cakes, pies, and other bakery products, butter and eggs,
manufactured, grown or produced by any such person and not purchased by him or
her for resale;
      (5)   Any sales by societies, groups or organizations acting for
charitable, religious or benevolent purposes; and
      (6)   Any agent or salesperson selling manufactured products, except
green groceries and canned or bottled fruit products, produced by his or her
employer, and who sells the same to retail dealers for the purpose of resale.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.08) (Ord. passed 2-16-1984)
§ 110.034 PAWNBROKERS.
   (A)   The annual license fee to engage in the business of pawnbroker shall
be an amount set forth by Council from time to time. The term PAWNBROKER shall
include any person engaged in the business of lending money on deposit or
pledge of personal property or other valuable thing, other than securities or
printed evidence of indebtedness, or in the business of purchasing personal
property, such as articles made of or containing gold, silver, platinum or
other precious metals or jewels of any description, for the purpose of reducing
or smelting them into any form different from their condition or construction
when purchased and reselling or marketing the product.
   (B)   (1)   Every pawnbroker shall keep at his or her place of business an
accurate detailed description of all personal property, bonds, notes and other
securities received or purchased and mentioning particularly any descriptive or
identifying marks that may be on such property, bonds, notes or other
securities, together with the name, residence and an accurate description of
the person by whom they were left.
      (2)   IDENTIFYING MARKS include a listing of serial numbers on items
received or purchased.
         (a)   Such entries shall list the date such property is taken by using
ink or indelible pencil; no entry shall be erased or obliterated. All such
records shall be clean and legible.
         (b)   On Monday of each week, a copy of the record sheets for the
preceding seven-day period shall be picked up by the police. Such record shall
be open to inspection by any law enforcement officer in this state during
normal business hours of the purchaser.
         (c)   Every pawnbroker must keep for his or her own records the name,
residence and an accurate description of the person by whom items are left. In
the event the name of the person pawning an item is needed by a law enforcement
officer to conduct an investigation, such information must be provided by the
pawnbroker to the law enforcement officer.
         (d)   All books and records shall be preserved or made available in
this city for a period of two years from date of the transaction, or one year
from final entry made thereon, whichever is later.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.09) (Ord. passed 3-17-1994) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.035 THEATERS AND OTHER PERMANENT PLACES FOR PUBLIC SHOWS.
   A theater, opera house or other permanent place for public shows may be kept
or maintained upon the payment of a license fee in an amount set forth by
Council from time to time; provided, that if such theater, opera house or other
permanent place for public shows is conducted outside of but within one mile of
the corporate limits of the city, the license fee shall be the same as if such
performance were given within the city or town; provided, further, that any
theater, opera house or other permanent place for public shows, including
drive-in theaters kept, maintained or operated in such a location as to be
exempt from the foregoing provisions of this section shall pay an annual
license fee of an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.10)
§ 110.036 COLLECTION AGENCIES.
   The annual license fee to engage in the business of a collection agency
within the city shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time. For
the purposes of this section, solicitation or collection by or through an agent
operating within the city shall be considered to be engaging in the business of
a collection agency within the city.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.11)
§ 110.037 EMPLOYMENT AGENTS.
   The annual license fee to conduct the business of an employment agent, to
receive applications for employment or to hire or contract with persons for
employment shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time; except,
that the annual license fee for an agency or registry for the employment of
registered professional nurses, practical nurses or undergraduate nurses shall
be an amount set forth by Council from time to time; provided, that this
section shall not apply to any such agency or registry operated by a registered
professional nurses’ association or any district subdivision thereof for the
exclusive benefit of its registrants and not for profit.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.12)
§ 110.038 BOWLING LANES AND BILLIARD, POOL OR BAGATELLE TABLES.
   The annual license fee to keep or maintain a bowling lane or a billiard,
pool or bagatelle table, or table of like kind, for public use, where any
charge is made for the use of the same, shall be an amount set forth by Council
from time to time; but, if more than one of such lanes or tables are kept or
maintained in the same building by the same person, the fee shall be an amount
set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.13)
§ 110.039 BUSINESS REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Business registration certificate required. No person shall, without a
business registration certificate, engage in or prosecute within the city and
business, trade, occupation, profession, calling, vocation or activity, without
obtaining a business registration certificate from the city.
   (B)   Application for business registration certificate. Any person making
and filing the proper application for a business registration certificate on
forms to be prescribed and furnished by the City Treasurer shall be provided a
certificate if the City Treasurer determines to his or her satisfaction that
all of the conditions precedent to the granting of such certificate have been
fulfilled by the applicant before issuing the certificate of registration. A
certificate shall not be issued unless the applicant presents a valid and
current business franchise registration certificate issued by the state nor
shall a certificate be issued if the municipal business and occupation taxes of
the applicant are not paid on a current basis.
   (C)   Time for which registration certificate granted; power of City
Treasurer to cancel certificate.
      (1)   All annual certificates issued under this section shall be for a
period of one year beginning July 1 and ending the following June 30.
      (2)   If a registrant shall at any time knowingly or willfully file false
data or information required by division (B) above, or shall willfully refuse
or neglect to file any tax report or to pay the tax, additions to tax
penalties, or interest, or any part thereof, required by §§
110.055 through
110.089, the City Treasurer may cancel his or her certificate. Before canceling
any such certificate, the Tax Commissioner shall set a hearing as hereinafter
prescribed and notify the person by certified mail not less than 20 days prior
to the hearing date to appear and show cause why such registration certificate
should not be canceled.
   (D)   Business certificate a personal privilege not assignable; change of
name, location, ownership and the like.
      (1)   Every business certificate issued under the provisions hereof shall
confer a personal privilege only to transact the business, activity or trade,
which may be the subject of the business certificate and shall not be exercised
except by the persons holding the same and shall not be assignable to any other
person.
      (2)   Changes in the name of the person or change of location, or
address, or changes in ownership of the business or changes in real parties of
interest shall be considered a cessation of the business and a new certificate
shall be required. Changes of partners or members of firms or officers of a
corporation shall not require a new certificate to be issued.
   (E)   Display of registration certificate. Any person to whom a certificate
of registration shall be issued shall keep such certificate posted in a
conspicuous position in the place where the privilege of such business is
exercised. Such certificate of registration shall be produced for inspection
whenever required by the city, Treasurer or by any law enforcement officers of
the city.
   (F)   Hearing; appeal. Any person adversely affected by refusal of the City
Treasurer or his or her representative, to issue a business registration
certificate or to renew this certificate may request a hearing before the City
Treasurer if such request is made within 30 days from receipt of written notice
of the refusal. A person may appeal the administrative decision of the City
Treasurer by taking appeal to the Circuit Court of the county within 30 days
after being served with notice of the City Treasurer’s administrative decision.
   (G)   Issuance fee. The City Treasurer, in his or her discretion, may impose
an issuance fee in an amount set forth by Council from time to time to cover
administrative and clerical costs of administering this section.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.14) (Ord. passed 6-18-1981; Ord. passed 2-5-1987)
§ 110.040 ITINERANT VENDORS.
   (A)   (1)   When used in this section, the term ITINERANT VENDOR shall mean
and include all persons who engage or conduct within this city, either in one
place, or in traveling from place to place, a temporary or transient business
of selling goods, wares and merchandise; and who, for the purpose of carrying
on such business, use, lease or occupy either in whole or in part, a room,
building or other structure, or who use, lease or occupy for such purposes a
room or rooms at any hotel, motel or lodging house, for the exhibition and sale
of such goods, wares and merchandise; and the person so engaged shall not be
released from the provisions of this section by reason of association
temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by
conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as part
of the business of, or in the name of, any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to sales made to
persons by commercial travelers, or selling agents in the usual course of
business, nor to bona fide sales of goods, wares or merchandise by sample for
future delivery; nor to hawkers or peddlers in the streets, roads or highways,
from packs or vehicles, nor to persons selling meat or the produce of the farm,
garden, dairy, nor to any sales of goods, wares and merchandise on the ground
of any agricultural association during the continuance of any annual fair held
by such association; nor to any sales by societies acting for charitable,
religious or benevolent purposes; nor to judicial sales directed by law, or
under the orders of any court; nor to the sales of the common necessities of
life in any public market place.
   (B)   No itinerant vendor shall advertise, represent or hold forth a sale of
goods, wares or merchandise as a bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, trustee,
estate, executor, administrator, receiver, attorney, manufacturer’s wholesale
or closing out sale, or the sale of any goods damaged by smoke, fire, water or
otherwise, unless before so doing he or she shall state in writing, under oath,
to the City Collector and Treasurer at the time he or she makes application for
a license, hereinafter provided for, all the facts relating to the reason and
character of such special sale as advertised, held forth, or represented,
including a statement of the names of the persons from such goods, wares or
merchandise were purchased, and the date of the delivery of the same to the
person applying for license; the place, if any, where such goods, wares or
merchandise were previously exposed for sale, and such details as are necessary
to exactly locate and fully identify all such goods, wares and merchandise
proposed to be sold. And such itinerant vendor shall also include in such
statement the name and residence of the owner or owners in whose interest the
business is conducted, to be kept on file in the office of the City Collector
and Treasurer and a record shall be kept by said Collector and Treasurer of all
such statements, in convenient form and open to public inspection.
   (C)   The annual license fee to carry on the business of itinerant vendor
shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
   (D)   Every itinerant vendor who sells or exhibits for sale at public or
private sale, any goods, wares or merchandise without first obtaining a license
therefor, and in all other respects complying with the provisions of this
subchapter, or who makes any false statement in reference to the matter set out
in division (B) above, or who fails to comply with the requirements of this
subchapter, and every person, whether principal or agent, who, by circular,
handbills, newspaper, or in any manner advertises such sale, as herein
described, before proper licenses are issued to the vendor and before he or she
has complied with the provisions of this subchapter, shall be guilty of a
violation of this subchapter, and shall be punished accordingly.
(1991 Code, § 6-14.15) (Ord. passed 3-15-1984) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.041 YARD SALES.
   (A)   Citizens of the city may hold up to four yard sales per year, each
yard sale lasting up to, but not to exceed, 72 hours at any particular area
within the city limits.
   (B)   This provision shall not apply to current business license holders of
the city, who are current on their business and occupation taxes. Any citizen
who violates the provisions of this section shall be classified as itinerant
vendors, and shall be subject to fees enumerated in §
110.040 which apply to itinerant vendors. Said offenders who are classified as
an itinerant vendor, by virtue of failure to abide by this section shall also
be subject to the collection provisions found in this chapter.
(Ord. 045, passed 6-1-2006; Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.042 CITY BUSINESS LICENSE FEE.
   A copy of the revised city business license fees as itemized are attached to
the ordinances codified in this section and incorporated by reference as if set
out in full herein.
(Ord. O-042, passed 6-1-2006; Ord. 054, passed 9-7-2006; Ord. 212, passed 6-16-
2016; Ord. 221, passed 9-15-2016)
BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX
§ 110.055 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “City of Elkins Municipal Business and
Occupation Tax Ordinance”.
(1991 Code, § 6-15) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to impose business and occupation tax on businesses and
occupations taxed by state, see W.Va. Code § 8-13-5, as modified by W.Va. Code
§ 11-13-25
   State business and occupation tax, see W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 13
§ 110.056 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to impose a municipal business and
occupation tax pursuant to W.Va. Code § 8-13-5 to the fullest extent allowable
under the operative laws of the state and the United States unless a more
restrictive application is required by an express limitation set forth in this
subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-16) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.057 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BANKING BUSINESS or FINANCIAL ORGANIZATION. Any bank, banking association,
trust company, industrial loan company, small loan company or licensee,
building and loan association, savings and loan association, credit union,
finance company, investment company, investment broker or dealer, and any other
similar business organization at least 90% of the assets of which consists of
intangible personal property and at least 90% of the gross receipts of which
consists of dividends, interest and other charges derived from the use of money
or credit.
   BUSINESS. All activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the
object of gain or economic benefit, either direct or indirect. The production
of raw materials or manufactured products which are used or consumed in the
main business shall be deemed a BUSINESS engaged in taxable in the class for
which it falls.
   CONTRACTING. The furnishing of work, or both materials and work, in the
fulfillment of a contract for the construction, alteration, repair, decoration
or improvement of a new or existing building or structure, or any part thereof,
or for the alteration, improvement or development of real property.
   GROSS INCOME. The gross receipts of the taxpayer, other than a banking or
financial business, received as compensation for personal services and the
gross receipts of the taxpayer derived from trade, business, commerce or sales
and the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of tangible property, real
or personal, or service, or both, and all receipts by reason of the investment
of the capital of the business engaged in, including interest, discount,
rentals, royalties, fees, reimbursed costs or expenses or other emoluments
however designated and without any deductions on account of the cost of
property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, taxes, royalties,
interest and discount paid, or sums paid to independent contractors,
subcontractors or persons furnished services or property used in the operation
of any business to produce gross income, or any other expense whatsoever. GROSS
INCOME of a banking or financial business is specified in §
110.066.
   GROSS PROCEEDS OF SALES. The value actually proceeding from the sale of
tangible property without any deduction on account of the cost of property sold
or expenses of any kind. The words gross income and GROSS PROCEEDS OF SALES
shall not be construed to include cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;
the proceeds of sale of goods, wares or merchandise returned by customers when
the sale price is refunded, either in cash or by credit; or the sale price of
any article accepted as part payment on any new article sold, if the full sale
price of the new article is included in the gross income or GROSS PROCEEDS OF
SALES; excise taxes imposed by the state; money or other property received or
held by a professional person for the sole use and benefit of a client or
another person or money received by the taxpayer on behalf of a bank or other
financial institution for repayment of a debt of another; and excise taxes
imposed by the federal government upon the consumer, not manufacturer, and
which are held in trust by the vendor as agent for the federal government.
   INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR. A natural person who provides labor, services, or
materials to another for compensation and:
      (1)   Is not treated as an employee for purposes of federal income tax
withholding;
      (2)   Is issued an Internal Revenue Service Form 1099 for such services;
and
      (3)   Retains control over the manner and means of performing the work,
consistent with Internal Revenue Service guidance and common law agency
principles.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Elkins.
   PERMANENT PHYSICAL LOCATION.
      (1)   Any fixed place of business within the corporate limits of the city
at which the person regularly conducts business, including but not limited to a
commercial office, retail store, warehouse, workshop, or dedicated space within
a residence.
      (2)   The term does not include temporary job sites, incidental use of
public spaces, or occasional in-person meetings, nor does it include a postal
mailing address or third-party drop location unless business activity is
regularly conducted there.
   PERSON and COMPANY. The terms are used interchangeably in this subchapter
and mean and include any individual, firm, copartnership, joint adventure,
association, corporation, limited liability company, trust, estate or any other
group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular
number. The word IT shall also include the pronouns “he” and “she”.
   RETAIL SALES and SELLING AT RETAIL. All sales other than wholesale sales,
including, but not limited to, sales to persons for use in any activity not
subject to the tax imposed by this subchapter, all sales of real property, and
sales to consumers.
   SALE and SALES. Any transfer of the ownership of or title to property,
whether for money or in exchange for other property.
   SOLE PROPRIETOR. Someone who owns an unincorporated business by themselves.
   SERVICES or SERVICE BUSINESS OR CALLING. Includes all activities engaged in
for other persons for a consideration, which involve the rendering of a service
as distinguished from the production or sale of tangible property, but shall
not include the services rendered by an employee to his or her employer.
   TAX YEAR and TAXABLE YEAR. Either the calendar year or the taxpayer’s fiscal
year when permission is obtained in writing from the Treasurer to use such
fiscal year in lieu of the calendar year.
   TAXPAYER. Any person liable for any tax hereunder.
   TREASURER. The municipality’s Treasurer and his or her agents, delegates or
representatives.
   WHOLESALE SALES and SELLING AT WHOLESALE. Only:
      (1)   Sales of tangible personal property for the purpose of resale in
the form of tangible personal property;
      (2)   Sales of machinery, supplies or materials which are to be directly
consumed by the purchaser in the conduct of any business or activity which is
subject to the tax imposed by this subchapter; or
      (3)   Sales of tangible personal property to the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, or to the state, its institutions
and political subdivisions.
(1991 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017;
Ord. 344, passed 6-26-2025)
§ 110.058 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (A)   There are hereby levied and imposed and shall be collected annual
privilege taxes, against the persons, on account of the business and other
activities and in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates
against values or gross income or gross proceeds as set forth in §§
110.059 through
110.067, inclusive.
   (B)   If any person liable for any tax under §
110.059 shall ship or transport its products, or any part thereof, out of the
municipality without making sale of such products, the value of the products in
the condition or form in which they exist immediately before transportation out
of the municipality shall be the basis for the assessment of the tax imposed in
those sections. Gross income included in the measure of the tax under §
110.059 shall neither be added nor deducted in computing the tax levied under
the other sections of this subchapter. In determining value, however, as
regards sales from one to another of affiliated companies or persons, or under
other circumstances where the relation between the buyer and the seller is such
that the gross proceeds from the sale are not indicative of the true value of
the subject matter of the sale, the value upon which such privilege tax shall
be levied shall correspond as nearly as possible to the gross proceeds from the
sale of similar products of like quality or character where no common interest
exists between the buyer and the seller but where the circumstances or
conditions are otherwise similar.
   (C)   The municipal business and occupation tax is imposed on each person
engaged in privileges taxable under this subchapter if such person is engaged
in purposive revenue generating activities within the municipality’s limits and
such person has sufficient contacts to sustain the municipality’s taxing
jurisdiction. By way of example (but not limitation), if a person’s activities
within the municipality contributes to the establishment and maintenance of a
market, such contacts are considered to be sufficient to sustain the
municipality’s taxing jurisdiction assuming federal constitutional nexus
standards are satisfied.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, no tax shall be imposed pursuant to
this section for any tax year in which the taxpayer's gross income is less than
$2,500, as further provided in §
110.069A.
(1991 Code, § 6-18) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017;
Ord. 344, passed 6-26-2025)
§ 110.059 NATURAL RESOURCE PRODUCTION.
   (A)   (1)   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality
in the business of severing, extracting, mining, quarrying, reducing to
possession and/or producing for sale, profit or commercial use any natural
resource products, the amount of such tax shall be equal of the value of the
articles produced as shown by the gross proceeds derived from the sale thereof
by the producer, except as hereinafter provided, multiplied by the respective
rates as follows:
         (a)   Coal, 0.69%;
         (b)   Limestone or sandstone quarried or mined, 1%;
         (c)   Oil or blast furnace slag, 1.94%;
         (d)   Natural gas in excess of the value of $250 quarterly, 3.88%;
         (e)   Sand gravel or other mineral products, not quarried or mined,
1.94%;
         (f)   Timber, 1%; and
         (g)   Other natural resource products, 1.38%.
      (2)   The measure of this tax is the value of the entire production in
the municipality, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that delivery may
be made to points outside the municipality.
   (B)   A person exercising privileges taxable under this section and using or
consuming the natural resources so produced in his or her business or
transferring or delivering the natural resources as any royalty paid, in kind,
or the like, shall be deemed to be engaged in the business of producing natural
resources and shall be required to make returns on account of the production of
the business, showing the gross proceeds or equivalent in accordance with
uniform and equitable rules for determining the value upon which privilege
taxes shall be levied, corresponding as nearly as possible to the gross
proceeds from the sale of similar products of like quality or character by
other taxpayers.
   (C)   Persons who produce natural resources outside the municipality and who
make sale of those products within the municipality shall not pay the tax
imposed by this section but shall pay the tax imposed by §
110.060 for the privilege of selling such products within the municipality.
   (D)   A person exercising any privilege taxable under this section and
engaging in the business of selling its natural resource products in the
municipality shall be required to make returns of the gross proceeds of such
sales and pay the tax imposed in §
110.060 for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling such natural
resource products in the municipality.
(1991 Code, § 6-19) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.060 SELLING TANGIBLE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in
the business of selling any tangible property whatsoever, real or personal,
including the sale of food in hotels, restaurants, cafeterias, confectioneries
and other public eating houses and wholesale sales from a rolling stockpile,
except sales of any person engaging or continuing in the business of
horticulture, agriculture or grazing, or selling stocks, bonds or other
evidence of indebtedness, there is hereby levied, and shall be collected, a tax
equal to 0.20% of the gross income of the business; except, therein the case of
selling at wholesale, the tax shall be equal to 0.13% of the gross income of
the business.
   (B)   Gross income or gross proceeds of sales derived from sales within the
state that is not taxed or taxable by any other municipality are included in
the measure of municipal business and occupation tax if the sales are either
directed from a location within the municipality or the taxpayer’s principal
West Virginia office is located in the municipality. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, when the taxpayer has only one office location and
this office is located within the municipality and its activities elsewhere in
the state are neither taxed nor taxable by another municipality, the gross
income or gross proceeds from those activities are taxable by this
municipality.
   (C)   Persons domiciled outside the municipality who solicit sales within
the municipality and sell tangible personal property within the municipality
are doing business in the municipality, irrespective of the domicile of such
persons and irrespective of whether or not such persons maintain a permanent
place of business in the municipality and irrespective of how a sales order is
transmitted or processed. If an order is placed in connection with solicitation
by a representative (regardless whether there is an employment or agency
relationship or whether acting as an independent contractor) who solicits
orders within the municipality, and the tangible personal property is to be
delivered in the municipality, then the gross proceeds of such sales are
included in the measure of the tax imposed by this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-21) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.061 PUBLIC SERVICE OR UTILITY BUSINESS.
   (A)   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in
any public service or utility business, except railroad, railroad car, express,
pipeline, telephone and telegraph companies, water carriers by steamboat or
steamship and motor carriers, there is levied, and shall be collected, taxes on
account of the business engaged in equal to the gross income of the business
multiplied by the respective rates as follows:
      (1)   Water companies, 2%;
      (2)   Electric light and power companies, 4% on sales and demand charges
for domestic and commercial lighting and 3% on sales and demand charges for all
other purposes;
      (3)   Natural gas companies, 3%; and
      (4)   Upon all other public service or utility business, 1.31%.
   (B)   (1)   The measure of this tax shall not include gross income derived
from commerce between the state and other states of the United States.
      (2)   The measure of the tax under this section shall include only gross
income received from the supplying of public service. The gross income of the
taxpayer from any other activity shall be included in the measure of the tax
imposed upon such other activity by the appropriate section of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-22) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.062 CONTRACTING.
   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in the
business of contracting, the tax shall be equal to 2% of the gross income of
the business.
(1991 Code, § 6-23) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.063 AMUSEMENTS.
   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in the
business of operating a theater, opera house, moving picture show, vaudeville,
amusement park, carnival, circus, dance hall skating rink, racetrack, radio
broadcasting station or any other place at which amusements are offered to the
public, the tax shall be equal to 0.31% of the gross income of the business.
(1991 Code, § 6-24) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.064 SERVICE BUSINESS OR CALLING NOT OTHERWISE CLASSIFIED.
   (A)   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in
any service business or calling not otherwise specifically taxed under this
subchapter, there is hereby levied, and shall be collected, a tax equal to
0.50% of the gross income of any such business.
   (B)   Gross income or gross proceeds of sales derived from services within
the state that is not taxed or taxable by any other municipality are included
in the measure of tax under this subchapter if the services are either directed
from a location in the municipality or the taxpayer’s principal West Virginia
office is located in the municipality. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, when a taxpayer has only one office location and this office is
located within the municipality and its activities elsewhere in the state are
neither taxed nor taxable by another municipality, the gross income or gross
proceeds from those activities are taxable by this municipality.
(1991 Code, § 6-25) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.065 RENTALS AND ROYALTIES.
   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in the
business of furnishing any real or tangible personal property which has a tax
situs in the municipality, or any interest therein, for hire, loan, lease or
otherwise, whether the return is in the form of rentals, royalties, fees or
otherwise, the tax shall be 0.50% of the gross income of any such activity. The
term TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY, as used herein, shall not include money or
public securities.
(1991 Code, § 6-26) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.066 BANKING AND OTHER FINANCIAL BUSINESSES.
   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in the
business of banking or financial business, the tax shall be equal to 0.75% of
the gross income received from interest, premiums, discounts, dividends,
service fees or charges, commissions, fines, rents from real or tangible
personal property, however denominated, royalties; charges for bookkeeping or
data processing, receipts from check sales, charges or fees, and receipts from
the sale of tangible personal property; provided, that gross income shall not
include:
   (A)   Interest received on the obligations of the United States, its
agencies and instrumentalities;
   (B)   Interest received on the obligations of this or any other state,
territory or possession of the United States, or any political subdivision of
any of the foregoing or of the District of Columbia; or
   (C)   Interest received on investments or loans primarily secured by first
mortgages or deeds of trust on residential property occupied by non-transients;
provided further, that all interest derived on activities exempt under this
division (C) shall be reported, as to amounts, on the return of a person
taxable under the provision of this section.
(1991 Code, § 6-27) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.067 HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS.
   The rate tax on the activity of a health maintenance organization holding a
certificate of authority under the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 33-25A-1 et
seq., shall not exceed 0.50% to be applied solely to that portion of gross
income received from the Medicaid program pursuant to Title XIX of the Social
Security Act, the state employee programs administered by the public employee
insurance agency pursuant to W.Va. Code §§ 5-16-1 et seq. and other federal
programs for health care items or services provided directly or indirectly by
the health maintenance organization that is expended for administrative
expenses; and shall not exceed 0.50% to be applied to the gross income received
from enrollees, or from employers on behalf of enrollees, from sources other
than Medicaid, state employee programs administered by the public employees
insurance agency and other federal programs for health care items or services
provided directly or indirectly by the health maintenance organization;
provided, that this tax rate limitation shall not extend to that part of the
gross income of health maintenance organizations which is received from the use
of real property other than property in which any such company maintains its
office or offices in the municipality, whether such income is in the form of
rentals or royalties.
(1991 Code, § 6-28) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.068 ADDITIONAL CREDITS.
   (A)   A person taxable under §
110.060 with respect to selling products at wholesale in this municipality
shall be allowed a non-refundable credit against the tax imposed on such
wholesale sales pursuant to §
110.060 for any:
      (1)   Manufacturing taxes paid by such person with respect to the
manufacturing of products so sold at wholesale in this municipality; and/or
      (2)   Extracting taxes paid by such person with respect to the extracting
of products so sold in this municipality or ingredients of products so sold at
wholesale in this municipality.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      EXTRACTING TAX. A gross receipts tax imposed by a municipality or other
local government unit on the act or privilege of engaging in the business as a
producer of natural resource products and includes:
         (a)   The tax imposed in §
110.059; and
         (b)   Similar gross receipts taxes paid to other municipalities or
other local government units within the United States (other than state
governments) within the United States.
      GROSS RECEIPTS TAX. A tax which:
         (a)   Is imposed on or measured by the gross volume of business in
terms of gross receipts or in other terms and in the determination of which
deductions allowed would not constitute the tax, an income tax or value added
tax; and
         (b)   Which is not, pursuant to law or custom, separately stated from
the sales price.
      MANUFACTURING TAX. 
         (a)   A gross receipts tax imposed by a municipality or other local
government unit on the act or privilege of engaging in the business as a
manufacturer and includes: similar gross receipts taxes paid to other
municipalities or other local government units (other than State governments)
within the United States.
         (b)   The manufacturing tax was deleted effective July 2018 by
Ordinance 248.
   (C)   If imposition of the municipality’s tax would place an undue burden
upon interstate commerce or violate constitutional requirements, a taxpayer
shall be allowed a credit to the extent necessary to preserve the validity of
the tax under this subchapter, and still apply the tax to as much of the
taxpayer’s activities as may be subject to the municipality’s taxing authority.
(1991 Code, § 6-30) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.069 EXEMPT ACTIVITIES.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Insurance companies which pay the state a tax upon premiums; provided,
that such exemption shall not extend to that part of gross income of insurance
companies which is received for the use of real property, other than property
in which any such company maintains its office or offices, in the municipality,
whether such income is in the form of rentals or royalties;
   (B)   Non-profit cemetery companies organized and operated for the exclusive
benefit of their members;
   (C)   Fraternal societies, organizations and associations organized and
operated for the exclusive benefit of their members and not for profit;
provided, that this exemption shall not extend to that part of gross income
arising from the sale of alcoholic liquor, food and related services of such
fraternal societies, organizations and associations which are licensed as
private clubs under the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 60-7-1 et seq.;
   (D)   Corporations, associations and societies organized and operated
exclusively for religious or charitable purposes;
   (E)   Production credit associations, organized under the provisions of the
Federal Farm Credit Act of 1933, being 12 U.S.C. §§ 2001 et seq.; provided,
that the exemption of this section shall not apply to corporations or
cooperative associations organized under the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 19-4-
1 et seq.;
   (F)   Any credit union organized under the West Virginia Code; provided,
that the exemptions of this section shall not apply to corporations or
cooperative associations organized under the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 19-4-
1 et seq.; and
   (G)   Gross income derived from advertising service rendered in the business
of radio and television broadcasting.
(1991 Code, § 6-31) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.069A DE MINIMUS GROSS INCOME EXEMPTION FOR SMALL BUSINESS.
   (A)   Effective July 1, 2025, a person engaging in business within the
municipality shall not be subject to the municipal business and occupation or
privilege tax imposed by this chapter for any tax year in which the taxpayer's
gross income, as defined in §
110.057, is less than $2,500.
   (B)   This exemption shall apply on a prospective basis only and shall not
affect liability for any tax periods ending prior to July 1, 2025.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, the term GROSS INCOME shall be
interpreted consistently with §
110.057 and includes all receipts and values accruing to the taxpayer from
engaging in business, without deduction.
(Ord. 344, passed 6-26-2025)
§ 110.070 TAX CUMULATIVE.
   The tax, interest and penalty imposed by this subchapter shall be in
addition to all other licenses, taxes and other revenue measures levied or
collected by the municipality as a condition precedent to the right of any
person to engage or continue in any business, profession, trade, calling or
other activity within this municipality. A person exercising a privilege
taxable under this subchapter, subject to the payment of all licenses and
charges which are conditions precedent to exercising the privileges taxed, may
exercise the privilege in this municipality for the tax year upon the condition
that he or she shall pay the tax, interest and penalty imposed by this
subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-32) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.071 ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY.
   The administration of this subchapter is vested in and shall be exercised by
the Treasurer who shall prescribe forms and may promulgate from time to time
reasonable rules, publications and instructions for the making of returns, and
for ascertaining, assessment, collection and administration of tax, interest
and penalty imposed hereunder.
(1991 Code, § 6-33) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.072 RETURNS; COMPUTATION AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (A)   The tax levied by this subchapter shall be due and payable in
quarterly installments on or before the expiration of one month from the end of
the calendar quarter in which they accrue. The taxpayer shall, within one month
from the expiration of each quarter, make a return reporting the computation of
tax for which it is liable for each quarter; sign and mail the completed
return, together with any remittance due, to the location specified by the
Treasurer. In reporting and remitting the amount of the tax, interest and
penalties due for each quarter, the taxpayer may deduct the quarterly credit
allowed by §
110.068. The Treasurer may allow return and payment under this section for
periods other than quarterly periods.
   (B)   On or before 31 days after the end of the tax year, each person liable
for the payment of tax under this subchapter shall make a fourth quarter
return, showing the gross proceeds of sale or gross income of business, trade,
calling or activity, computing the amount of tax, interest and penalty
chargeable against the person in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter and transmit with the return a remittance in the sum required by
this subchapter, covering the remainder of the tax, interest and penalty
chargeable against the person for the tax year, to such location or locations
specified by the Treasurer. Such returns shall be verified by the oath of the
taxpayer, if made by an individual, or by the individual designated by a
taxpayer that is an entity to take the oath on behalf of the taxpayer.
   (C)   All remittances and payments of tax, interest and penalty imposed by
this subchapter shall be made to the Treasurer, in lawful money of the United
States or by bank draft, certified check, cashier’s check or other commercially
acceptable means specified by the Treasurer, to be kept, deposited and
accounted for as provided by law.
   (D)   A person whose gross income for a tax year is less than $2,500, as
described in § 
110.69A, shall not be liable for the tax imposed by this chapter but may be
required to file a return or declaration indicating that their gross income is
below the applicable threshold, in such form as the Treasurer may prescribe.
(1991 Code, § 6-34) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017;
Ord. 344, passed 6-26-2025)
§ 110.073 TAXPAYER RECORDS.
   Each person subject to this subchapter shall maintain sufficient records for
review by the Treasurer as long as the contents of such records may be material
in the administration of tax imposed by this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-35) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.074 TAX RETURN INFORMATION CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   Except when required in an investigation or proceeding to ascertain or
collect amount of tax, interest, penalty, refund or credit due, or pursuant to
an exemption in W.Va. Code § 11-10-5d, it shall be unlawful for any officer,
employee or agent of the municipality to divulge or make known in any manner
the tax return, or any part thereof, of any person, or disclose information
concerning the personal affairs of any individual or the business of any
person, or disclose the amount of income or any particulars set forth or
disclosed in any report, declaration or return required to be filed with the
Treasurer or otherwise obtained by the municipality in an investigation
undertaken by the Treasurer concerning the tax imposed by this subchapter. Any
person protected by the provisions of this subchapter may, in writing, waive
the confidentiality provisions of this section for such purpose and such period
as he or she shall therein state. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the publication or release of statistics so classified as to prevent
the identification of particular reports and the items thereof. This section
shall not be construed to prohibit the publication by the Treasurer of the list
of delinquent business and occupation taxpayers as provided for in this
subchapter.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Treasurer may permit the proper
officer, or his or her authorized representative or agent, of the United States
or the state, or any political subdivision of the state, to inspect return
information to or may furnish to such officer or representative a copy of any
such return or any other tax return information, provided, that such other
jurisdiction grants similar privileges to this municipality or if the other
jurisdiction is a party of an intergovernmental agreement authorizing the
exchange of such information.
(1991 Code, § 6-36) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 226, passed 12-15-2016;
Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.075 ERRONEOUS COMPUTATION OF TAX.
   If any taxpayer shall make any error in computing the tax, interest and
penalty under this subchapter, the Treasurer shall correct such error or
reassess the proper amount of tax, interest and penalty, and notify the
taxpayer of his or her action by mailing the taxpayer promptly a copy of the
corrected assessment, and any additional tax, interest and penalty for which
such taxpayer may be liable shall be paid within 15 days after the receipt of
such statement. If the amount already paid exceeds that which should have been
paid on the basis of the tax so recomputed, the excess so paid shall be
immediately refunded to the taxpayer upon the request of the Treasurer and
shall be payable out of any funds available for the purpose. The taxpayer may,
at its election, apply an overpayment as credit upon tax subsequently accruing
hereunder.
(1991 Code, § 6-37) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.076 INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a tax return, claim
or assessment or for the purpose of making an estimate of any taxpayer’s
liability for the tax administered under this subchapter, the Treasurer shall
have the power to examine or cause to be examined any books, papers, records,
memoranda and other documents or data bearing upon the matters required to be
included in the return and may require the attendance of the person rendering
the return or the attendance of any other person having knowledge of relevant
matters. In connection therewith, the Treasurer may take testimony and shall
have the power to administer oaths.
   (B)   The Treasurer has the power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces
tecum to compel the attendance of witnesses and production of documents for the
purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return or claim or for performing
an assessment or for any hearing held by the Treasurer. In case of the failure
or refusal of a witness to appear and testify or to produce evidence, the
Treasurer may invoke the aid of the Circuit Court of the county. Upon proper
showing, the Treasurer may apply for an order requiring the witness to appear
and give testimony and produce evidence concerning the matter in question.
(1991 Code, § 6-38) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.077 ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   If any person who is required by this subchapter to do so shall fail
or refuse to make a return, either in whole or part; or if the Treasurer
believes the tax imposed by this subchapter has been insufficiently returned by
any taxpayer, the Treasurer may proceed to assess the tax and shall notify the
person assessed of the amount of the tax, additional tax, interest and
penalties so assessed.
   (B)   The Treasurer may, at any time before the assessment becomes final,
amend, in whole or in part, any assessment whenever the Treasurer ascertains
that such assessment is improper or incomplete in any material respect. The
Treasurer may, at any time within the period prescribed for assessment, make a
supplemental assessment whenever the Treasurer ascertains that any assessment
is incorrect in any material respect.
   (C)   The amount of tax, interest and penalties imposed by this subchapter
shall be assessed within three years after the date the fourth quarter return
for the year in which such tax arose is filed by the taxpayer; provided, that
in the case of a false or fraudulent return filed with the intent to evade the
tax or in case no return is filed, an assessment may be made at any time.
(1991 Code, § 6-39) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.078 NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT; PETITION FOR REASSESSMENT.
   The Treasurer shall give the taxpayer written notice of any assessment made
pursuant to this subchapter. Unless the taxpayer to whom the notice of
assessment is given shall within 30 days after service thereof file with the
Treasurer a petition for reassessment, the assessment shall become final and
not subject to administrative or judicial review. A petition for reassessment
must be in writing verified under oath by the taxpayer or his or her duly
authorized agent having knowledge of the facts, setting forth with
particularity the items of the assessment objected to, together with the
reasons for the objections. The total amount of an assessment shall be due and
payable on the day following the date upon which the assessment becomes final.
(1991 Code, § 6-40) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.079 HEARING PROCEDURE; DECISION; REVIEW.
   (A)   When a petition for reassessment or a petition for refund or credit is
properly filed pursuant to this subchapter within the time prescribed for such
filing, the Treasurer shall assign a time and a place for a hearing thereon and
shall notify the petitioner of such hearing by written notice at least 20 days
in advance thereof. Such hearing shall be held within 90 days from the date of
filing the petition, unless continued by agreement of the parties or by the
Treasurer for sufficient cause. The hearing shall be informal and shall be
conducted in an impartial manner by the Treasurer or a hearing examiner
designated by the Treasurer. The burden of proof shall be upon the taxpayer to
show that the assessment or denied refund or credit is incorrect and contrary
to law, in whole or in part.
   (B)   After such hearing, the Treasurer shall, within a reasonable time,
give notice in writing to the taxpayer of the Treasurer’s decision. An appeal
may be taken by the taxpayer to the Circuit Court of the county within 60 days
after service of the Treasurer’s administrative decision issued pursuant to
this section.
(1991 Code, § 6-41) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.080 INJUNCTION.
   After any delinquency shall have continued 60 days, the Treasurer may
proceed in the Circuit Court of the county to obtain an injunction restraining
the further exercise of the privilege until full payment shall have been made
of all tax, interest and penalty due under this subchapter. In any proceeding
under this section, upon judgment or decree for the municipality, the
municipality shall be awarded its costs.
(1991 Code, § 6-42) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.081 UNPAID TAX A LIEN; DELINQUENCY NOTICE FILING AND RELEASE.
   Any tax, interest and penalties due and payable under this subchapter shall
be a debt due the municipality and shall constitute a lien on the real and
personal property of the taxpayer. The Treasurer, for the more effective
collection of the tax, interest and penalty imposed by this subchapter, may
file with the Clerk of the County Commission a certified notice of lien for
delinquent taxes, interest and penalty under this subchapter for recordation.
If a lien has been recorded respecting a delinquency, upon full payment of all
delinquent tax, interest and penalty, the Treasurer shall attest to the fact
and amount of payment, and shall forward a certificate of release to the
taxpayer. Upon presentment and payment of the recording fee by the taxpayer,
the Clerk of the County Commission shall record such certificate in the book in
which releases are recorded.
(1991 Code, § 6-43) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.082 SUCCESSOR LIABILITY.
   The tax, interest and penalty imposed by this subchapter shall be a
continuing lien upon the property of any person subject to the provisions
hereof who shall sell out its business or stock of goods, or shall quit
business, and such person shall be required to make the return provided for in
this subchapter within 30 days after the date it sold out its business or stock
of goods, or quit business, and its successor in business shall be required to
withhold sufficient of the purchase money to cover the amount of such tax,
interest and penalty due and unpaid until such time as the former owner shall
produce a receipt from the Treasurer showing that all tax, interest and penalty
has been paid. If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods fails to
withhold purchase money as hereby provided, and the tax, interest and penalty
shall be due and unpaid after the 30-day period allowed, the successor shall be
personally liable for the payment of the tax, interest and penally accrued and
unpaid on account of the operation of the business by the former owner.
(1991 Code, § 6-44) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.083 REVOCATION, NON-RENEWAL OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   (A)   The Treasurer has the authority to revoke, deny and prevent any and
all licenses and permits issued by the municipality in the event a licensee or
permittee fails or refuses to file any return required hereby or fails or
refuses to pay any delinquent tax, interest or penalty due and owing to the
municipality.
   (B)   In the event of such a revocation or denial, the Treasurer will
provide written notice to the affected person at least five days prior to the
contemplated revocation or denial and such notice shall be served by certified
mail. The notice shall indicate the time and the place of a revocation/denial
review meeting, the general grounds of said contemplated action, and shall
advise the affected person of its rights to appear at said hearing in person
and represented by legal counsel, and to be heard orally upon the merits of the
person’s defense. The Treasurer may request legal advice from the City
Attorney, and adopt such procedures for its decorum and the dispatch of
business at such hearings as the Treasurer may regard advisable. The revocation
decision of the Treasurer will be final.
   (C)   Each license or permit that has been revoked or denied pursuant to
this section may be issued or re-issued upon payment of all delinquent tax,
interest or penalty due and owing to the municipality and satisfaction of all
relevant licensing conditions otherwise imposed by the municipality.
(1991 Code, § 6-45) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.084 SETTLEMENT AGREEMENTS AND COMPROMISES.
   The Treasurer, with approval of the Mayor, is authorized to enter into an
agreement in writing with any person relating to the liability of such person
in respect of the tax, interest and penalty imposed by this subchapter for any
taxable period. If such a closing agreement is duly made and entered into, such
agreement shall be final and conclusive for the periods covered except upon a
showing of fraud, malfeasance or misrepresentation of a material fact. The
Treasurer, with approval of the Mayor, may compromise all or part of any
administrative determination or civil case concerning tax, interest and penalty
or otherwise arising under the provisions of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-46) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.085 ADDITIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS CONCERNING CONTRACTING.
   (A)   Without limiting the generality of the administrative and collection
powers granted to the Treasurer in this subchapter, the Treasurer is also
empowered to require any person engaging or continuing within the municipality
in the business of contracting to furnish a list of the names, addresses and
amounts paid by them to any subcontractors employed and suppliers of materials
used upon any job or to do any work within the municipality. The Treasurer may
also require every person engaging or continuing within the municipality in the
business of contracting who is a nonresident of the state to pay or guarantee
the payment of the amount of the tax imposed by this subchapter for the
privilege of engaging in the business of contracting within the municipality,
such payment of such tax to be based upon the amount of the building permit
issued by the municipality for the work to be performed by such person, as a
condition precedent to the issuance of such building permit. In lieu of such
prior payment in cash of such tax, any such nonresident may guarantee the
payment of such privilege tax provided for herein by delivering to the
municipality a bond, with good and adequate surety, payable to the
municipality, and conditioned to pay such tax on or before the estimated date
of the completion of the work to be performed by such person within the
municipality.
   (B)   Any person engaging a contractor or subcontractor within this
municipality shall withhold payment in sufficient amount to cover taxes
assessed by this subchapter in the final settlement of such contracts until the
receipt of a certificate from the Treasurer to the effect that all taxes levied
and accrued under this subchapter against the contractor have been paid. If any
person fails to withhold as provided herein and the contractor or subcontractor
fails to timely pay such tax, such person shall be personally liable for the
payment of such taxes, and the same shall be recoverable by the Treasurer by
appropriate legal proceedings.
(1991 Code, § 6-47) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.086 CLAIMS FOR REFUND OR CREDIT.
   (A)   Any taxpayer claiming to have overpaid any tax, interest or penalty
imposed by this subchapter shall file its claim with the Treasurer within three
years after the due date of the return in respect of which the tax was imposed,
and not thereafter.
   (B)   If, as a result of the claim, the Treasurer shall be of the opinion
that the tax, interest or penalty, or any part thereof, was overpaid, the
Treasurer shall refund the same to the taxpayer. If the Treasurer denies the
claim, the taxpayer may within 30 days after notice of denial file with the
Treasurer a petition for refund or credit, which shall be heard in accordance
with §
110.079. A taxpayer’s failure to abide by express procedures contained in this
section precludes taxpayer’s right to any refund or credit of tax, interest and
penalties paid or collected under this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-48) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.087 INTEREST AND PENALTY.
   (A)   The tax imposed by this subchapter, if not paid when due, shall bear
interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the due date of the payment until
paid.
   (B)   If any person fails to make the return or any quarterly installment
required by this subchapter, or makes its return but fails to remit, in whole
or in part, the proper amount of tax, there shall be added to the amount of tax
unpaid, from the date such tax should have been paid, a penalty in the amount
of 5% of the tax for the first month, or fraction thereof, of delinquency, and
1% of the tax for each succeeding month, or fraction thereof of delinquency;
provided, that if such failure is due to reasonable cause, the Treasurer may
waive, in whole or in part, these penalties. Additionally, if the failure to
pay is due to fraud or intent to evade any such tax there shall be added an
additional penalty of 25% of the tax owed, exclusive of penalties. Interest and
penalties may be collected in the same manner as the tax imposed by this
subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-49) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.088 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall first accrue July 1, 2017.
(1991 Code, § 6-51) (Ord. 070, passed 1-3-2008; Ord. 236, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 110.089 PUBLICATION.
   (A)   Delinquent list preparation.
      (1)   The Treasurer shall prepare the delinquent list in a manner set
forth W.Va. Code § 8-13-25.
      (2)   The Treasurer shall adopt policies and procedures designed to
verify each delinquency prior to publication.
      (3)   The delinquent list may include the name of the delinquent taxpayer
and the year(s) in which the delinquency arises.
      (4)   For each delinquent list published by the city, and prior to such
publication, the Treasurer shall take an oath, to be included in or attached to
the delinquent list, certified by the City Clerk or some other person duly
authorized to administer oaths, in form and effect as follows:
“I, _______________ Treasurer of the City of Elkins of _________, do swear, to
the best of my knowledge and belief, that the foregoing list of delinquent
business and occupation taxes to be published on _______________, is complete
and accurate, and, as of the date of this oath, that I have not received
payment from any of the entities listed for the delinquent amounts included in
the list.”
   (B)   Publication and posting of delinquent tax list; costs.
      (1)   A copy of a delinquent list may be posted at the front door of City
Hall and may be published as a Class I-0 legal advertisement in the newspaper
or other media in compliance with the provisions of W.Va. Code § 8-13-26,
chapter fifty-nine of this code, on the city’s website or in such other
reasonable manner as determined by the city to provide notice of the
delinquency without incurring unnecessary costs related to the publication.
      (2)   Prior to the publication of such list each delinquent taxpayer
shall be given 30-day written notice that his or her name is on the list to be
published unless the delinquent taxes are paid prior to the date upon which the
name can be deleted by the newspaper publication.
      (3)   To cover the costs of preparing, publishing and posting a
delinquent list, a reasonable charge may be added to the amount owed by a
taxpayer included in any such list, in addition to the tax, interest and
penalty already owed by the taxpayer.
   (C)   Notice of delinquent lists to Council and retention of list by city. A
copy of each published delinquent list shall be provided to the Council not
later than the first regular meeting of the Council after the publication. A
copy of the delinquent list shall be retained by the Treasurer designated in
the ordinance for a period of not less than three years.
(Ord. 220, passed 12-15-2016)
MUNICIPAL SALES AND USE TAX
§ 110.100 COUNCIL FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Municipal Home Rule Board in July, 2017, approved the amended home
rule plan submitted by the city, thereby allowing the city to adopt a municipal
sales and service tax and a municipal use tax pursuant to W.Va. Code § 8-l-5a
without the limiting restrictions in W.Va. Code §§ 8-13C-1 et seq. In
accordance with its amended home rule plan, the Council hereby finds and
declares that the adoption by this city for its municipal sales and service tax
and its municipal use tax provisions of the Code of West Virginia, 1931, as
amended, relating to imposition, administration, collection and enforcement of
the state consumers sales and service tax codified in W.Va. Code §§ 11-15-1 et
seq., the state use tax codified in W.Va. Code §§ 11-15A-1 et seq. and the
Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Act codified in W.Va. Code §§ 11-15B-1 et seq.
will:
      (1)   Simplify collection of the city’s sales and use taxes;
      (2)   Simplify preparation of municipal sales and use tax returns by
taxpayers; and
      (3)   Improve enforcement of the city’s sales and use taxes.
   (B)   The Council does, therefore, declare that this subchapter be construed
so as to accomplish the foregoing purposes.
(1991 Code, § 6-52) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.101 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Terms used in this subchapter or in the administration, collection and
enforcement of the taxes imposed by this subchapter and not otherwise defined
in this subchapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in W.Va. Code Ch.
11, Arts. 9, 10, 15, 15a and 15b.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BUSINESS. Includes all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in
by any person with the object of gain or economic benefit, direct or indirect,
and all activities of the state and its political subdivisions, which involve
sales of tangible personal property or the rendering of services when those
service activities compete with or may compete with the activities of other
persons.
      CITY or THIS CITY. The City of Elkins, West Virginia.
      CODE OF WEST VIRGINIA or W.VA. CODE. The Code of West Virginia, 1931, as
amended from time to time by the West Virginia Legislature.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership or any other legal entity,
including this state or its political subdivisions or an agency of either, or
the guardian, trustee, committee, executor or administrator of any person.
      PURCHASE. Any transfer, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in
any manner or by any means whatsoever, for a consideration.
      PURCHASE PRICE. The measure subject to the taxes imposed by this
subchapter and has the same meaning as SALES PRICE.
      PURCHASER. A person who purchases tangible personal property, custom
software or a service taxed by this subchapter.
      SALE, SALES or SELLING. The meaning ascribed to those terms in W.Va. Code
Ch. 11, Art. 15b.
      SALES AND USE TAXES. The taxes imposed by §§
110.102 and
110.103.
      SALES PRICE. The meaning ascribed to that term in W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art.
15b.
      SALES TAX. The tax levied by §
110.102.
      SERVICE or SELECTED SERVICE. The meaning ascribed to those terms in W.Va.
Code Ch. 11, Art. 15b.
      STATE SALES TAX. The tax levied by W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 15, as
amended.
      STATE USE TAX. The tax levied by W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 15a, as amended.
      TAX. The taxes imposed by this subchapter and includes additions to tax,
interest and penalties levied under W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 10, as amended.
      TAX COMMISSIONER. The Chief Executive Office of the Tax Division of the
Department of Revenue of this State, as provided in W.Va. Code § 11-1-1.
      THIS STATE. The State of West Virginia.
      ULTIMATE CONSUMER or CONSUMER. A person who uses or consumes services,
tangible personal property or custom software.
      USE.
         (a)   For purposes of the tax imposed by §
110.103 means and includes:
            1.   The exercise by any person of any right or power over tangible
personal property or custom software incident to the ownership, possession or
enjoyment of the property, or by any transaction in which possession of or the
exercise of any right or power over tangible personal property, custom software
or the result of a taxable service is acquired for a consideration, including
any lease, rental or conditional sale of tangible personal property or custom
software; or
            2.   The use or enjoyment in this state of the result of a taxable
service. As used in this definition, ENJOYMENT includes a purchaser’s right to
direct the disposition of the property or the use of the taxable service,
whether or not the purchaser has possession of the property.
      (2)   The term USE does not include the keeping, retaining or exercising
any right or power over tangible personal property, custom software or the
result of a taxable service for the purpose of subsequently transporting it
outside the city for use thereafter solely outside this city.
      USE TAX. The tax imposed by §
110.103.
      VENDOR. Any person engaged in this city in furnishing services taxed by
this subchapter or making sales of tangible personal property or custom
software. VENDOR and SELLER are used interchangeably in this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-53) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.102 IMPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL SALES AND SERVICE TAX.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property or customer software
and for the privilege of furnishing certain selected service, a vendor doing
business in this city shall collect from the purchaser the taxes imposed by
this section and pay the amount of taxes collected to the Tax Commissioner at
the same time and in the same manner as the consumers sales and service tax
imposed by W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 15, as amended, are paid to the Tax
Commissioner. The rate of tax shall be 1% of the sales price, as defined in §
110.101 of the tangible personal property, custom software or taxable service
purchased or leased.
(1991 Code, § 6-54) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.103 IMPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL USE TAX.
   An excise tax is hereby levied and imposed on the use in this city of
tangible personal property, custom software and the results of taxable
services, to be collected and paid to the Tax Commissioner as agent for the
city in the same manner that state use tax is collected under W.Va. Code Ch.
11, Arts. 15a and 15b, as amended, and remitted to the Tax Commissioner. The
rate of tax shall be 1% of the purchase price, as defined in §
110.101, of the tangible personal property, custom software or taxable service
used within the city.
(1991 Code, § 6-55) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.104 CALCULATION OF TAX ON FRACTIONAL PARTS OF DOLLAR.
   The tax computation under §§
110.102 and
110.103 shall be carried to the third decimal place and the tax rounded up to
the next whole cent whenever the third decimal place is greater than four and
rounded down to the lower whole cent whenever the third decimal place is four
or less. The vendor may elect to compute the tax due on a transaction on a per
item basis or on an invoice basis provided the method used is consistently used
during the reporting period but the method used shall be the same as that used
for purposes of computing the state sales or use tax.
(1991 Code, § 6-56) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.105 STATE AND LOCAL TAX BASES.
   The taxable base of the taxes imposed by §§
110.102 and
110.103 shall be identical to the sales and use tax base of this state except
as provided in §
110.106, unless otherwise prohibited by federal law, as required by W.Va. Code
§ 11-15B-34.
(1991 Code, § 6-57) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.106 EXCEPTIONS.
   The taxes imposed by this subchapter do not apply to:
   (A)   The sale or use of motor fuel, as defined in W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art.
14c, as amended;
   (B)   The sale or use of motor vehicles upon which the tax imposed by W.Va.
Code § 11-15-3c, as amended, is paid;
   (C)   The purchase or use of any tangible personal property, custom software
or service that the city is prohibited from taxing under the laws of this state
or of the United States;
   (D)   The sales tax imposed by §
110.102 does not apply to any transaction that is exempt from the tax imposed
by W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 15; and
   (E)   The use tax imposed by §
110.103 does not apply to any purchase upon which the sales tax imposed by §
110.102 has been paid.
(1991 Code, § 6-58) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.107 CREDIT AGAINST MUNICIPAL USE TAX.
   (A)   A person is entitled to a credit against the use tax imposed by §
110.103 on the use of a particular item of tangible personal property, custom
software or results of a taxable service equal to the amount, if any, of sales
tax lawfully paid to another municipality for the acquisition of that property,
custom software or service; provided, that the amount of credit allowed may not
exceed the amount of use tax imposed by §
110.103 on the use of the tangible personal property, custom software or
results of the taxable service in this city.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MUNICIPALITY. Includes municipalities of this state or of any other state
of the United States.
      SALES TAX. Includes a sales tax or compensating use tax imposed on the
sale or use of tangible personal property, custom software or the results of a
taxable service by the municipality in which the sale occurred.
   (C)   No credit is allowed under this section for payment of any sales or
use taxes imposed by this state or any other state. For purposes of this
division (C), STATE includes the 50 states of the United States and the
District of Columbia but does not include any of the several territories
organized by Congress.
(1991 Code, § 6-59) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.108 TAX CUMULATIVE.
   The taxes imposed by this subchapter are in addition to other taxes imposed
on the sale or use of tangible personal property, custom software or taxable
services including, but not limited to, the state consumers sales and service
tax imposed by W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 15; the state use tax imposed by W.Va.
Code Ch. 11, Art. 15a; the public utility tax imposed by this city pursuant to
W.Va. Code § 8-13-5a; the amusement tax imposed by this city pursuant to W.Va.
Code § 8-13-6; the tax on sales of alcoholic liquors and wine imposed by this
city pursuant to W.Va. Code § 8-13-6; the hotel occupancy tax imposed by this
city pursuant to W.Va. Code Ch. 7, Art. 18; and the special district excise
taxes imposed by a county pursuant to W.Va. Code §§ 7-22-1 et seq. or a
municipality pursuant to W.Va. Code §§ 8-38-1 et seq.
(1991 Code, § 6-60) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.109 LOCAL RATE AND BOUNDARY DATA BASE; CHANGES.
   (A)   The Tax Commissioner is required by W.Va. Code § 11-15B-35 to maintain
a database for all jurisdictions levying a sales or use tax in this state. The
Treasurer shall furnish the Tax Commissioner with information the Tax
Commissioner requires for that database that will allow the Tax Commissioner to
maintain a database that assigns each five-digit and nine-digit zip code within
the City to the proper rate of tax. If any nine-digit zip code area includes
area outside this city, the single state and local rate assigned to that area
in the Tax Commissioner’s database will be the lowest rate applicable to that
area; provided, that, when sales occur at and are sourced to a physical
location of the seller located in the city in that nine-digit zip code area,
the seller shall collect the tax imposed by §
110.102.
   (B)   Whenever boundaries of the city change, whether by annexation or
deannexation, the Treasurer shall promptly notify the Tax Commissioner in
writing of the change in boundaries; provide the Tax Commissioner with the
nine-digit zip code or codes for the area annexed or de-annexed; and any other
information the Tax Commissioner may require to maintain the database. An
ordinance annexing property into the city, or an ordinance removing property
from the corporate limits of the city may not take effect any sooner than the
first day of a calendar quarter that begins 60 days after the city provides
written notice to the Tax Commission of a change in the municipal boundaries.
   (C)   The nine-digit database shall be maintained by the city until such
time as the Tax Commissioner allows use of a different system to determine
whether a location is within or outside the corporate limits of the city.
(1991 Code, § 6-61) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.110 STATE LEVEL ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Tax Commissioner is responsible for administering, collecting and
enforcing the taxes imposed by this subchapter as provided in W.Va. Code §§ 8-
13C-6 and 11-15B-33. The city may enter into a written agreement with the Tax
Commissioner that will allow employees of the city auditing a vendor whose
primary business location is in the city for compliance with the city’s
business and occupation tax to also audit that business location for compliance
with the sales and use tax laws of this state and this city and obligate the
city to share that information with the Tax Commissioner.
   (B)   The Tax Commissioner may retain from collections of the taxes imposed
by this subchapter the fee allowed by W.Va. Code § 11-10-11c or by any other
state law or legislative rule.
   (C)   The Tax Commissioner shall deposit all the proceeds from collection of
the taxes imposed by this subchapter, minus any fee for collecting, enforcing
and administering taxes retained under this section, in the subaccount for this
city established in a “municipal sales and services tax and use tax fund,” an
interest bearing account created in the state treasury pursuant to W.Va. Code §
8-13C-7. All moneys collected and deposited in the subaccount for the city
shall be remitted at least quarterly by the State Treasurer to the City
Treasurer, as provided W.Va. Code § 8-13C-7.
(1991 Code, § 6-62) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.111 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   Each and every provision of the West Virginia Tax Procedure and
Administration Act set forth in W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 10 applies to the
administration, collection and enforcement of the sales and use taxes imposed
pursuant to this subchapter, except as otherwise expressly provided in W.Va.
Code Ch. 8, Art. 13-c, with like effect as if that act were applicable only to
the taxes imposed by this subchapter and were set forth in extenso in this
subchapter, as provided in W.Va. Code § 8-13C-6.
(1991 Code, § 6-63) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.112 CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   Each and every provision of the West Virginia Tax Crimes and Penalties Act
set forth in W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 9 applies to the administration,
collection and enforcement of the municipal sales and use taxes imposed
pursuant to this subchapter with like effect as if that act were applicable
only to the taxes imposed pursuant to this subchapter and were set forth in
extenso in this subchapter, as provided in W.Va. Code § 8-13C-6; provided, that
the criminal penalties imposed upon conviction for a criminal violation of this
subchapter may not exceed the maximum penalties allowed by law for a similar
violation of the ordinances of this city.
(1991 Code, § 6-64) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.113 AUTOMATIC UPDATING.
   Any amendments to W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Arts. 9, 10, 15, 15a and 15b shall
automatically apply to the municipal sales and use tax imposed pursuant to this
subchapter, to the extent they are applicable to the taxes imposed by this
subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-65) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.114 DEPOSIT OF TAXES COLLECTED IN GENERAL REVENUE FUND.
   When the City Treasurer receives periodic distributions of municipal sales
and use taxes from the State Treasurer, the City Treasurer shall promptly
deposit the amount received in the General Revenue Fund or Account of the city.
(1991 Code, § 6-66) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.115 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall become effective upon its adoption by the Council on
final passage. However, the Council hereby suspends imposition and collection
of the municipal sales and use taxes imposed by this subchapter until July 1,
2018, or such later July 1 as required by the legislative rule codified in
Title 110, Legislative Rule, Department of Tax and Revenue, Series 28.
(1991 Code, § 6-68) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.116 NOTIFICATION OF TAX COMMISSIONER.
   Upon adoption of this subchapter by Council, the City Treasurer shall
forthwith send to the Tax Commissioner a certified copy of this subchapter, the
rate and the boundary database required by §
110.109, along with a description of the boundaries of the city, and such other
information as the Tax Commissioner may need to administer, collect and enforce
the taxes imposed by this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 6-69) (Ord. 248, passed 12-7-2017)
§ 110.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   A violation of §
110.034 will constitute a misdemeanor with a minimum penalty of an amount set
forth by Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 3-17-1994)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.001   Definitions
   
111.002   Tax imposed; exception
   
111.003   License required for distributing or retailing wine; fees; license
period; separate license required for each place of business
   
111.004   Intoxication or drinking in public places; violation
   
111.005   False statement in application for license
Nonintoxicating Beer
   
111.020   License; required; application
   
111.021   Issuance
   
111.022   Tax imposed; computation for less than full year
   
111.023   Subject to conditions for state licenses
   
111.024   Additional tax; return and affidavit; collection; lien
Private Clubs
   
111.035   City license; required
   
111.036   Application; fee
   
111.037   Issuance; application; expiration; renewal; transferability
   
111.038   Schedule of fees; partial fees
   
111.039   Revocation
Unlawful Acts
   
111.050   Unlawful acts of licensees
   
111.051   Unlawful acts of persons
Sale of Alcohol on Sunday
   
111.065   Definitions
   
111.066   Sale of alcohol
Alcohol Policy
   
111.080   General provisions
   
111.081   Use of alcohol general policies
   
111.082   Renters
   
111.083   Insurance
   
111.084   Special events license
 
   
111.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, words and phrases defined by W.Va. Code §§
11-16-2, 60-1-5 and 60-7-2 shall have the meanings ascribed to them therein.
(1991 Code, § 3-1) (Ord. passed 6-1-1967)
§ 111.002 TAX IMPOSED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of W.Va. Code § 8-13-7, as last amended,
there is hereby imposed a tax of 5% of the retail purchase price of any and all
intoxicating liquors purchased from the Alcohol Beverage Control Commission or
from any person licensed to sell wine at retail to the public under the
provision of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 8, within the corporate limits of the
city; provided that such tax shall not be levied or collected on intoxicating
liquors, other than wine, sold by or purchased from holders of a license issued
under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 7; and further provided, that
such tax shall be collected upon all sales of wine to holders of a license
issued under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 7 from a wine
distributor licensed pursuant to the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 3 et
seq.
   (B)   Such tax shall be levied upon the purchaser of said intoxicating
liquor or wine and shall be added to and collected with the retail purchase
thereof. Such tax shall be received by the city from the State Treasury
pursuant to the rules and regulations adopted by the Alcohol Beverage Control
Commission.
(1991 Code, § 3-2) (Ord. passed 7-1-1947; Ord. passed 6-6-1963; Ord. passed 6-
17-1965; Ord. passed 6-18-1981; Ord. passed 8-18-1983)
Editor’s note:
   At the time of enactment of the ordinance codified in this section, and
again at the time of the 1963 and 1981 amendments thereof, certified copies of
the ordinance were sent to the State Alcohol Beverage Control Commissioner as
required by W.Va. Code § 8-13-7.
Statutory reference:
   Tax upon liquor sold at state store located beyond but within one mile of
corporate limits of any municipality, for the benefit of such municipality, see
W.Va. Code § 60-3-9d
§ 111.003 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR DISTRIBUTING OR RETAILING WINE; FEES; LICENSE
PERIOD; SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person shall engage in business as a distributor or retailer of
wine as provided by W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 8 of 1931, as last amended, within
the corporate limits of the city, without first obtaining a license from the
city, nor shall a person continue to engage in any such activity after his or
her license has expired, been suspended or revoked. No person may be licensed
in more than one of such capacities at the same time.
   (B)   The city shall collect an annual fee for licenses issued in an amount
set forth by Council from time to time.
   (C)   The license period shall begin on July 1 of each year commencing with
July 1, 1982, and if the initial license is granted for less than a year, the
fee shall be computed in proportion to the number of quarters remaining the
fiscal year, including the quarter in which application is made.
   (D)   A retailer who has more than one place of retail business shall obtain
a license for each separate retail establishment. A retailer’s license may be
issued only to the proprietor or owner of a bona fide grocery store or wine
specialty shop.
   (E)   A copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter imposing the tax
shall be certified by the Mayor to the State Alcohol Beverage Commission and to
the Tax Commissioner.
(1991 Code, § 3-2.1) (Ord. passed 7-16-1981; Ord. passed 9-2-1982) Penalty, see
§
111.999
§ 111.004 INTOXICATION OR DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES; VIOLATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Appear in a public place in an intoxicated condition;
      (2)   Drink alcoholic liquor in a public place other than a business
establishment duly licensed by the state to sell alcoholic liquor or
nonintoxicating beer for consumption on its premises;
      (3)   Drink alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle on any highway, street,
alley or in a public garage; and/or
      (4)   Tender alcoholic liquor to another person in a public place.
   (B)   Any officer of the law is hereby authorized and empowered to arrest
and to hold in custody, without a warrant, until complaint may be made before
the municipal judge and a warrant issued, any person who, in the presence of
such officer of the law, violates any one or more of the provisions of division
(A) above.
(1991 Code, § 3-3) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding state law, and penalties for violation, see W.Va. Code §
60-6-9
   Profane swearing and drunkenness, see W.Va. Code § 61-8-15
§ 111.005 FALSE STATEMENT IN APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any applicant for any license under this chapter to
knowingly make any false statement of any material fact in his or her
application for such license.
(1991 Code, § 3-4) Penalty, see §
111.999
NONINTOXICATING BEER
§ 111.020 LICENSE; REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   No nonintoxicating beer, as defined by W.Va. Code § 11-16-2, shall be sold,
delivered or otherwise distributed within the city without a city license
having been obtained therefor. Such license shall designate the name of the
licensee and, if a different person, the name of the party obtaining the
license, the particular place where nonintoxicating beer shall be sold and the
time for which the license shall run, the kind of license and any other
specifications which may be required by the State Tax Commissioner on similar
licenses issued by the state. The applicant shall make application in writing,
under oath, answering such questions as are provided in the application to the
State Tax Commissioner for a state license.
(1991 Code, § 3-5)
Statutory reference:
   Exclusion of nonintoxicating beer from regulations of State Liquor Control
Act, see W.Va. Code § 60-1-7
   Form and contents of application for state license, and bond required by
state, see W.Va. Code § 11-16-12
   State Nonintoxicating Beer Act, see W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 16
   Unlawful acts of holders of state nonintoxicating beer licenses, see W.Va.
Code § 11-16-13
§ 111.021 ISSUANCE.
   The City Clerk shall issue the license applied for when the application has
been filed and upon presentation to him or her of a license duly issued to the
applicant by the state and of the license tax for the city license.
(1991 Code, § 3-6)
§ 111.022 TAX IMPOSED; COMPUTATION FOR LESS THAN FULL YEAR.
   There is hereby levied and imposed an annual license tax upon all dealers in
and of nonintoxicating beer, which license period shall begin on July 1 of each
year and end on June 30 of the following year and, if granted for a shorter
period, the tax shall be computed quarterly, in proportion to the remainder of
the fiscal year, as follows.
   (A)   Retail dealers shall be divided into two classes, A and B.
      (1)   Class A. In the case of a Class A retail dealer, the license fee
shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time for each place of
business; the license fee for social, fraternal or private clubs not operating
for profit and having been in continuous operation for two years or more
immediately preceding the date of application, shall be an amount set forth by
Council from time to time; except, that railroads operating in the city may
dispense nonintoxicating beer upon payment of an annual license tax of an
amount set forth by Council from time to time for each dining, club or buffet
car in which such beverage is dispensed. Class A licenses issued for social,
fraternal or private clubs and for railroad dining, club or buffet cars, as
herein provided, shall authorize the licensee to sell nonintoxicating beer at
retail, for consumption only on the licensed premises where sold. All other
Class A licenses shall authorize the licensee to sell nonintoxicating beer at
retail, for consumption on or off the licensed premises.
      (2)   Class B. In the case of a Class B retailer, there shall be two
types of Class B license. The fee for a Class B license authorizing the sale of
unchilled beer only shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
The fee for a Class B license authorizing the sale of both chilled and
unchilled beer shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time. A
Class B license shall authorize the licensee to sell nonintoxicating beer at
retail in bottles, cans or other sealed containers only, and only for
consumption off the licensed premises. Sales under this license, to any person
at any one time, must be in lesser quantities than five gallons. Such license
may be issued only to the proprietor or owner of a grocery store. For the
purposes of this subchapter the term GROCERY STORE means and includes any
retail establishment commonly known as a grocery store or delicatessen, where
food or food products are sold for consumption off the premises.
   (B)   In the case of a distributor, the license fee shall be an amount set
forth by Council from time to time; for each place of business.
   (C)   In the case of a brewery with its principal place of business located
in the city, the license fee shall be an amount set forth by Council from time
to time for each place of manufacture.
(1991 Code, § 3-7) (Ord. passed 6-15-1961)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to impose the license taxes herein levied, see W.Va. Code
§ 11-16-17
   State law provisions corresponding to this section, see W.Va. Code § 11-16-4
§ 111.023 SUBJECT TO CONDITIONS FOR STATE LICENSES.
   The license for the sale, delivery or distribution of nonintoxicating beer
shall be issued for the same period as that issued by the state for
corresponding state licenses, and shall be subject to revocation or
cancellation for the same reasons or cause as would subject a state license to
revocation or cancellation.
(1991 Code, § 3-8)
§ 111.024 ADDITIONAL TAX; RETURN AND AFFIDAVIT; COLLECTION; LIEN.
   Every person required, under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 16,
to make return for and affidavit of the amount of nonintoxicating beer sold for
the purpose of additional tax, shall make report and affidavit for the same
period to the City Clerk, who shall assess the additional tax at the rate and
in the amount taxed by the state, and shall certify the additional tax to the
City Treasurer and Collector for collection. Upon failure to pay such
additional tax within 30 days, the tax shall be collected as are other
delinquent taxes or by any appropriate remedy in a court of competent
jurisdiction. In addition thereto, there shall be a similar lien for the city
taxes upon the same property as for state taxes, but such lien shall be
subsequent to the lien for state taxes.
(1991 Code, § 3-9)
PRIVATE CLUBS
§ 111.035 CITY LICENSE; REQUIRED.
   No licensee authorized by the state to sell alcoholic liquors as provided by
W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 7 shall do so within the corporate limits of the city
without first having obtained a city license issued by the City Clerk as
hereinafter provided.
(1991 Code, § 3-10) (Ord. passed 6-1-1967)
Statutory reference:
   Licensing of private clubs to sell intoxicating liquors, see W.Va. Code §§
60-7-1 et seq.
   Prohibited acts by licensee, see W.Va. Code § 60-7-12
§ 111.036 APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   Application for a license to operate a private club shall be made on
such forms as may be prescribed by the City Clerk and shall include:
      (1)   The name of the applicant;
      (2)   If such application be an unincorporated association, the names and
addresses of the members of its governing board;
      (3)   If such applicant be a corporation, the names and addresses of its
officers and directors;
      (4)   The place at which such applicant will conduct its operations;
      (5)   The number of members of the applicant;
      (6)   The name or names of any national organization with which the
applicant is affiliated;
      (7)   The size and nature of the dining and kitchen facilities operated
by the applicant; and
      (8)   Such other information as the City Clerk may reasonably require.
   (B)   Such application shall be verified by each member of the governing
board of the applicant if an unincorporated association or, if the applicant be
a corporation, by its officers and members of its board of directors. Such
application shall be accompanied by the license fee hereinafter prescribed.
(1991 Code, § 3-11) (Ord. passed 6-1-1967)
§ 111.037 ISSUANCE; APPLICATION; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL; TRANSFERABILITY.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall withhold issuing such license until such time as
the applicant exhibits a valid private club license issued by the State Alcohol
Beverage Control Commissioner. Upon the exhibition thereof by the applicant or
within 30 days thereafter, the City Clerk shall issue the city license, unless
it shall appear from the investigation conducted by the City Clerk that the
application submitted by the applicant contains one or more material
inaccuracies or false statements; in which event, the City Clerk shall refuse
to issue such license until such time as the applicant has corrected such
inaccuracies or false statements.
   (B)   Any license issued pursuant to an application received hereunder shall
authorize the licensee to sell alcoholic liquors at only one location specified
in the license.
   (C)   Any license issued hereunder shall expire on June 30 next following
the date of issue, and may be renewed upon the same showing as required for the
issuance of the initial license, and the payment of such fees as hereinafter
prescribed.
   (D)   A license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall not be
transferable with regard to either licensee or location.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall attach to any license issued hereunder a copy of
this subchapter, together with a notice advising the licensee to fully acquaint
himself or herself with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 3-12) (Ord. passed 6-1-1967)
§ 111.038 SCHEDULE OF FEES; PARTIAL FEES.
   (A)   The annual license fee for a license issued under the provisions of
this subchapter to a fraternal or veteran’s organization or a non-profit social
club shall be an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
   (B)   The annual license fee for a license issued under the provisions of
this subchapter to a private club other than a private club of the type
specified in division (A) above shall be an amount set forth by Council from
time to time if such private club has fewer than 1,000 members, and an amount
set forth by Council from time to time0 if such private club has 1,000 or more
members.
   (C)   The fee for any such license issued following January 1 of any year
and to expire on June 30 of such year shall be half those prescribed by
divisions (A) or (B) above, as may be applicable to the particular type of
group making a license application, as aforesaid.
(1991 Code, § 3-13) (Ord. passed 6-1-1967; Ord. passed 5-21-1981)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to enact this section, see W.Va. Code § 60-7-7
   For provisions of state law corresponding to this section, see W.Va. Code §
60-7-6
§ 111.039 REVOCATION.
   (A)   Upon final conviction of a licensee or of any employee thereof acting
within the scope of his or her employment of a violation of any provision of
this subchapter, or upon final conviction of a licensee or of any employee
thereof acting within the scope of his or her employment of any violation of
any ordinance of the city relating to the regulation, control or sale of
alcoholic liquors, the City Clerk shall revoke the licensee’s city license.
   (B)   Such license so revoked shall not be reissued or reinstated for one
year from the date of such revocation. Upon final conviction of any licensee or
of any employee thereof acting within the scope of his or her employment as
aforementioned, the City Clerk shall, in writing, immediately advise the State
Alcohol Control Commissioner thereof.
(1991 Code, § 3-15) (Ord. passed 6-1-1967)
UNLAWFUL ACTS
§ 111.050 UNLAWFUL ACTS OF LICENSEES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful:
      (1)   For any licensee, his, her, its or their servants, agents or
employees to sell, give or dispense, or any individual to drink or consume, in
or on any licensed premises or in any rooms directly connected therewith,
nonintoxicating beer or cooler on weekdays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m., or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., on any Sunday,
except in private clubs licensed under the provisions of W.Va. Code §§ 60-7-
1 et seq., where the hours shall conform with the hours of sale of alcoholic
liquors;
      (2)   For any licensee, his, her, its or their servants, agents or
employees, to sell, furnish or give any nonintoxicating beer as defined in
state law to any person visibly or noticeably intoxicated, or to any person
known to be insane or known to be a habitual drunkard;
      (3)   For any licensee, his her, its or their servants, agents or
employees, to sell, furnish or give any nonintoxicating beer an defined in
state law to any person who is less than 21 years of age;
      (4)   For any distributor to sell or offer to sell, or any retailer to
purchase or receive, any nonintoxicating beer as defined in state law, except
for cash; and no right of action shall exist to collect any claims for credit,
extended contrary to the provisions of this division (A)(4). Nothing herein
contained shall prohibit a licensee from crediting to a purchaser the actual
price charged for packages or container returned by the original purchaser as a
credit on any sale, or from refunding to any purchaser, the amount paid or
deposited for such containers when title is retained by the vendor;
      (5)   For any brewer or distributor or brewpub or his, her, its or their
agents, to transport or deliver nonintoxicating beer as defined in state law to
any retail licensee on Sunday;
      (6)   For any brewer or distributor to give, furnish, rent or sell any
equipment, fixtures, signs or supplies directly or indirectly or through a
subsidiary or affiliate to any licensee engaged in selling products of the
brewing industry at retail, or to offer any prize, premium, gift or other
similar inducement, except advertising matter of nominal value, to either trade
or consumer buyers; provided, that a distributor may offer, for sale or rent,
tanks of carbonic gas. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit a brewer from
sponsoring any professional or amateur athletic event or from providing prizes
or awards for participants and winners in any such events; provided, however,
that no such event shall be sponsored which permits actual participation by
athletes or other persons who are minors, unless specifically authorised by the
Commissioner;
      (7)   For any licensee to permit in his or her premises any lewd, immoral
or improper entertainment, conduct or practice;
      (8)   For any licensee except the holder of a license to operate a
private club issued under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 7, or a
holder of a license or a private wine restaurant issued under the provisions of
W.Va. Code §§ 60-8-1 et seq., to possess a federal license, tax receipt or
other permit entitling, authoring or allowing such licensee to sell liquor or
alcoholic drinks other than nonintoxicating beer;
      (9)   For any licensee to obstruct the view of the interior of his or her
premises by an enclosure, lattice or drapes or any means which would prevent
plain view of the patrons occupying such premises. The interior of all licensed
premises shall be adequately lighted at all times; provided, that provisions of
this division (A)(9) shall not apply to the premises of a Class B retailer, the
premises of a private club licensed under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60,
Art. 11 or the premises of a private wine restaurant licensed under the
provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 8;
      (10)   For any licensee to manufacture, import, sell, trade, barter,
possess or acquiesce in the sale, possession or consumption of any alcoholic
liquors on the premises covered by such license or on premises directly or
indirectly used in connection therewith; provided that the prohibition
contained in this division (A)(10) with respect to the selling or possessing or
to the acquiescence in the sale possession or consumption of alcoholic liquors
shall not be applicable with respect to the holder of a license to operate a
private club issued under the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 7, nor
shall the prohibition be applicable to a private wine restaurant licensed under
the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 8 insofar as such private wine
restaurant is authorized to serve wine;
      (11)   For any retail licensee to sell or dispense nonintoxicating beer,
as defined in state law, purchased or acquired from any source other than a
distributor, brewer or manufacturer licensed under the laws of this state;
      (12)   For any licensee to permit loud, boisterous or disorderly conduct
of any kind upon his or her premises or to permit the use of loud musical
instruments if either or any of the same may disturb the peace and quietude of
the community wherein such business is located; provided, that no licensee
shall have in connection with his or her place of business any loud speaker
located on the outside of the licensed premises that broadcasts or carries
music of any kind;
      (13)   For any person who license been revoked, as in this section
provided, to obtain employment with any retailer within the period of one year
from the date of such revocation, or for any retailer to employ knowingly any
such person within such time;
      (14)   For any distributor to sell, possess for sale, transport or
distribute nonintoxicating beer except in the original container;
      (15)   For any licensee to knowingly permit any act to be done upon the
licensed premises, the commission of which constitutes a crisis under the laws
of this state;
      (16)   For any Class B retailer to permit the consumption of
nonintoxicating beer upon his or her licensed premises;
      (17)   For any Class A licensee, his, her, its or their servants, agents
or employees, or for any licensee by or through such servants, agents or
employees, to allow, suffer or permit any person less than 18 years of age to
loiter in or upon any licensed premises; except, however, that the provisions
of this division (A)(17) shall not apply where such person under the age of 18
years is in or upon such premises in the immediate company of his or her parent
or parents, or, where and while such person under the age of 18 years is in or
upon such premises for the purpose of and actually making a lawful purchase of
any items or commodities therein sold, or for the purchase of and actually
renewing any lawful service therein rendered, including the consumption of any
item of food, drink or soft drink therein lawfully prepared and served or sold
for consumption on such premises;
      (18)   For any distributor to sell, offer for sale, distribute or deliver
any nonintoxicating beer outside the territory assigned to such distributor by
the brewer or manufacturer of such nonintoxicating beer or to sell, offer for
sale, distribute or deliver any such nonintoxicating beer to any retailer whose
principal place of business or licensed premises is within the assigned
territory of another distributor of such nonintoxicating beer; provided, that
nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit sales of convenience between
distributors licensed in this state wherein one such distributor sells,
transfers or delivers to another such distributor a particular brand or brands
for sale at wholesale; and
      (19)   For any licensee or any agent, servant or employee of any such
licensee to knowingly violate any rule or regulation lawfully promulgated by
the Commissioner in accordance with the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 29a (§§
29A-1-1 et seq.).
   (B)   Nothing in this section nor any rule or regulation of the Commissioner
shall prevent or be deemed to prohibit any licensee from employing any person
who is at least 18 years of age to serve in such licensee’s lawful employ,
including the sale or delivery of nonintoxicating beer as defined in state law.
With the prior approval of the Commissioner, a licensee who principal business
is the sale of food or consumer goods or the providing of recreational
activities including, but not limited to, nationally franchised fast food
outlets, family-oriented restaurants, bowling alleys, drug stores, discount
stores, grocery stores and convenience stores, may employ persons who are lees
than 18 years of age but at least 16 years of age; provided, that such person’s
duties shall not include the sale or delivery of nonintoxicating beer or
alcoholic liquors; provided, however, that the authorization to employ such
persons under the age of 18 years shall be clearly indicated on the licensee’s
license.
(Ord. passed 5-19-1994) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 11-16-18
§ 111.051 UNLAWFUL ACTS OF PERSONS.
   (A)   Any person under the age of 21 years who, for the purpose of
purchasing nonintoxicating beer, misrepresents his or her age, or who for such
purpose presents or offers any written evidence of age which is false,
fraudulent or not actually his or her own, or who illegally attempts to
purchase nonintoxicating beer, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who shall knowingly buy for, give to or furnish
nonintoxicating beer to anyone under the age of 21 to whom he or she is not
related by blood or marriage is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 5-19-1994) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 11-16-19
SALE OF ALCOHOL ON SUNDAY
§ 111.065 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ON-PREMISES LICENSE. The following State Alcohol Beverage Control
Administration Class A licenses:
      (1)   Private club (less than 1,000 members) - liquor, wine and
nonintoxicating beer;
      (2)   Private club (1,000 or more members) - liquor, wine and
nonintoxicating beer;
      (3)   Fraternal club (non-profit) - liquor, wine and nonintoxicating
beer;
      (4)   Fraternal club (non-profit) - nonintoxicating beer;
      (5)   Tavern - nonintoxicating beer;
      (6)   Private wine restaurant - wine only;
      (7)   Private wine restaurant - wine and nonintoxicating beer only;
      (8)   Private wine spa - wine only;
      (9)   Private wine bed and breakfast - wine only;
      (10)   Brew pub;
      (11)   Special events (fairs and festivals) - wine and nonintoxicating
beer;
      (12)   Special events (fairs and festivals) - wine only;
      (13)   Special events (fairs and festivals) - nonintoxicating beer only;
and
      (14)   Growler.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, limited
partnership, limited liability company or other entity, regardless of its form,
structure or nature.
(Ord. 245, passed 9-7-2017)
§ 111.066 SALE OF ALCOHOL.
   Notwithstanding any contrary provision contained in the West Virginia Code,
the Code of State Rules of West Virginia or the city code, any entity or person
possessing on-premises licenses shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages
for on-premises consumption on any Sunday, beginning at 10:00 a.m. All other
terms and conditions imposed by state law or by the State Alcohol Beverage
Control Administration on entities or persons possessing an on-premises Class A
license shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 245, passed 9-7-2017) Penalty, see §
111.999
ALCOHOL POLICY
§ 111.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The Phil Gainer Community Center, the Darden House and the Kump House
are not licensed facilities. Beer, wine and alcoholic beverages are allowed
under certain specific conditions and upon prior written permission.
   (B)   All uses of these facilities described in this chapter will be subject
to the following regulations and restrictions.
(Ord. 228, passed 12-15-2016; Ord. 289, passed 9-16-2021)
§ 111.081 USE OF ALCOHOL GENERAL POLICIES.
   (A)   Alcoholic beverages are prohibited and shall not be permitted in or on
any municipal facilities operated by the city and/or the city’s Parks and
Recreation Commission, except beer, wine and alcoholic beverages may be served
for special event occasions at the Phil Gainer Community Center, the Darden
House and the Kump House in accordance with the city alcohol policy. Beer, wine
and alcoholic beverages may only be served at the Phil Gainer Community Center,
the Darden House and the Kump House, if the organization, association or a non-
profit obtains a special event, festival or fair permit through the state’s
Alcohol Beverage Commission (ABC) when done in compliance with the state’s
Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) regulations and approved in writing by the
Council for an event at the Darden House and the Kump House or of the city’s
Parks and Recreation Commission for an event at the Phil Gainer Community
Center.
   (B)   The use of alcoholic beverages is by written permission only and must
be requested at the time the facility use request is submitted. The city and/or
the city’s Parks and Recreation Commission reserves the right to place
restrictions on the use of alcoholic beverages in accordance with state law and
these guidelines. ALCOHOL USE means the presence of any beverage that contains
any amount of alcohol.
   (C)   Alcohol is not allowed when an event is designated for minors such as
school age award programs, birthday parties and/or receptions.
   (D)   When alcohol is served, a city and/or Commission employee or city and/
or Commission representative shall be present. The Police Department shall be
notified in advance of the event when alcohol is served.
   (E)   No alcoholic beverage shall be served to any person less than 21 years
of age. Injuries caused to any person as a result of alcoholic beverages being
served to or consumed by someone under the age of 21 while on the city’s
premises, shall be the sole responsibility of the organization or individual
renting the facility.
   (F)   The distribution or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be in
compliance with all applicable laws, including regulations of the ABC. Any
organization using city facilities shall be solely responsible for obtaining
all permits or licenses relating to the distribution and consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the premises.
   (G)   Alcohol may only be served by an adult 21 years of age or older. If
evidence is found that alcohol is being served that was not authorized by the
city and/or the Commission or to a minor, the police will be notified and the
event will be terminated immediately and all fees and deposits will be
forfeited.
   (H)   The city shall require the applicant to carry general liability
insurance. The city shall require evidence of full liquor liability insurance
in addition to general liability insurance when alcohol is available. The cost
of the required liability insurance shall be borne by the applicant.
(Ord. 228, passed 12-15-2016; Ord. 289, passed 9-16-2021) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.082 RENTERS.
   Renters which consist of a business, non-profit, education or government
organization must provide proof of general liability/property damage insurance
coverage with a minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000 per occurrence and
a minimum $1,000,000 aggregate. All renters serving alcohol shall provide
commercial general liability insurance and liquor liability insurance.
(Ord. 228, passed 12-15-2016)
§ 111.083 INSURANCE.
   (A)   General liability/property damage insurance coverage with a minimum
combined single limit of $1,000,000 per occurrence and a minimum of $1,000,000
aggregate will be required from individuals utilizing the Darden House, the
Kump House, Phil Gainer Community Center facility if any of the following
applies:
      (1)   The general public is invited to attend, observe and/or
participate; and/or
      (2)   Sales of merchandise and/or food will take place.
   (B)   If an event held at the Darden House, the Kump House or the Phil
Gainer Community Center does not meet one of the above criteria and is intended
for the sole use of the individual conducting the event, no insurance will be
required, unless the city and/or the city’s Parks and Recreation Commission
determines that such event dictates the need for additional insurance
protection because of the amount of people attending or nature of event.
   (C)   For the Darden House and the Kump House, the insurance certificate
shall show the city as additional insured. For the Phil Gainer Community
Center, the insurance certificate shall show the city and the city’s Parks and
Recreation Commission as additional insured. Only insurance written by a
company with an A.M. Best rating of no less than a B+ and in good standing with
the state shall be acceptable to the city.
      (1)   The certificate holder to read for the Darden House or the Kump
House:
 
City of Elkins
401 Davis Avenue
Elkins, WV 26241
 
      (2)   The certificate holder to read for the Phil Gainer Community
Center:
 
City of Elkins
Elkins Parks and Recreation Commission
401 Davis Avenue
Elkins, WV 26241
 
   (D)   Additional insurance is not required by for events sponsored by the
city or its political entities and/or subdivisions.
   (E)   Beer, wine and alcoholic beverages may only be served at the Darden
House, the Kump House or the Phil Gainer Community Center if the organization,
association or a non-profit obtains a special event, festival or fair permit
through the state’s Alcohol Beverage Commission (ABC).
(Ord. 228, passed 12-15-2016; Ord. 289, passed 9-16-2021)
§ 111.084 SPECIAL EVENTS LICENSE.
   (A)   Special event liquor licenses through the state’s ABC administration
are available to an organization, association or a non-profit corporation.
Note: individuals are not eligible to obtain a ABC special events license;
hence, individuals may not serve alcohol at the Darden House, and the Kump
House or the Phil Gainer Community Center.
   (B)   This license allows the holder to sell or to provide alcoholic
beverages to the public or event attendees.
   (C)   To obtain these licenses, the following must be completed:
      (1)   Step one. Complete reservation request. Obtain permission from the
Council for the Darden House and the Kump House or the city’s Parks and
Recreation Commission for the Phil Gainer Community Center to serve alcohol as
required by the state’s ABC administration;
      (2)   Step two.
         (a)   Apply for and obtain a special events, fairs and festival
nonintoxicating beer license through the state’s ABC Commission. Application
can be found at:
http://www.abca.wv.gov/licensing/Documents/
Special%20Events%20Fair%20and%20Festival%20App%20Web%20Pk.pdf.
         (b)   Note that all applications must be submitted 30 days prior to
event.
      (3)   Step three. The applicant agrees to abide by city and state liquor
laws. The applicant must obtain and provide proof of general liability
insurance and liquor liability/dram shop insurance coverage as specified in
this policy.
   (D)   Special provisions apply to any organization that charges to attend
their event or wants to benefit from the sale of alcohol at their event:
      (1)   All alcohol must be purchased through a licensed distributor
according to the regulations of the West Virginia ABC Commission;
      (2)   Donated alcohol/beer/wine cannot be used; and
      (3)   All permits must be on file with the city or the city’s Parks and
Recreation Commission.
(Ord. 228, passed 12-15-2016; Ord. 289, passed 9-16-2021)
§ 111.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person authorized by the state to sell alcoholic liquors pursuant
to the provisions of W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 7, who shall do so within the
corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a city license
therefor shall, upon conviction of such violation of this chapter, be punished
by a fine in an amount set by Council from time to time, or by imprisonment for
a period not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The
Municipal Court of the city shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all
cases brought hereunder. For the purposes of this division (B), a LICENSEE
shall be deemed to include any agent, employee or member of such licensee who
shall, on such licensee’s premises, sell alcoholic liquors, as provided by the
W.Va. Code Ch. 60, Art. 7, without having obtained a city license as
hereinbefore provided.
(1991 Code, § 3-14)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §
111.050 including, but not limited to, any provision of §
111.050 or who commits any of the acts herein declared to be unlawful, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished for each offense by a fine in an
amount set by Council from time to time, or imprisoned in jail for not less
than 30 days or more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court.
   (D)   (1)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
111.051(A), such person shall be fined in an amount set by Council from time to
time or shall be imprisoned in jail for a period not to exceed 72 hours, or
both such fine and imprisonment, or, in lieu of such fine and imprisonment,
may, for the first offense, be placed on probation for a period not exceeding
one year.
      (2)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
111.051(B), such person shall be fined in an amount set by Council from time to
time or shall be imprisoned in jail for a period not to exceed ten days, or
both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. passed 6-1-1967; Ord. passed 5-19-1994)
CHAPTER 112: VENDORS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Vendors at the Mountain State Forest Festival
Street Vendors
   
112.35   Definitions
   
112.36   Scope of subchapter
   
112.37   Categories for street vending
   
112.38   Street sales
   
112.39   Compliance with guidelines
   
112.40   Licensing; operation without license unlawful: failure to display
license unlawful
   
112.41   Application and issuance of vendor’s license; general liability
insurance required; procedures
   
112.42   Revocation
   
112.43   Appeal of revocation
 
   
112.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city by ordinance to provide for the adoption and enforcement
of local police and similar regulations, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-2(a)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 VENDORS AT THE MOUNTAIN STATE FOREST FESTIVAL.
   (A)   The city recognizes the need to control vendors during the Mountain
State Forest Festival (hereafter “MSFF”), does direct and ordain that the MSFF
and the city together determine an appropriate method for the control of
vendors during said festival to regulate, license and supervise vendors for the
mutual protection of the public and MSFF.
   (B)   The city does authorize the MSFF to control vendors, subject to the
terms and conditions hereof, during the time from the official opening of the
MSFF until the close thereof, each year, pursuant to the following.
      (1)   The city does grant to MSFF, acting in a manner approved by its
Board of Directors, the right to authorize, approve and control public vendors
selling any manner of goods, including, but not limited to, food and drink for
public consumption, purchased or delivered to vendors selling said products
from booths, stands, trailers or other locations on a temporary basis, as
opposed to those stores and places of sale that are a permanent outlet for
products located within the city. Said vendors shall only be allowed to sell in
compliance with the terms and provisions hereof.
         (a)   All vendors shall register with the MSFF for a license to sell
as here defined. MSFF shall have, at the headquarters of the MSFF, application
forms for a license, which shall be available at least seven days prior to the
opening of the festival. The fee shall be paid at the time of the application
and license issued not later then two working days following the license
application.
         (b)   A license shall be issued approving said vendor, which shall be
placed in a conspicuous location at the vending site, at all times available
for inspection by officials of the MSFF or city officials.
         (c)   The vendor shall carry liability insurance in the minimum amount
set forth by Council from time to time, and have, at the location of the
vendor, available for inspection upon request, a declaration page or proof of
insurance for general liability. The city or MSFF may, in its sole discretion,
also cause the city or MSFF to be added as an additional insured on any such
policy.
         (d)   All vendors handling food shall comply with all city and state
health and sanitation regulations, including food handlers’ permits. There will
be no dumping of grease or foreign substances within the city limits.
         (e)   MSFF shall, in compliance with this section, collect an
appropriate fee to be determined by officials of the MSFF for a ten-day
business license for each vendor, which shall expire at midnight on Sunday
following the grand feature parade. The city and MSFF shall require a non-
profit entity to meet all the requirements of this section, except the city or
MSFF may waive fees for non-profit organizations.
         (f)   City police shall enforce the regulations herein provided and,
upon request to the Chief of Police by a designated director of the MSFF, the
Chief of Police shall take any such action as is authorized pursuant to this
section, including, but not limited to, enforcement of the provisions of this
section.
         (g)   The MSFF shall provide an accounting to the city of all receipts
obtained from the sale of licenses to vendors pursuant to this section,
excluding the license fees collected from vendors located in the city park, on
Church Lane and in the MSFF craft show. The MSFF shall remit to the city 50% of
the amount of all license fees collected pursuant to this section. Submission
of license fees and accounting of license sales shall be submitted to the city
within 45 days of the end of the festival.
      (2)   City police may, for good cause, terminate the right of any vendor
not bearing a license meeting the terms and provisions hereof; or may terminate
any vendor’s license who violates any city ordinance, rule or statute, or
otherwise creates a hazard to the safety of the public.
(Ord. 005, passed 9-18-2003; Ord. 206, passed 4-7-2016) Penalty, see §
112.99
STREET VENDORS
§ 112.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   STREET VENDOR. Any person, except itinerant vendors, who engages in or
conducts, either as principal or agent, a business selling goods, wares,
merchandise, food, confectionery or drink upon any street, sidewalk or public
park and includes food trucks.
   VENDING. Permitted in any zoned districts as established by the Municipal
Planning and Zoning Code.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 112.36 SCOPE OF SUBCHAPTER.
   The provisions of this suchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Sales governed by other sections of this chapter or sales made to
dealers by commercial travelers or selling agents in the usual course of
business;
   (B)   Bona fide sales of goods, wares or merchandise by samples for future
delivery;
   (C)   Sales at trade shows or conventions, expos, arts and crafts fairs, and
other similar events, or sales by entities at events at Phil Gainer Community
Center;
   (D)   Special sidewalk sales, festivals, or other special events allowed by
special permit or ordinance;
   (E)   Any city-sponsored event; or
   (F)   Any business or trades that are vending on private property.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019; Ord. 267, passed 11-7-2019)
§ 112.37 CATEGORIES FOR STREET VENDING.
   The types of businesses or activities that are permitted shall be defined by
the following classifications:
   (A)   Classification A. All non-food items such as t-shirts, sweatshirts,
arts/crafts, flowers and any miscellaneous items that are not food products.
   (B)   Classification B. All food products that do not require cooking, such
as whole fruits, vegetables and non-perishable food items that are pre-packaged
by the manufacturer.
   (C)   Classification C. All food products that require cooking or heating or
a health permit.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 112.38 STREET SALES.
   (A)   No person licensed as a vendor shall demonstrate, sell or offer for
sale or barter any goods, wares, merchandise, food, confection or drink upon
any street or sidewalk or any other city-owned property within the city except
in accordance with all of the following provisions:
      (1)   No merchandise shall be displayed or sold except in the locations
designated in the rules and regulations of the City Clerk or the designee.
      (2)   No merchandise shall be displayed or sold in a manner that blocks,
obstructs, or restricts the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles in the
lawful use of the sidewalks, streets or public places or ingress or egress to
the abutting property.
      (3)   All merchandise shall be displayed or sold from portable tables,
carts or containers as approved by the City Clerk or the designee. Each vendor
shall remove all merchandise, packaging, paper, display tables, carts or
containers or other materials brought to the location at the termination of
sales for the day.
      (4)   No vendor’s table, cart, container or other appurtenances,
paraphernalia, merchandise, supplies or signage shall occupy an area more than
three feet in width and eight feet in length. Food truck vendors must vend onto
the sidewalk or open space which is not within the street.
      (5)   Each vendor during the period of selling shall keep the area within
ten feet of the location where the vendor sells or displays merchandise free
from all litter and debris arising from the operations, including the litter
which arises from action of customers in disposing of wrapping or packaging
materials of merchandise sold by the vendor.
      (6)   Vendors shall at all times exercise reasonable care that their
merchandise, packaging material, display equipment and other paraphernalia
shall not create a safety or health hazard to customers or other persons using
the public streets, sidewalks or public places, or to persons on or in abutting
property.
      (7)   The hours of operation shall be from 6:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. Any
other ordinance prescribing more restrictive hours shall prevail.
      (8)   No items of a pornographic nature shall be sold or displayed by
street merchants.
      (9)   The playing of any radio, phonograph, or any musical instrument or
device in such a manner or with such a volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet
comfort and repose of store owners, employees, patrons or residents is
prohibited pursuant to other provisions of the codified laws of the city.
      (10)   No vending shall be permitted on Davis Avenue from Fifth Street to
Second Street.
      (11)   No vendor is permitted to connect to or use any public utility
without the specific permission of the Operations Department.
      (12)   No vendor is permitted to occupy more than two designated parking
spaces.
      (13)   All vendors must maintain a minimum distance of 800 feet from any
fair, festival or other city sanctioned event.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
distribution or the sale of newspapers on the sidewalks.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.39 COMPLIANCE WITH GUIDELINES.
   The City Clerk and the Treasurer or their designees may conduct site checks
to determine if vendors are in compliance with the guidelines. Upon inspection,
if a violation is found, vendors are immediately issued site check forms which
indicate specific regulation violations. Vendors will be given no more than 24
hours to correct cited violations. Upon the receipt of three cited violations
within 90 days, the Treasurer’s Office may issue a notice terminating the
license for the remainder of the current licensing period.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019; Ord. 267, passed 11-7-2019)
§ 112.40 LICENSING; OPERATION WITHOUT LICENSE UNLAWFUL; FAILURE TO DISPLAY
LICENSE UNLAWFUL.
   No person shall engage in the business or trade of street vendor without
first obtaining a license from the Treasurer’s Office. The license shall be
displayed conspicuously at all times upon the vendor’s table, cart, container
or truck. Any and all additional licenses or permits required pursuant to law
shall be displayed conspicuously at all times upon the vendor’s table, cart,
container or truck. Each day’s operation for such business without a license
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.41 APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF VENDOR’S LICENSE; GENERAL LIABILITY
INSURANCE REQUIRED; PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Each applicant for a vendor’s license shall file an application with
the City Treasurer in such form as prescribed the Treasurer’s Department with
an application fee of $10. The applicant may be an individual or a firm or
corporation on behalf of an individual. In the case where a person, firm or
corporation applied for the license on behalf of an individual, the license
shall be issued in the name of the applicant; and the license shall also bear
the name of the vendor on whose behalf the license is issued.
   (B)   All food vendor applicants under Classification C shall submit with
their application a valid permit from the County Health Department and shall be
inspected by the Fire Department to ensure compliance with all National Fire
Codes.
   (C)   No license shall be issued or shall remain in effect unless such
vendor can demonstrate to the City Clerk or the designee proof of general
public liability insurance in the aggregate sum of $1,000,000, naming the city
as additional insured and further indicating that any insurance carried by the
city is excess and in no way contributory or quota share, with assurance that
the city will be advised by the insurance carrier if the insurance is canceled.
In addition, such vendor, as consideration for the city granting a license to
the vendor, enters into a hold-harmless with the city by submission of the
application and licensing process.
   (D)   All street vendor applicants shall be given a copy of the rules and
regulations for street vendors and are charged with knowledge of such rules and
regulations. If the vendor is using a vehicle licensed and regulated by the
State Department of Motor Vehicles, proof of registration and insurance must be
presented at the time the application for a vendor’s license is submitted to
the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 112.42 REVOCATION.
   The violation of any requirement of this subchapter or of any rule or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this subchapter, or of any ordinance or law
shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the vendor’s license by the City
Clerk.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 112.43 APPEAL OF REVOCATION.
   Any vendor who feels aggrieved by the revocation of the vendor’s license or
other adverse action taken by the City Clerk or the designee, or by the
Treasurer or the designee may, by filing a written request with the City Clerk
or the designee within ten days, obtain reconsideration by the City Clerk or
the designee. If requested, the vendor shall be entitled to a formal hearing
before the City Clerk or a hearing examiner designated by the City Clerk in
order to provide the vendor with an opportunity to show that the action taken
was incorrect or contrary to law, in whole or in part, after which hearing, the
City Clerk shall, within a reasonable time, give notice in writing of his
decision. Such appeal, unless and until the ruling of the City Clerk is
modified and rescinded, shall not affect any stay of the action taken which is
being appealed. Further appeal may be taken by the vendor to the Circuit Court
of the county by certiorari in the manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   In addition to any penalties or sanctions provided in §§
112.35 through
112.43, the violation of any requirement of §§
112.35 through
112.43 shall constitute an offense punishable in Municipal Court with a civil
penalty for violation and a fine not to exceed $500 for each offense.
(Ord. 264, passed 9-19-2019)
CHAPTER 113: FARMERS’ MARKET
Section
   
113.01   Establishment authorized
   
113.02   Sale of products; restrictions on commissions
   
113.03   Market compliance with local and state laws generally
   
113.04   Sellers and growers; compliance with regulations required
   
113.05   Location
   
113.06   Schedule of operation
   
113.07   Administration
   
113.08   Permits generally
   
113.09   Sale of fruits, vegetables, baked goods and wild edibles
   
113.10   Suspension of permit
   
113.11   Permittee of suspended permit; restrictions
   
113.12   Trespassing; violation; penalty
   
113.13   Appeal of permit denial or suspension; hearing
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 ESTABLISHMENT AUTHORIZED.
   The establishment of a farmers’ market in the city for the sale of fresh
fruits, vegetables, baked goods and wild edibles by the growers or producers
thereof within a 30-mile radius of the city is hereby authorized. Said market
shall be known as the Farmers’ Market of the city.
(1991 Code, § 7A-1) (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
§ 113.02 SALE OF PRODUCTS; RESTRICTIONS ON COMMISSIONS.
   Farm products may be sold or offered for sale at said market only by the
grower thereof or by members of his or her immediate family or by his or her
salespeople. No commission shall be paid by the growers or received by other
persons involved in the transactions occurring at said market, except such
commissions as are paid to the Elkins Farmers’ Market Association for the
privilege of selling at the market. There shall be no resale made at said
market.
(1991 Code, § 7A-2) (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
§ 113.03 MARKET COMPLIANCE WITH LOCAL AND STATE LAWS GENERALLY.
   Said market and all products sold or disposed of or offered for sale in said
market shall be subject to inspection under, and shall comply with, and be
subject to all local ordinances and regulations and all state laws governing
the marketing of such products or governing the inspection, quality,
standardization, weights, measures, quarantine, sanitation, marketing and sale
of such products offered for sale by private individuals, firms or
corporations.
(1991 Code, § 7A-3) (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
§ 113.04 SELLERS AND GROWERS; COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS REQUIRED.
   All federal, state laws and regulations, as well as all local ordinances and
regulations applicable to said market and the products offered for sale therein
shall be complied with by the sellers, and growers utilizing the facilities of
said market, shall keep the premises used by them in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall remove all fruit and vegetables, cuttings, trimmings and
wrappings and containers at the close of each day.
(1991 Code, § 7A-4) (Ord. passed 7-5-1984) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.05 LOCATION.
   The Farmers’ Market shall be located within the municipal parking lot at the
corner of Third Street and Railroad Avenue, or at such other place as the
Council may determine by resolution.
(1991 Code, § 7A-5) (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
§ 113.06 SCHEDULE OF OPERATION.
   The Farmers’ Market shall operate between July 1 and November 1 of each year
and shall operate on the following days during the following hours: Wednesday
and Saturday between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
(1991 Code, § 7A-6) (Ord. passed 7-5-1984; Ord. passed 8-1-1985)
§ 113.07 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The administration of said Farmers’ Market when established shall be
administered by the city’s Farmers’ Market Association. Supervision of the
administration of said Farmers’ Market shall be undertaken by the Building
Inspector of the city.
   (B)   The city’s Farmers’ Market Association is hereby authorized to make
such rules and regulations as it shall deem proper for the conduct of said
market and for the maintenance of sanitary conditions therein and for the
identification of persons offering products for sale in said market, which said
rules shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, but shall
be in furtherance thereof. Said rules and regulations shall be subject to
approval of the Council prior to taking effect.
(1991 Code, § 7A-7) (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
§ 113.08 PERMITS GENERALLY.
   Permits to use the market facility shall vest in the permittee the privilege
of entering on the market premises and making use of the market facilities only
upon the following terms and conditions:
   (A)   Participation will be granted upon the proper filing of application
with the City Treasurer which meets the requirements thereof, for which there
will be no permit fee required;
   (B)   The granting of a written permission by the permittee, given
concurrently with the application for a permit to use and enjoy the market
facilities, for the duly authorized representative of the association to enter
on land owned or possessed in whole or in part, by the permittee at all
reasonable times for the purpose of determining what fruits or vegetables,
other than wild edibles, have been produced on such land. Such license to enter
on the land of the permittee shall be given expressly in consideration of the
granting of the permit applied for and shall be irrevocable during such period
that the permit is in full force and effect;
   (C)   Compliance with the requirements of all ordinances relating to the
operation, use and enjoyment of the facilities of the market premises;
   (D)   Compliance with all rules and regulations of the Association regarding
use of the market facilities; and
   (E)   Permits shall be prominently displayed on the permittee’s vehicle on
market days.
(1991 Code, § 7A-8) (Ord. passed 7-5-1984; Ord. passed 8-1-1985)
§ 113.09 SALE OF FRUITS, VEGETABLES, BAKED GOODS AND WILD EDIBLES.
   (A)   No person shall sell, keep for sale or offer to sell fruits,
vegetables, baked goods or wild edibles except under the authority of a duly
issued and validly subsisting permit and pursuant to the terms and conditions
thereof.
   (B)   No permittee nor any of his or her agents or employees shall bring
onto the market premises, keep in his or her possession, offer to sell or sell
any fruits and vegetables, other than wild edibles, which have not been
produced on land owned or possessed by the permittee.
   (C)   Persons acting under a duly issued, valid and subsisting permit may
bring into the market premises, keep in their possession, offer to sell or sell
only such fruits and vegetables, other than wild edibles which has been
produced on land owned or possessed by the permittee. Whenever a permittee,
either by himself or herself or through his or her agents and employees, brings
onto the market premises, or has in his or her possession on said premises, or
sells or offers to sell fruits and vegetables which, except for wild edibles,
had not been produced on land belonging to that permittee, the City Building
Inspector may immediately suspend the permittee’s permit to use the market
premises for a period of not less than seven days and no more than 14 days
thereafter.
(1991 Code, § 7A-9) (Ord. passed 7-5-1984) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.10 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   Whenever a permittee refuses permission to the duly authorized
representative of the Association to enter on land owned or possessed, in whole
or in part by said permittee, in breach of the license to enter as provided in
§
113.08(B), the City Building Inspector, upon being so advised, may indefinitely
suspend the permit belonging to said permittee.
(1991 Code, § 7A-10) (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
§ 113.11 PERMITTEE OF SUSPENDED PERMIT; RESTRICTIONS.
   A permittee of a suspended permit shall not enter onto market premises for
any purpose during such period of time as the permit is suspended. A permittee
whose permit has been suspended shall be ineligible to apply for a new permit
during such period as his or her permit is under suspension. Upon a second
violation of this chapter, the permittee’s permit shall be suspended for the
remainder of the year.
(1991 Code, § 7A-11) (Ord. passed 7-5-1984) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.12 TRESPASSING; VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person entering the market premises in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, any permittee entering the market area while his or her permit is
suspended, and any person remaining on said premises after being ordered to
leave by the duly authorized representative of the Association, is hereby
declared to be a trespasser and is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1991 Code, § 7A-12) (Ord. passed 7-5-1984) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.13 APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL OR SUSPENSION; HEARING.
   (A)   Any applicant denied a permit or any permittee whose permit has been
suspended may immediately file an appeal with the Municipal Court. The
Municipal Court shall set a time for hearing that appeal, which shall be within
five days of the date of filing thereof.
   (B)   The applicant or permittee shall be notified of the time and place of
said hearing in advance thereof, and shall be entitled to appear at the hearing
and be heard. After such hearing, the Municipal Court may concur to the action
of suspension by the city, or he or she may overrule the suspension and order
that the permit be immediately granted or restored.
(1991 Code, § 7A-13) (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Upon arrest and conviction of §
113.12, such person shall be punished by a fine in an amount set forth by
Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 7A-12) (Ord. passed 7-5-1984)
CHAPTER 114: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
Sexually Oriented Businesses
   
114.01   Purpose and intent
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   Classification
   
114.04   Permit and/or license required
   
114.05   Issuance of permit and/or license
   
114.06   Fees
   
114.07   Inspection
   
114.08   Expiration of permit and/or license
   
114.09   Suspension
   
114.10   Revocation
   
114.11   Transfer of permit and/or license
   
114.12   Locational restrictions
   
114.13   Pre-existing locations
   
114.14   Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses
   
114.15   Signage
   
114.16   Persons younger than 18 prohibited from entry; attendant required
   
114.17   Notices
   
114.18   Injunction
Nude Dancing
   
114.30   Findings of fact
   
114.31   Application of other provisions
   
114.32   Definitions
   
114.33   Employee conduct
   
114.34   Manager, owner, operator conduct
   
114.35   Hours of operation
 
   
114.99   Penalty
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
§ 114.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses and related activities to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of
sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this subchapter
have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this subchapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protect by the
First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this subchapter to condone or legitimize the distribution
of obscene materials.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-
producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per
machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
      (1)   A commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or
more of the following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations which depict or describe specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and
         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas and still be categorized as ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. Such
other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments
from being categorized as an ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE so long as
one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration the specified materials which depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas. A principal business purpose need not
be a primary use of an establishment so long as it is a significant use based
upon the visible inventory or commercial activity of the establishment.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   DIRECTOR. The Chief of Police and any such employee(s) of the Police
Department as he or she may designate to perform the duties of the DIRECTOR
under this subchapter.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   LICENSED DAY CARE CENTER. A facility licensed by the state, whether situated
within the city or not, that provides care, training, education, custody,
treatment or supervision for four or more children under 18 years of age, where
such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or
operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a day, regardless of whether
or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it
offers.
   NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY. The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus,
male genitals, female genitals or female breast without a frilly opaque
complete covering of the breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely
and opaquely covered.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the human
bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast without a
fully opaque complete covering of a breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, escort agency,
nude model studio or sexual encounter center.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The male genitals in a state of sexual arousal
and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. The increase in
floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas exist
on February 1, 2004.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Includes
any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the
business whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.03 CLASSIFICATION.
   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult arcades;
   (B)   Adult bookstores or adult video stores; and
   (C)   Adult motion picture theaters.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.04 PERMIT AND/OR LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a sexually oriented
business without a valid permit and/or license, issued by the Director.
   (B)   An application for a permit and/or license must be made on a form
provided by the city. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or a
diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of
total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
   (C)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
subchapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance
with the law by the Health Department, Fire Department and Building Official.
   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he or she must sign the application for a permit and/or license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
other than an individual, each individual who has a 10% or greater interest in
the business must sign the application for a permit and/or license as
applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business
or as the entity that wishes to operate such a business, each individual having
a 10% or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a
permit and/or license as applicant.
   (E)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits
and/or licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually oriented business permit and/or license.
   (F)   Application for a permit, whether original or renewal, must be made to
the Director by the intended operator of the enterprise. Applications must be
submitted by hand delivery to the office of the Director or the Director’s
designee during regular working hours. Application forms shall be supplied by
the Director. The intended operator shall be required to give the following
information on the application form:
      (1)   (a)   The name, street address (and mailing address if different)
and West Virginia driver’s license number of the intended operator; and
         (b)   The name, street address (and mailing address if different) of
the owner(s).
      (2)   The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a
general description of the services to be provided;
      (3)   The telephone number of the establishment;
      (4)   The address, and legal description of the tract of land on which
the establishment is to be located;
      (5)   If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner
(s) acquired the establishment for which the permit is sought, and the date on
which the establishment began operations as a sexually oriented business at the
location for which the permit is sought; and
      (6)   If the establishment is not in operation, the expected startup date
(which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the
permit). If the expected startup date is to be more than ten days following the
date of issuance of the permit, then a detailed explanation of the
construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay
and a statement of the owner’s time schedule and plan for accomplishing the
same.
   (G)   The application shall be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   Payment of the application fee in full;
      (2)   If the establishment is a West Virginia corporation, a certified
copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments, thereto;
      (3)   If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of
the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with
all amendments thereto;
      (4)   If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws
of West Virginia, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership,
together with all amendments thereto;
      (5)   If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified
copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents,
together with all amendments thereto;
      (6)   Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which
the establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed;
      (7)   If the persons identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land
in division (G)(6) above are not also the owners of the establishment, then the
lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or
other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owners or
proposed owners of the establishment to have or obtain the use and possession
of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the establishment for
the purpose of the operation of the establishment; and
      (8)   Any of items in divisions (G)(2) through (G)(7) above shall not be
required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents
previously furnished the Director with the original application or previous
renewals thereof remain correct and current.
   (H)   The application shall contain a statement under oath that:
      (1)   The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained
in the application and that the information contained therein and furnished
therewith is true and correct; and
      (2)   The applicant has read the provisions of this subchapter.
   (I)   A separate application and permit shall be required for each sexually
oriented business.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.05 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT AND/OR LICENSE.
   (A)   The Director shall approve the issuance of a permit and/or license to
an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless he or she
finds one or more of the following to be true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in his or her
payment to the city, the state or the United States government of taxes, fines
or penalties assessed against him or her or imposed upon him or her in relation
to a sexually oriented business;
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the permit and/or license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form;
      (4)   An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit
and/or license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the
preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose license to operate a
sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months;
      (5)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not
been approved by the Health Department, Fire Department or Building Official as
being in compliance with applicable laws or ordinances;
      (6)   The permit and/or license fee required by this subchapter has not
been paid; and/or
      (7)   An application of the proposed establishment is in violation of or
is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The permit and/or license, if granted, shall state on its face the
name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and
the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit and/or license shall
be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually
oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
   (C)   The Health Department, Fire Department and Building Official shall
complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in
compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application by the Director. The
certification shall be promptly presented to the Director.
   (D)   In the event that the Director determines that an applicant is not
eligible for a permit, the applicant shall be given in writing of the reasons
for the denial within 45 days of the receipt of its application by the
Director, provided that the applicant may request, in writing, that such period
be extended for an additional period of not more than ten days at any time
before the notice is issued in order to make modifications necessary to comply
with this subchapter.
   (E)   An applicant may appeal the decision of the Director regarding a
denial to Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within 15 days after the applicant is given notice of the Director’s decision.
The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing
setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support
thereof. The Director may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum
filed by the applicant on appeal to Council. After reviewing such memoranda, as
well as the Director’s written decision, if any, and exhibits submitted to the
Director, the Council shall vote to either uphold or overrule the Director’s
decision. Such vote shall be taken within 21 calendar days after the date on
which the City Clerk receives the notice of appeal. However, all parties shall
be required to comply with the Director’s decision during the pendency of the
appeal.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.06 FEES.
   The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit and/or license is an
amount set forth by Council from time to time$. This fee is to be used to pay
for the cost of the administration and enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.07 INSPECTION.
   An applicant or permittee and/or licensee shall permit representatives of
the Police Department, municipal, county and State Health Departments, Fire
Department, or other city or state departments or agencies to inspect the
premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with the licensure/permitting and regulatory provisions of this subchapter, at
any time it is occupied or open for business.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.08 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT AND/OR LICENSE.
   (A)   Each permit and/or license shall expire one year from the date of
issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in §
114.04. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before
expiration date; the expiration of the permit and/or license will not be
affected.
   (B)   When the Director denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not
be issued a permit and/or license for one year from the date of denial. If
subsequent to denial, the Director finds that the basis for denial of the
renewal permit and/or license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may
be granted a permit and/or license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the
date denial became final.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.09 SUSPENSION.
   The Director shall suspend a permit and/or license for a period not to
exceed 30 days if he or she determines that a permittee and/or licensee or an
employee of a permittee and/or licensee has:
   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this subchapter;
   (B)   Became impaired or intoxicated through the use of alcoholic beverages
while on the sexually oriented business premises;
   (C)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this subchapter; or
   (D)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.10 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Director shall revoke a permit and/or license if a cause of
suspension in §
114.09 occurs and the permit and/or license has been suspended within the
proceeding 12 months.
   (B)   The Director shall also revoke a permit and/or license if he or she
determines that:
      (1)   A permittee and/or licensee gave false or misleading information in
the material submitted during the application process;
      (2)   A permittee and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (3)   A permittee and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;
      (4)   A permittee and/or licensee or an employee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee’s and/or
licensee’s permit and/or license was suspended;
      (5)   A permittee and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed an
act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other
sexual conduct to occur in or on the permitted and/or licensed premises;
      (6)   A permittee and/or licensee is delinquent in payment to the city,
state or federal governments for any taxes for fees past due;
      (7)   The owner or operator of the permitted establishment knowingly
allowed a person under 18 years of age to enter the establishment; or
      (8)   There was a change of owner or operator for which a transfer
application was not timely filed.
   (C)   When the Director revokes a permit and. or license, the revocation
shall continue for one year, and the permittee and/or licensee shall not be
issued a sexually oriented permit and/or license for one year from the date
revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the Director finds
that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a permit and/or license if at least 90 days have elapsed since
the date the revocation became effective.
   (D)   After denial of an application by the Director and Council, or denial
of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of a permit and/or
license by the Director, the applicant or licensee or permittee may seek prompt
judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent
jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court
as in extraordinary remedy proceedings.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.11 TRANSFER OF PERMIT AND/OR LICENSE.
   A permittee and/or licensee shall not transfer his or her permit and/or
license to another, nor shall a permittee and/or licensee operate a sexually
oriented business under the authority of a permit and/or license at any place
other than the address designated in the application.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.12 LOCATIONAL RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted in any area of the
city provided that the sexually oriented business may not be operated within
1,000 feet of:
      (1)   A church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship;
      (2)   A public or private elementary or secondary school;
      (3)   A boundary of any primarily residential area;
      (4)   A public park;
      (5)   A licensed day-care center; or
      (6)   Another sexually oriented business.
   (B)   A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same building,
structure or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented business.
   (C)    For the purpose of this subchapter, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises
where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line
of the premises of a church, synagogue, regular place of worship, or public or
private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an
affected public park, primarily residential area, residential lot, or licensed
day care center.
   (D)   For purposes of division (C) above, the distance between any two
sexually oriented business uses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of
the structure in which each business is located.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.13 PRE-EXISTING LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Any business lawfully operating on the effective date of this
subchapter that is in violation of the locational requirements of this
subchapter shall be deemed a pre-existing location. The pre-existing location
will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed two years, unless
sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30
days or more. Such pre-existing location shall not be increased, enlarged,
extended or altered except that it may be changed to a non-sexually oriented
business. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of
one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented
business that was first established and continually operating at a particular
location is the permissible location and the later-established business(es) is
the pre-existing location.
   (B)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a permissible
location is not rendered a pre-existing location by the location, subsequent to
the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit and/or license,
of a church, synagogue, or regular place of religious worship, public or
private elementary or secondary school, licensed day-care center, public park,
or primarily residential area within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented
business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and/or
license, and does not apply when an application for a permit and/or license is
submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has been revoked.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.14 EXTERIOR PORTIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented
business to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be
visible from a point outside the establishment.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented
business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to
have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes,
drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent
permitted by the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually
oriented business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted
any color other than a single achromatic color.
      (2)   This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if
the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center;
and
         (b)   The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial
multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted
the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a
component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial
multi-unit center.
   (D)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to require the painting
of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.15 SIGNAGE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other city ordinance, code or regulation to the
contrary, it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any sexually
oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign
for the sexually oriented business other than one primary sign and one
secondary sign, as provided herein.
   (B)   (1)   Primary signs shall have no more than two display surfaces.
      (2)   Each such display surface shall:
         (a)   Not contain any flashing lights;
         (b)   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
         (c)   Not exceed 75 square feet in area; and
         (d)   Not exceed ten feet in height; ten feet in length; nor ten feet
in height distance from the ground to the lowest or bottom portion of the sign.
   (C)   Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or
pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the name of the
enterprise.
   (D)   Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid color,
and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The
background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall
be of a uniform and solid color.
   (E)   (1)   Secondary signs shall have only one display surface.
      (2)   Such display surface shall:
         (a)   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
         (b)   Not exceed 20 square feet in area;
         (c)   Not exceed five feet in height and four feet in width; and
         (d)   Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise.
   (F)   The provisions of divisions (B)(2)(a), (C) and (D) above shall also
apply to secondary signs.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.16 PERSONS YOUNGER THAN 18 PROHIBITED FROM ENTRY; ATTENDANT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 18 years of
age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time
that the sexually oriented business is open for business.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented
business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to
the sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented
business’ regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to
prohibit any person under the age of 18 years from entering the sexually
oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was
under the age of 18 unless such attendant asked for and was furnished:
      (1)   A valid operator’s, commercial operator’s or chauffeur’s driver’s
license; or
      (2)   A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state
reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.17 NOTICES.
   (A)   Any notice required or permitted to be given by the Director or any
other city office, division, department or other agency under this subchapter
to any applicant, operator or owner of an establishment may be given either by
personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return
receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the
application for the permit, or transfer application that has been received by
the Director, or any notice of address change that has been received by the
Director. Notices mailed as above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in
the United States mail. In the event that any notice given by mail is returned
by the postal service, the Director or his or her designee shall cause it to be
posted at the principal entrance to the establishment.
   (B)   Any notice required or permitted to be given to the Director by any
person under this subchapter shall not be deemed given until and unless it is
received in the office of the Director.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the permit
application and each operator to furnish notice to the Director in writing of
any change of residence or mailing address.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
§ 114.18 INJUNCTION.
   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without a valid permit and/or license or otherwise violates this subchapter is
subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations
as provided herein, all in addition to the suspension and revocation powers of
the Director for noncompliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see §
114.99
NUDE DANCING
§ 114.30 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   Based on public input and other evidence and information before it, the
Council makes the following findings of fact:
   (A)   Certain conduct occurring on premises offering nude dancing is
detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of
the city and therefore, such conduct must be regulated as provided herein; and
   (B)   Regulation of the nude dancing industry is necessary because in the
absence of such regulation the said nude dancing industry will: encourage
prostitution; increase sexual assaults; increase sexually transmitted diseases;
and attract other criminal activities.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1993)
§ 114.31 APPLICATION OF OTHER PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter are not intended to supersede the
provisions of any other regulation of the city or law of the state. The
provisions of this subchapter are in addition to any other law or regulation.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1993)
§ 114.32 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. Any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and
independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly
related to, the operation of an adult entertainment premises.
   ENTERTAINER. Any person who on any occasion provides adult entertainment
within an adult entertainment premises as defined in this section, whether or
not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment, or whether or not the
entertainer is paid.
   ENTERTAINMENT. Any exhibition or dance of any type, pantomime, modeling or
any other performance.
   MANAGER. Any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the
affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving adult
entertainment occurring at any adult entertainment premises.
   NUDE DANCING or DANCE NUDE. Any exhibition, performance or dance of any type
conducted in a premises where such exhibition, performance or dance involves a
person who:
      (1)   Is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to
view any portion of the breast below the top of the areola or any portion of
the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals; or
      (2)   Touches, caresses or fondles the breast, buttocks, anus, genitals
or pubic region of a patron, or permits the touching, caressing or fondling of
their own breast, buttocks, anus, genitals or pubic region by a patron, with
the intent to sexually arouse or excite the patron.
   NUDE DANCING PREMISES or ADULT ENTERTAINMENT PREMISES. Any premises to which
the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and wherein an
entertainer provides nude dancing or provides adult entertainment to a member
of the public, a patron or a member.
   OPERATOR. Any person operating, conducting or maintaining an adult
entertainment business or premises.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or
unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture or other entity or
group of persons however organized.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any area generally visible to public view and includes
streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots and
automobiles whether moving or not.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1993)
§ 114.33 EMPLOYEE CONDUCT.
   The following standards of conduct upon the premises must be adhered to by
employees of any adult entertainment premises.
   (A)   No employee or entertainer shall be unclothed or in such less than
opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any
portion of the breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic
region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, except upon a stage where
entertainer shall wear at least pasties, G-string or similar item of clothing
to at least cover the areola, genitals and anal cleft.
   (B)   No employee or entertainer mingling with any person or the patrons
shall be unclothed or in less than opaque and complete attire, costume or
clothing as described herein.
   (C)   No employee or entertainer shall knowingly permit any person upon the
premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of
any other person.
   (D)   No employee or entertainer shall touch, caress or fondle the breasts,
buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person.
   (E)   No employee or entertainer shall wear or use any device or covering
exposed to view which simulates the breast below the top of the areola, vulva
or genitals, anus, buttocks or any portion of the pubic region.
   (F)   No employee or entertainer shall use artificial devices or inanimate
objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this
subchapter.
   (G)   No entertainer of any adult entertainment premises shall be visible
from any public place during the hours of his or her employment, or apparent
hours of his or her employment, on the premises.
   (H)   No entertainer shall solicit, demand or receive any payment or
gratuity from any patron for any act prohibited by this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1993) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.34 MANAGER, OWNER, OPERATOR CONDUCT.
   The stage shall be at least 24 inches above the immediate floor level and
removed at least ten feet from the nearest patron or person.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1993) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.35 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to cause any nude dancing premises or adult
entertainment premises to remain open to the public, or to conduct or operate
business, whether for adult entertainment or otherwise, between the hours of 2:
00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1993) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
114.01 through
114.18 shall in addition to any other actions which may be taken by the
Director hereunder, be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time
or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of
§§
114.30 through
114.35; and whoever violates any provision of §§
114.30 through
114.35 shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time. A
person convicted of a second or subsequent offense under §§
114.30 through
114.35, shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor or manager to
operate or own an adult entertainment establishment or nude dancing premises at
such time as any violation of §§
114.30 through
114.35 occurs.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1993; Ord. O-011, passed 3-18-2004)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   MINORS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.001   Abandoning refrigerators and the like
   
130.002   Assault; battery
   
130.003   Damaging and the like markers or tombstones
   
130.004   Damaging and the like property
   
130.005   Giving false alarms and reports
   
130.006   Bathing in Tygarts Valley River
   
130.007   Firearms; shooting in city or police jurisdiction
   
130.008   Fireworks
   
130.009   Indecent exposure
   
130.010   Interfering and the like with city personnel
   
130.011   Intoxication in public
   
130.012   Loitering
   
130.013   Petit larceny
   
130.014   Poolrooms, bowling alleys and the like; closing time; allowing minors
   
130.015   Posting without consent; interfering with posted notices
   
130.016   Shoplifting
   
130.017   Spitting in public
   
130.018   Street carnivals, parades or exhibitions
   
130.019   Shopping carts; removing
   
130.020   Trains; exceeding speed limit
   
130.021   Watercourses, wells, drains and the like
   
130.022   Failure to obey officially posted signs
   
130.023   Disabling of communication devices being used to contact emergency
personnel
   
130.024   Public urination
   
130.025   Failure to appear
Adoption of State Code Criminal Offenses
   
130.040   Adoption of State Code Criminal offenses
Weapons
   
130.055   Furnishing minor with dangerous weapons
   
130.056   Brandishing or exposing; threatening or causing breach of peace
   
130.057   Carrying without license or other authorization
Hunting
   
130.070   Hunting within city or police jurisdiction
   
130.071   Bow fishing within city or police jurisdiction
Nuisance Properties
   
130.085   Drug and gang houses, houses of prostitution and other disorderly
houses
   
130.086   Order of abatement
   
130.087   Securing vacant or open buildings
Unauthorized Camping
   
130.100   Definitions
   
130.101   Unauthorized camping
 
   
130.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.001 ABANDONING REFRIGERATORS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside any
dwelling, building or other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned
dwelling, building or other structure under his or her control, in a place
accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, which may
not be released from the inside and having an interior space large enough to
permit a child or other person to be locked or entrapped therein, without first
removing the door or lid therefrom; or, being the owner, tenant, occupant,
manager or person in control of the place where such ice box, refrigerator or
other container has been discarded, abandoned or otherwise disposed of, to
knowingly permit such discarded, abandoned or unattended ice box, refrigerator
or other container to remain on premises owned, leased, occupied, managed or
controlled by him or her without removing its door or lid so as to make such
container unusable or ineffective, as set forth above.
(1991 Code, § 13-1) (Ord. passed 10-16-1958) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Requiring doors to be removed from abandoned appliances, and penalty for
violation, see W.Va. Code § 61-2-26
§ 130.002 ASSAULT; BATTERY.
   (A)   Assault. If any person unlawfully attempts to commit a violent injury
to the person of another or unlawfully commits an act which places another in
reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving a violent injury, he or she
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Battery. If any person unlawfully and intentionally makes physical
contact of an insulting or provoking nature with the person of another or
unlawfully and intentionally causes physical harm to another person, he or she
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1991 Code, § 13-1.1) (Ord. passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 61-2-9
§ 130.003 DAMAGING AND THE LIKE MARKERS OR TOMBSTONES.
   No person shall injure, mutilate, deface, remove or destroy any tombstone or
monument in any cemetery, nor on any land or lot corner or line mark, without
the consent of all persons interested therein.
(1991 Code, § 13-2) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to removal, injury to or destruction of property, or
monuments designating land boundaries, and penalty for violations, see W.Va.
Code § 61-3-30
§ 130.004 DAMAGING AND THE LIKE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall, knowingly and without proper authority, use, tamper
with, render inoperative, destroy, damage, remove, deface, molest or otherwise
interfere with any personal property of another, whether public or private.
   (B)   No person shall, knowingly and without proper authority, destroy,
damage, deface, molest or otherwise interfere with, or trespass upon, any real
property of another, whether public or private.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass, injure, mutilate,
injure or destroy any fruit, ornamental or shade tree standing upon or along
any street or sidewalk or within any park, cemetery, public square or ground
within the city.
(1991 Code, § 13-3) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to crimes against property generally, see W.Va. Code Ch.
61, Art. 3
§ 130.005 GIVING FALSE ALARMS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
fire or catastrophe.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
explosion or impending danger of explosion.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
the need for police protection, assistance or investigation, or any false
report to the Police Department.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
the need for an ambulance or medical assistance.
(1991 Code, § 13-4) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   False alarm of fire, and penalty for violation, see W.Va. Code § 29-3-21
   False reports concerning bombs and other explosive devices, and penalty for
violation, see W.Va. Code § 61-6-17
§ 130.006 BATHING IN TYGARTS VALLEY RIVER.
   No person shall bathe at any time in that part of the Tygarts Valley River
which is above the intake of the city waterworks, nor below that intake between
the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(1991 Code, § 13-5) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.007 FIREARMS; SHOOTING IN CITY OR POLICE JURISDICTION.
   No person, except officers of the law in the discharge of their official
duty, shall shoot or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within the city
or its police jurisdiction without the consent of the Council.
(1991 Code, § 13-5.1) Penalty, see §
130.999
Cross-reference:
   Weapons, see §§
130.055 through
130.057
§ 130.008 FIREWORKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use shoot or discharge consumer
fireworks within the city limits.
   (B)   Consumer fireworks are defined in W.Va. Code § 29-3E-2(5) as follows:
      CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Small fireworks devices that are designed to produce
visible effects by combustion that are required to comply with the
construction, chemical composition and labeling regulation promulgated by the
United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 C.F.R. parts 1500 and
1507, and that are listed in APA Standard 87-1. CONSUMER FIREWORKS do not
include sparkling devices, novelties, toy caps or model rockets;
(1991 Code, § 13-5.2) (Ord. 214, passed 6-30-2016) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Fireworks generally, see W.Va. Code § 29-3E-10
§ 130.009 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   No person shall make any indecent exposure of his or her person, or any part
of his or her person, upon any street, alley, road or other public place, or in
any private place to the annoyance of another.
(1991 Code, § 13-5.3) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Indecent exposure, see W.Va. Code § 61-8B-10
§ 130.010 INTERFERING AND THE LIKE WITH CITY PERSONNEL.
   No person shall carelessly or willfully interfere with, hinder or obstruct
any officer or employee of the city who is engaged in, en route to or returning
from the performance of official duty, whether such interference, hinderance or
obstruction be by threat, assault or other means.
(1991 Code, § 13-6) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Obstructing officer, and penalty for violation, see W.Va. Code § 61-5-17
§ 130.011 INTOXICATION IN PUBLIC.
   No person shall appear upon any street, alley, road or other public place in
a state of intoxication.
(1991 Code, § 13-6.1) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.012 LOITERING.
   (A)   Any person, individually or as part of a group of persons, on public
property, including streets, sidewalks and curbs, or on private property which
is regularly open for business to the public, regardless of whether it is open
for business at the time, or on or in a vehicle that is on public property or
on private property which is regularly open for business to the public,
regardless of whether it is open for business at the time, who loiters in a
manner which is prohibited by division (B) below, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   LOITERING which is prohibited is defined as conduct which:
      (1)   Creates a nuisance, disturbance or annoyance to the comfort or
safety of any person;
      (2)   Obstructs the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
      (3)   Causes obstruction or interference with any person or vehicle
lawfully in any public place or on any private property which is regularly open
for business to the public (regardless of whether it is open for business at
the time); or
      (4)   Involves the making of unsolicited remarks or gestures of any
offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are intended to annoy or
disturb any person in whose hearing or sight they are made.
(1991 Code, § 13-7) (Ord. 098-10, passed 9-17-1998) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.013 PETIT LARCENY.
   If any person shall commit simple larceny of goods or chattels the value of
which is less than an amount set forth by Council from time to time, such
person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, designated petit larceny.
(1991 Code, § 13-7.1) (Ord. passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 61-3-13
§ 130.014 POOLROOMS, BOWLING ALLEYS AND THE LIKE; CLOSING TIME; ALLOWING
MINORS.
   All poolrooms and bowling alleys shall be closed not later than 12:00
midnight. It shall be unlawful for any owner or manager of any poolroom,
bowling alley or similar tables and games to allow any person under the age of
16 years to be in or loiter around his or her place of business.
(1991 Code, § 13-8) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.015 POSTING WITHOUT CONSENT; INTERFERING WITH POSTED NOTICES.
   (A)   No person shall, without the consent of the owner of the property
involved, post any notice, advertisement, picture or other thing upon any
bridge, building, fence, window, wall, pole, post or other place.
   (B)   No person shall tear down, mutilate or destroy any notice,
advertisement, sign or other representation which was legally and properly
posted.
(1991 Code, § 13-9) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.016 SHOPLIFTING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MERCHANDISE. Includes goods and wares.
      OWNER OF MERCHANDISE. Includes the owner and any other person, firm or
corporation having the right to offer the same for sale as agent, consignee or
in other capacity under any agreement with the owner of such merchandise.
      SHOPLIFTING. Consists of any one or more of the following acts:
         (a)   For any person willfully to take possession of any merchandise
offered for sale by any store with the intention of converting the same to the
use of such person without paying to the owner the value thereof;
         (b)   For any person willfully to conceal upon his or her person or
otherwise any merchandise offered for sale by any store with the intention of
converting the same to the use of such person without paying to the owner the
value thereof;
         (c)   For any person willfully to alter any label, price tag or
marking upon any merchandise offered for sale by any store with the intention
of depriving the owner of all or some part of the value thereof; and/or
         (d)   For any person willfully to transfer any merchandise offered for
sale by any store from the container in or on which the same shall be displayed
to any other container with intent to deprive the owner of all or some part of
the value thereof.
      STORE. Any store or mercantile establishment in which merchandise is
displayed for sale in such manner as to be readily accessible to persons
shopping therein.
      VALUE OF MERCHANDISE. The sale price of any merchandise which a person
shall convert to his or her own use in committing an act of shoplifting defined
in either divisions (a) or (b) of the definition for shoplifting, or in the
event a person shall commit an act of shoplifting defined in either divisions
(c) or (d) of the definition for shoplifting, then the VALUE OF MERCHANDISE
shall mean the sale price of that part of the merchandise of which the owner
has been deprived in consequence of the commission of such act of shoplifting.
   (B)   Concealment of merchandise. If any person shall willfully conceal upon
his or her person or otherwise merchandise belonging to any store and for which
such person has not paid the purchase price in full, either upon or away from
the store premises, there shall be a prima facie presumption that such person
has concealed such merchandise with the intent of converting the same to his or
her own use within the meaning of the definition of shoplifting contained in
division (A) above.
   (C)   Shoplifting to constitute breach of peace; detention.
      (1)   An act of shoplifting as defined herein, is hereby declared to
constitute a breach of the peace and any owner of merchandise, his or her agent
or employee, or any law enforcement officer, except a constable, who has
reasonable ground to believe that a person has committed shoplifting, may
detain such person in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time
not to exceed 30 minutes, for the purpose of investigating whether or not such
person has committed or attempted to commit shoplifting.
      (2)   Such reasonable detention shall not constitute an arrest nor shall
it render the owner of merchandise, his or her agent or employee, liable to the
person detained.
(1991 Code, § 13-9.1) (Ord. passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to shoplifting, see W.Va. Code §§ 61-3A-1 et seq.
§ 130.017 SPITTING IN PUBLIC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any sidewalk in the city or
upon the floor or other portion of any public conveyance used and operated
within the city for the purpose of conveying passengers, or to expectorate in
or about any public place of building, to the annoyance of any person
rightfully there, or so as to endanger the health of any person, or upon any
steps, hallways or other part of any hotel, store, office building or other
place of business, entertainment or worship where guests or the public are or
have the right to go.
(1991 Code, § 13-10) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.018 STREET CARNIVALS, PARADES OR EXHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Permit required. No street carnival shall be permitted to exhibit upon
the streets or elsewhere within the city without having first obtained a permit
from the city and having paid the license fee as required in Title XI of this
code of ordinances.
   (B)   Permission of Council. No street parade, advertising or other
exhibition or the exhibition of natural or artificial curiosities shall be
conducted within the city without first having obtained permission from the
Council, and, in all such cases when permission is given by the Council, the
parade, advertising or other exhibition, shall be done in conformity to the
directions of the Council.
(1991 Code, § 13-11) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.019 SHOPPING CARTS; REMOVING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a grocery or shopping cart
from the premises or business place wherein such cart is provided and used,
without written consent of the owner or manager of such premises or business
place.
(1991 Code, § 13-12) (Ord. passed 8-16-1973) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.020 TRAINS; EXCEEDING SPEED LIMIT.
   No person shall run any locomotive or train in the city at a greater rate of
speed than four mph without, at the same time, ringing a bell thereon or giving
some similar signal.
(1991 Code, § 13-13) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.021 WATERCOURSES, WELLS, DRAINS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Changing, diverting or obstructing stream, sewer, drain and the like.
No person shall, without the consent of the Council and the consent of all
persons affected thereby, change the natural course of any stream of water or
the natural course of any drainage, nor shall any person obstruct or divert any
gutter, watercourse, drain, sewer, water pipe, sink, catch basin, drain pipe or
other thing used to conduct water within the city.
   (B)   Contaminating wells, streams and the like. No person shall cast any
dead animal or any unwholesome or poisonous thing of any kind into any spring,
well, cistern, reservoir, running stream or river within the city.
(1991 Code, § 13-14) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.022 FAILURE TO OBEY OFFICIALLY POSTED SIGNS.
   Failure for any person to obey any sign, officially posted by the city, by
or through the authority of any agency, commission or department of the city,
which has been posted and approved by an authorized agent of the city, shall be
a violation of the city code.
(Ord. O-034, passed 8-4-2005) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.023 DISABLING OF COMMUNICATION DEVICES BEING USED TO CONTACT EMERGENCY
PERSONNEL.
   No person shall willfully disable a communication device of another,
including, but not limited to, telephones, cellphones, radios or any other type
of communication device, when such device is being used for the purpose of
contacting emergency personnel, for purposes including, but not limited to,
reporting a crime or seeking assistance. For the purposes of this section,
emergency personnel include, but are not limited to, police, fire, ambulance or
hospital authorities.
(Ord. O-53, passed 7-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.024 PUBLIC URINATION.
   No person shall urinate or defecate in or on public property, or urinate or
defecate upon private property within the view of another.
(Ord. O-53, passed 7-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.025 FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   Any person, who, having been released upon his or her personal recognizance
or having been otherwise admitted to bail and released who shall willfully and
without just cause fail to appear as and when it may be required of him or her,
shall be guilty of the offense as hereinafter prescribed, and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished in the manner hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 098, passed 5-7-2009) Penalty, see §
130.999
ADOPTION OF STATE CODE CRIMINAL OFFENSES
§ 130.040 ADOPTION OF STATE CODE CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   There is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code to the
same extent as if the same were copied verbatim herein all provisions of W.Va.
Code Ch. 20, Art. VII and W.Va. Code Ch. 61, as amended or as may hereafter be
amended by the legislature of the state, to the extent that the same may be
legally applicable within the corporate limits of the city. In case of conflict
between the provisions of the adopted portions of the West Virginia Code and
the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the former shall be binding
and controlling and the provisions of this chapter shall be considered modified
and amended to include the conflicting state code provisions. Any violations of
the West Virginia Code provisions, which are not specifically made violations
of this chapter, may be pleaded in warrants as violations of this chapter under
this section.
(Ord. 096-10, passed 9-19-1996)
WEAPONS
§ 130.055 FURNISHING MINOR WITH DANGEROUS WEAPONS.
   No person shall sell, give or furnish to any minor any revolver, pistol,
dirk, Bowie knife, razor, slung shot, billy, metallic or other false knuckles
or any gunpowder or other high explosive of similar character.
(1991 Code, § 13-15) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.056 BRANDISHING OR EXPOSING; THREATENING OR CAUSING BREACH OF PEACE.
   Any person who, in a public or private place, disturbs the peace, order,
decency or decorum of others by violent, profane, indecent or boisterous
conduct or language or by making of unreasonable loud noise that causes
annoyance or alarm to another person, and who persists is such conduct after
being requests to desist by a law enforcement officer, acting in his or her
lawful capacity, is guilty of breach of peace, a misdemeanor.
(1991 Code, § 13-16) (Ord. passed 5-21-1981; Ord. O96-11, passed 10-17-1996;
Ord. 061, passed 3-15-2007; Ord. 242, passed 8-3-2017) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 61-7-10
§ 130.057 CARRYING WITHOUT LICENSE OR OTHER AUTHORIZATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without a state license therefor or
except as provided in W.Va. Code Ch. 61, Arts. 7, §§ 3, 4, 5 and 6, to carry
about his or her person any revolver or pistol, dirk, Bowie knife, slung shot,
razor, billy, metallic or other false knuckles, or other dangerous or deadly
weapon of like kind or character.
(1991 Code, § 13-17) (Ord. passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding provisions of state law, see W.Va. Code § 61-7-1
HUNTING
§ 130.070 HUNTING WITHIN CITY OR POLICE JURISDICTION.
   No person shall hunt for, take, kill, wound or shoot at wild animals or wild
birds by any means, including, but not limited to, firearms, bow and arrow,
slingshot, BB gun, pellet gun and darts within the corporate limits of the city
or the city police jurisdiction. However, it shall be lawful for a resident,
landowner, or tenant to trap rodents or other animals which pose a serious
health, sanitation or nuisance problem on the premises which such resident,
landowner or tenant, owns, manages or resides.
(Ord. passed 1-17-1991) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.071 BOW FISHING WITHIN CITY OR POLICE JURISDICTION.
   No person shall hunt or fish for, take, kill, wound or shoot at fish by bow
and arrow, within the corporate limits of the city or the city police
jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 8-5-1993) Penalty, see §
130.999
NUISANCE PROPERTIES
§ 130.085 DRUG AND GANG HOUSES, HOUSES OF PROSTITUTION AND OTHER DISORDERLY
HOUSES.
   (A)   Any premises used for prostitution; illegal gambling; illegal
possession, storage or delivery of or trafficking in controlled substances, or
other illegal drug activity or other illegal activity, is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance; provided that no public nuisance or violation of this
section shall be deemed to exist unless:
      (1)   The property is used for two or more such offenses or incidents
within any 12-month period; or
      (2)   The offense for which the property is used is punishable by
imprisonment for one year or more.
   (B)   Any person who owns, manages or controls any premises and who:
      (1)   Encourages or permits an illegal activity described in division (A)
above to occur or continue on such premises; or
      (2)   Fails to implement reasonable and warranted abatement measures
identified in the notice issued pursuant to §
130.086, or subsequently agreed to, or other abatement measures which
successfully abate the nuisance within the 30-day period following the notice,
or within any other agreed upon period, shall be subject to a fine according to
the schedule set forth in §
130.999(K).
(Ord. 223, passed 11-3-2016; Ord. 286, passed 7-1-2021) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.086 ORDER OF ABATEMENT.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, or other authorized representative of the city
may bring an action to abate a public nuisance described by §
130.085 in a Municipal Court.
   (B)   The Chief of Police, or other authorized representative of the city,
when practicable, shall make reasonable efforts to provide notice to the owner
of the property of the causes of the public nuisance prior to filing for the
order of abatement.
   (C)   Upon notice the property owner shall within 72 hours provide to the
Chief of Police or other authorized representative of the city an action plan
to abate the public nuisance.
   (D)   If the Chief of Police or other authorized representative of the city
is unable to make contact with the property owner or the proposed action plan
is insufficient to abate the public nuisance, as determined in the sole
discretion of the Chief of Police or other authorized representative of the
city, then the Chief of Police or other authorized representative of the city
shall proceed to file a petition requesting an order of abatement.
   (E)   The Municipal Court Judge shall, upon a petition to abate a public
nuisance and finding of probable cause of a public nuisance, issue an order of
abatement.
   (F)   The order of abatement shall require the defendant to take measures
reasonably calculated to prevent the recurrence of the illegal activity or to
show cause that a public nuisance does not exist.
   (G)   The order of abatement may also authorize the issuance of search
warrants reasonably calculated to determine whether the nuisance has been
abated or whether the order of the court has been obeyed.
(Ord. 223, passed 11-3-2016; Ord. 286, passed 7-1-2021) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.087 SECURING VACANT OR OPEN BUILDINGS.
   Any person or persons owning, maintaining, operating, collecting rents for,
or having any legal or equitable interest in any vacant and open building, or
any uncompleted abandoned building, or any vacant boarded-up building must be
secured by methods approved by the Police Department.
(Ord. 227, passed 12-15-2016) Penalty, see §
130.999
UNAUTHORIZED CAMPING
§ 130.100 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMP or CAMPING. To temporarily stay, reside or dwell in a place, using a
nonpermanent shelter, while conducting activities of daily living such as
eating, sleeping or the storage of personal possessions in such, or around, a
nonpermanent shelter.
   NONPERMANENT SHELTER. Includes, without limitations, any tent, shack, house
trailer, travel trailer, motor home, camper trailer, automobile or any form of
cover or protection from the elements other than clothing and not considered a
permanent residence.
(Ord. 252, passed 3-1-2018)
§ 130.101 UNAUTHORIZED CAMPING.
   (A)   Unauthorized camping on public property.
      (1)   Except as may be permitted within parks by the City Parks and
Recreation Commission, no person shall camp or squat upon any public property
owned by the city, including, without limitation, streets, easements, parks,
dump sites, creek beds, utility substations or parking lots.
      (2)   No person shall leave at any such place any nonpermanent shelter to
be used, or that could be used for the purpose of camping.
   (B)   Camping on private property.
      (1)   Except as may be permitted within campgrounds or trailer parks
designed and approved for camping, no person shall camp or squat within the
city for a period to exceed more than 14 days.
      (2)   The days need not be consecutive days.
(Ord. 252, passed 3-1-2018) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever, in the codified ordinances or in any ordinance of the city,
any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or
whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise provided,
whoever violates any such provision shall be fined an amount set forth by
Council from time to time. Each day any such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. All other fines, penalties or punishments for
offenses against, or violations of, the codified ordinances of the city or any
ordinances of the city shall remain in full force and effect.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §
130.001 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine in an amount set
forth by Council from time to time or be imprisoned for not more than 30 days
or be punished by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(1991 Code, § 13-1)
   (C)   Any person found guilty of any offense under §
130.008 shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(1991 Code, § 13-5.2)
   (D)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
130.012, such person shall be fined in an amount set forth by Council from time
to time.
   (E)   (1)   If any person shall commit an act of shoplifting as defined in §
130.016, for the first offense he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment in the city jail for
not more than 30 days or by fine in an amount set forth by Council from time to
time, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
      (2)   If any person shall commit an act of shoplifting as defined in §
130.016, for the second or subsequent offenses he or she shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment in
the city jail for not more than 30 days or by fine in an amount set forth by
Council from time to time, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(1991 Code, § 13-9.1)
   (F)   A violation of §
130.022 shall be declared a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine in an amount set
forth by Council from time to time and/or incarceration for a period of up to
one year.
   (G)   Any person who fails to abide by §
130.023 shall be charged with a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time or confined in the
county or regional jail for not more than one year.
   (H)   Any person who fails to abide by §
130.024 shall be charged with a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time or confined in the
county or regional jail for not more than 30 days.
   (I)   (1)   If any such person was admitted to bail or released after being
arrested for, charged or convicted of a misdemeanor and shall thereafter be
convicted for a violation of the provisions of §
130.025, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for failure to appear and
shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time or confined in
the county or regional jail for not more than one year, or both such fine and
confinement.
      (2)   If any such person was a material witness and shall thereafter fail
to appear when and where it shall have been required of him or her, such person
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
an amount set forth by Council from time to time or confined in the county or
regional jail not more than one year, or both such fine and confinement.
   (J)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
130.056, such person shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to
time or shall be imprisoned in jail for a period not to exceed three days, or
both such fine and imprisonment.
   (K)   (1)   Each day that a violation of §§
130.085 and
130.086 continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
         (a)   No person shall be found in violation of §
130.085(B)(2) unless the city proves by a preponderance of the evidence that
the abatement measures were reasonable and warranted, and that the defendant
knowingly failed to implement them.
         (b)   A person may be found in violation of §
130.085(B)(1) or (B)(2) regardless of whether an order of abatement is issued
under § 130.086 or in violation of §
130.085(B)(1) regardless of whether a notice has been given under §
130.086. A fine may be assessed by the Elkins Municipal Court.
      (2)   Upon a finding of liability under §§
130.085 or
130.086, the defendant shall be fined: $100 for the first offense, $200 for a
second offense, $500 for a third offense and for each subsequent offense the
fine shall be $1,000. Provided, that if a defendant has not had a second
violation within 12 months from the first violation, then the violation shall
be considered a first offense for purposes of assessing a fine.
   (L)   (1)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
130.087 shall be punished by a fine in an amount set forth by Council from time
to time.
      (2)   A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each
day on which such person or persons shall violate the provisions of §
130.087.
   (M)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
130.101, the offender shall, within 48 hours after such conviction, remove or
cause to be removed, any such item or items, in violation of §
130.101 and his or her failure to do so shall constitute a second offense
against the provisions of §
130.101. The continued failure or refusal of such offender to comply with the
provisions of §
130.101 shall constitute a separate distinct and additional offense for each
successive 48-hour period of such failure and refusal, and upon conviction of
such second offense such offender shall be fined an amount set forth by Council
from time to time for each offense with the cost of removing and disposing of
said item/items to be charged to the offender.
(Ord. passed 10-16-1958; Ord. passed 5-21-1981; Ord. O96-11, passed 10-17-1996;
Ord. 098-10, passed 9-17-1998; Ord. O-034, passed 8-4-2005; Ord. O-53, passed
7-20-2006; Ord. 061, passed 3-15-2007; Ord. 098, passed 5-7-2009; Ord. 214,
passed 6-30-2016; Ord. 219, passed 11-3-2016; Ord. 223, passed 11-3-2016; Ord.
227, passed 12-15-2016; Ord. 242, passed 8-3-2017; Ord. 252, passed 3-1-2018;
Ord. 286, passed 7-1-2021)
CHAPTER 131: MINORS
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Contributing to delinquency or neglect of a child
Curfew
   
131.15   Definitions
   
131.16   Curfew imposed; exceptions
   
131.17   Unlawful acts; by persons having charge of public places
   
131.18   Unlawful acts; by parent, guardian, custodian and the like
   
131.19   Sponsors of evening functions may notify police of such functions
   
131.20   Violations by minor; authority and duties of police
Tobacco
   
131.35   Legislative intent
   
131.36   Sale or gift of cigarette, cigarette paper, pips, cigar, snuff or
chewing tobacco to persons under 18
   
131.37   Use of possession of tobacco or tobacco products by persons under the
age of 18 years
 
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OR NEGLECT OF A CHILD.
   (A)   A person who by any act or omission contributes to, encourages or
tends to cause the delinquency or neglect of any child, including, but not
limited to, aiding or encouraging any such child to habitually or continually
refuse to respond, without just cause, to the lawful supervision of such
child’s parents, guardian or custodian or to be habitually absent from school
without just cause, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any parent, guardian
or custodian who fails or refuses, or allows another person to fail or refuse,
to supply a child under the care, custody or control of such parent, guardian
or custodian with necessary medical care, when such medical care conflicts with
the tenets and practices of a recognized religious denomination or order of
which such parent, guardian or custodian is ah adherent or member.
(Ord. passed 9-16-1993) Penalty, see §
131.99
CURFEW
§ 131.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CUSTODIAN. Any person over the age of 18 years who is in loco parentis to a
minor.
   GUARDIAN. Any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a
minor.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
   PARENT. A natural or adopted parent of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground,
parking area or lot, business or place to which the general public has access
and a right to resort for business attendance or other lawful purposes. PUBLIC
PLACE shall include, but not be limited to, any street, shop, restaurant,
tavern, café, theater, drugstore, poolroom, shopping center or any other place
devoted to business, amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall
also include the front, rear and sidewalk areas of the above.
(1991 Code, § 13-18) (Ord. passed 3-6-1980)
§ 131.16 CURFEW IMPOSED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain, idle, wander, loiter,
stroll, play or be in or at or upon any public place, either on foot or,
without a set destination, in any motor vehicle or on any bicycle or other
conveyance in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day unless:
      (1)   Accompanied by parents, guardian, custodian or other adult person
having legal custody or control of such minor;
      (2)   Unless the minor is on an emergency errand;
      (3)   Unless the minor is returning to his or her place of residence from
attendance at a school, church, athletic or recreational function or activity
at which the minor’s attendance is authorized by his or her parents, guardian,
custodian or other adult person having legal custody or control of such minor;
or
      (4)   Where the presence of such minor is connected with or required by
some lawful employment, trade, profession or occupation.
   (B)   All minors shall be required to leave and not be on or about any
public place within one-half hour of the termination of any of the functions or
activities herein mentioned.
(1991 Code, § 13-19) (Ord. passed 3-6-1980) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.17 UNLAWFUL ACTS; BY PERSONS HAVING CHARGE OF PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of any public place to
knowingly permit or suffer the presence therein of minors between the hours as
designated and set forth in §
131.16 herein except as may be authorized and permitted by the provisions
thereof.
(1991 Code, § 13-20) (Ord. passed 3-6-1980) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.18 UNLAWFUL ACTS; BY PARENT, GUARDIAN, CUSTODIAN AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, custodian or other adult
person having legal custody or control of any minor to suffer, permit or allow,
or be inefficient or ineffective in the control of minors so as to permit or
allow such minor to be on any street or sidewalk or on or in or about any
public property or public place within the city, except as provided in §
131.16, in violation of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 13-21) (Ord. passed 3-6-1980) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.19 SPONSORS OF EVENING FUNCTIONS MAY NOTIFY POLICE OF SUCH FUNCTIONS.
   To facilitate in the enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter and to
enable minors not to be stopped by police, the sponsor of any special function,
activity or entertainment of any church, school, club or other organization
that requires minors to be out past the curfew hour may register the event in
advance with the Chief of Police or his or her designee. The registration shall
state the time the function, activity or entertainment shall be expected to
end. Minors who attend the function, activity or entertainment shall be
required to be off the streets, sidewalks or public places within one-half hour
after the function, activity or entertainment is ended.
(1991 Code, § 13-22) (Ord. passed 3-6-1980) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.20 VIOLATIONS BY MINOR; AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF POLICE.
   (A)   Any police officer, upon finding a minor to be in or on any public
place as hereinbefore defined in violation of this subchapter, shall ascertain
the name and address of such minor, advise the minor that he or she is in
violation of this subchapter and direct the minor to proceed at once to his or
her home or place of abode. The police officer shall further immediately
report, or attempt to report, such action to the parents, guardian, custodian
or person having legal custody or control of such minor by either telephoning
or personally contacting them.
   (B)   If such minor refuses to heed such a warning by any such police
officer or refuses to give such police officer his or her correct name and
address, or if the minor has been the subject of a prior curfew warning that
same night, then the minor shall be taken to his or her place of residence, if
the same can be determined; otherwise to the Police Department and the parents,
guardian, custodian or other adult person having the legal care and custody of
such minor shall be notified to come to the Police Department and take charge
of the minor. If the parents, guardian, custodian or other person having the
legal care and control of such minor cannot be located or fails to come and
take charge of the minor, the minor shall be dealt with in accordance with the
juvenile laws of the state, but in no event shall be placed in confinement or
jail for violation of the provisions of this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 13-23) (Ord. passed 3-6-1980)
TOBACCO
§ 131.35 LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   The legislature hereby declares it to be the policy and intent of this state
to discourage and ban the use of tobacco products by minors. As basis for this
policy, the legislature hereby finds and accepts the medical evidence that
smoking tobacco may cause lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema and other
serious health problems while the use of smokeless tobacco may cause gum
disease and oral cancer. It is the further intent of the legislature in banning
the use of tobacco products by minors to ease the personal tragedy and
eradicate the severe economic loss associated with the use of tobacco and to
provide the state with a citizenry free from the use of tobacco.
(Ord. 096-03, passed 4-4-1996)
§ 131.36 SALE OR GIFT OF CIGARETTE, CIGARETTE PAPER, PIPS, CIGAR, SNUFF OR
CHEWING TOBACCO TO PERSONS UNDER 18.
   No person, firm or corporation may sell, give or furnish, or cause to be
sold, given or furnished, to any person under the age of 18 years:
   (A)   Any cigarette, cigarette paper or any other paper prepared,
manufactured or made for the purpose of smoking any tobacco or tobacco product;
or
   (B)   Any cigar, pipe, snuff, chewing tobacco or tobacco product, in any
form.
(Ord. 096-03, passed 4-4-1996) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.37 USE OF POSSESSION OF TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY PERSONS UNDER THE
AGE OF 18 YEARS.
   No person under the age of 18 years shall have on or about his or her person
or premises for use any cigarette, cigarette paper or any other paper prepared,
manufactured or made for the purpose of smoking any tobacco products, in any
form; or, any pipe, snuff, chewing tobacco or tobacco product.
(Ord. 096-03, passed 4-4-1996) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
131.01, such person shall be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to
time, or imprisoned for a period not exceeding one year, or both fined and
imprisoned.
      (2)   In addition to any penalty provided under division (B)(1) above and
any restitution which may be ordered by the court, the court may order any
person convicted under the provisions of §
131.01 to pay all or any portion of the cost of medical, psychological or
psychiatric treatment of the child resulting from the act or acts for which the
person is convicted, whether or not the child is considered to have sustained
bodily injury.
   (C)   (1)   Any parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having the
legal custody and control of a minor who is guilty of any violation of the
provisions of §§
131.15 through
131.20, or any person operating or having charge of any public place who
knowingly permits or suffers the presence of minors on his or her premises in
violation of the provisions of §§
131.15 through
131.20, shall be subject to a fine in an amount set forth by Council from time
to time or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than 30
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
      (2)   Any minor who violates any provision of §§
131.15 through
131.20 shall be dealt with and proceeded against in such manner as may be
authorized by the juvenile laws of the state.
(1991 Code, § 13-24)
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §
131.36 is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
   (E)   Any parent, guardian, or person responsible for, or having control
over, a person under the age of 18 who violates the provisions of §
131.37 will be fined an amount set forth by Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 3-6-1980; Ord. passed 9-16-1993; Ord. 096-03, passed 4-4-1996;
Ord. 219, passed 11-3-2016)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDINGS
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Office of Building Official
   
150.002   Office of Building Inspector
   
150.003   Inspection of buildings while under construction; stop work orders
   
150.004   Refund of building permit fee; water and sewer tap fees; imposition
of processing fee
   
150.005   Building projects which do not alter existing exterior structures;
permit issuance authority
Building Permits
   
150.020   Required; exceptions
   
150.021   Application; plans and specifications; application for variance
   
150.022   Fees
   
150.023   Fees; prior payment
   
150.024   Issuance; denial; form; expiration
Building Code
   
150.035   Adopted
   
150.036   Administration and enforcement
   
150.037   Enforcement of external sanitation and common nuisance violations
   
150.038   Authority of city to file liens on real property for costs incurred
in abating exterior sanitation and common nuisance violations and for costs
incurred in repairing, relaying or constructing sidewalks
Certification of Electricians
   
150.110   Generally
Rental Housing
   
150.125   Purpose
   
150.126   Scope
   
150.127   Definitions
   
150.128   Illegal conditions
   
150.129   Application for certificate of use and occupancy
   
150.130   Filing deadlines
   
150.131   Fees and conditions
   
150.132   Inspections
   
150.133   Certificate of use and occupancy, display, transfer, expiration
   
150.134   Notice of violation
   
150.135   Right of appeal
   
150.136   Applicability of other laws
   
150.137   Waiverability
   
150.138   Applicability of other codes and ordinances
Vacant Structures
   
150.150   Adoption
   
150.151   Purpose
   
150.152   Definitions
   
150.153   Inspection
   
150.154   Corrective action
   
150.155   Registration generally
   
150.156   Right of appeal
   
150.157   Amending information
   
150.158   Reinspection
   
150.159   Nonpayment of fees/liens
   
150.160   Relation to other codes and laws
Unsafe Structures
   
150.175   Purpose
   
150.176   Definitions
   
150.177   Closing and removal of unsafe structures
   
150.178   Inspection
   
150.179   Correction of unsafe conditions
   
150.180   Relief from order for corrective action
   
150.181   Owner responsibility for costs
   
150.182   Civil action for corrective action and recovery of costs
   
150.183   Notices
Means of Appeal
   
150.195   Purpose
   
150.196   Membership
   
150.197   Procedures and duties
   
150.198   Remedies
 
   
150.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to provide for elimination of health and safety
hazards, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(23)
   Authority of city to provide for the regular building of houses and other
structures, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-12-5(28) and 8-15-1
   Authority of Council to enact building regulations, require building permits
and make inspections of construction work and the like, see W.Va. Code §§ 8-12-
13 through 8-12-15
   Authority of Council to provide for the regular building of houses and other
structures, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-5(28)
   Authority to regulate the construction, repair and alteration of structures
of every kind within the city and to regulate electric wiring and plumbing, see
W.Va. Code § 8-12-13
   Ordinances regulating repair, closing and the like of buildings unfit for
human habitation, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-16
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 OFFICE OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The office of Building Official is hereby created, to be headed by the
Building Official and having such other personnel as may, from time to time, be
authorized by the Council. The Chairperson of the Building Committee shall
serve as ex officio Building Official.
(1991 Code, § 5-2)
§ 150.002 OFFICE OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   Appointment; delegation of authority. The office of Building Inspector
is hereby created to be headed by the Building Inspector who shall be appointed
by the Council and who shall hold such office at the pleasure of Council and
shall receive such compensation as Council may determine from time to time. He
or she may delegate the authority vested in him or her to such deputies,
assistants, inspectors and other personnel as may, from time to time, be
assigned to his or her office or, with the approval of the Mayor, to other city
officers and employees.
   (B)   Administrative duties. The Building Inspector shall receive
applications for all permits and certificates required by this chapter, unless
otherwise provided; and to enable him or her to enforce compliance with law,
remove illegal conditions, secure the necessary safeguards during construction
or require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he or she
shall issue such orders or notices as may be necessary. He or she shall keep
comprehensive records of applications, of permits issued and of certificates,
orders and notices issued. He or she shall retain, on file, copies of required
plans and all documents relating to building work for as long as the work may
continue and for a reasonable time thereafter. All such records shall be open
to public inspection, for good and sufficient reason, at the office hours
observed by the city, but shall not be removed from the City Hall.
   (C)   Duties as an inspecting officer. The Building Inspector shall examine
premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary
inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that
construction is prosecuted safely. He or she shall, when requested by proper
authority or when the interest of the city so requires, make investigations in
connection with matters referred to in this chapter or
Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances and render written reports thereon. He
or she shall make the inspections required under the provisions of the Building
Code and other technical codes adopted by this chapter. He or she shall have
the authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable
hour, upon proper identification and in compliance with all applicable
provisions of law.
(1991 Code, § 5-1.1) (Ord. passed 4-1-1982)
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of city to provide for entering and inspecting
private premises in the enforcement of city ordinances, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-
15
§ 150.003 INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS WHILE UNDER CONSTRUCTION; STOP WORK ORDERS.
   (A)   The Building Inspector or his or her representative shall inspect all
construction of buildings and the performance of the work described in the
building permit application.
   (B)   If at any time he or she finds that the construction or the work does
not comply with any provision of this code or other pertinent laws, or he or
she finds that the construction or the work being done differs from the
description of the construction or work contained in the building permit
application, or he or she finds that the cost of the construction or work being
performed exceeds the estimated cost set forth in the building permit
application, he or she may order that the construction or work be stopped until
compliance has been satisfactorily made or an amended building permit approved
and additional fee, if any, paid, as the case may be.
(1991 Code, § 5-6.1) (1-4-84.)
§ 150.004 REFUND OF BUILDING PERMIT FEE; WATER AND SEWER TAP FEES; IMPOSITION
OF PROCESSING FEE.
   (A)   Upon request for the withdrawal of any application for a building
permit, water tap or sewer tap, whether or not such application has been
approved, and request for a refund of the fee paid therefor, the City Collector
and Treasurer shall make refund of such fee previously paid by the applicant;
provided, however, that an administrative fee of an amount set forth by Council
from time to time shall be withheld and not refunded to cover the cost of
processing the application.
   (B)   (1)   Prior to making the refund provided for in division (A) above,
the City Treasurer and Collector shall ascertain that no work has been
commenced under such building permit and that no water or sewer tap has been
made.
      (2)   The City Treasurer and Collector shall advise the Building
Inspector, the Water Department and/or the Sewer Department, as the case may
be, of such refund having been made.
(1991 Code, § 5-6.2) (Ord. passed 7-19-1984)
§ 150.005 BUILDING PROJECTS WHICH DO NOT ALTER EXISTING EXTERIOR STRUCTURES;
PERMIT ISSUANCE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The city’s Building Inspector is hereby given authority to issue
building permits on proposed projects which do not alter, in any manner,
existing exterior structures of buildings or which do not, in any way impact
upon existing zoning laws or regulations.
   (B)   Further, no building permit shall be issued by the city’s Building
Inspector unless all other laws, ordinances and requisitions are complied with.
   (C)   In the event the city’s Building Inspector refuses to issue a building
permit on a proposed project, the owner of such project may appeal to the
Council within ten days from such refusal or at the next regular scheduled
meeting of the Council.
(1991 Code, § 5-6.3) (Ord. passed 8-4-1988)
BUILDING PERMITS
§ 150.020 REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall, within the city, move any house or other building from one
location to another, or demolish any building or other structure or erect,
construct, install, repair, alter or enlarge any building or other structure or
any electrical wiring, apparatus or appliance, any gas system, apparatus or
appliance or any plumbing system or fixture which is or is to become a part of
any building or structure, except pursuant to a city building permit first
issued to him or her for such purpose; provided, that minor repairs, the total
estimated cost of which does not exceed an amount set forth by Council from
time to time for both materials and labor and which do not constitute an
alteration of the things repaired may be made without such permit; and provided
further, that such repairs without such permit shall conform to the
requirements of the Building Code and any other applicable technical code
adopted by this chapter.
(1991 Code, § 5-3)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to require building permits, see W.Va. Code § 8-12-14
§ 150.021 APPLICATION; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS; APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE.
   (A)   Applications for building permits shall be submitted in writing, on
forms provided by the city, to the Building Inspector. Each such application
shall state the location of the proposed project, the character, design and
purpose thereof, the materials proposed to be used and the manner in which the
work shall be done; and the Building Inspector may require that detailed plans
and specifications be submitted, in duplicate, with the application. The
Building Inspector may require such other information as may be necessary to
enable him or her to determine whether the proposed project meets all
requirements of state law, this code and other ordinances.
   (B)   When detailed plans and specifications are submitted, one set thereof
shall be retained by the Building Inspector and the other set shall be kept at
the location of the work being done pursuant thereto.
   (C)   No application for a variance, as provided in
Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances, shall be made until after an
application for a building permit in accordance with this section shall have
first been made.
(1991 Code, § 5-4) (Ord. passed 4-1-1982)
§ 150.022 FEES.
   The Council may, by ordinance, establish and, from time to time, amend
schedules of fees for permits, certificates and inspections required by this
chapter or by the Building Code or any other technical code adopted by this
chapter; and until such a schedule is adopted pursuant to this section, the
fees in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this code are hereby
continued in full force and effect.
(1991 Code, § 5-4) (Ord. passed 4-7-1960)
§ 150.023 FEES; PRIOR PAYMENT.
   No building permit shall be issued until the fee prescribed therefor, if
any, shall have been paid; nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until
the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the
building or structure, shall have been paid.
(1991 Code, § 5-5)
§ 150.024 ISSUANCE; DENIAL; FORM; EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Upon a determination by the Building Inspector that the proposed
project, if undertaken and completed according to the statements contained in
the application and in accordance with the plans, specifications and other
papers accompanying the application, would meet all requirements of state law,
this code, the Building Code or other technical codes adopted by this chapter,
and upon a determination that the application has been properly filed and the
required fee has been paid, the Building Inspector shall so advise and
recommend to the Building Committee that the permit be issued. The Building
Inspector shall recommend that a permit be denied when he or she has determined
that the above requirements would not be met; provided, that the Building
Inspector may permit any application to be amended by the applicant so as to
meet such requirements.
   (B)   The Building Committee shall review the application for building
permits and the recommendations of the Building Inspector and shall finally
approve such permits for issuance.
   (C)   Building permits shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the
Building Inspector, unless otherwise provided by the Council. The application
for a building permit, as well as its accompanying plans, specifications and
other papers, if any, as approved by the Building Inspector, shall be deemed to
be an integral part of the permit.
   (D)   (1)   If the performance of the work authorized by the building permit
has not commenced prior to the expiration of six months from the date of
issuance, the building permit becomes automatically null and void. Upon a
permit becoming void, a refund of the applicable building permit fees may be
obtained upon the request of the applicant, pursuant to the restrictions and
provisions of §
150.004.
      (2)   Application tor an extension of time to commence work may be made
at anytime within the six-month time period. Approval of said extension shall
be made by the Building Inspector or his or her representative, but only for
good cause shown. Each extension shall be limited to a period of 90 days, with
the total extension time not to exceed 360 days from the issue date of the
original permit.
(1991 Code, § 5-6) (Ord. passed 4-1-1982; Ord. 096-02, passed 3-11-1996; Ord.
159, passed 9-20-2012)
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.035 ADOPTED.
   The State Building Code be and is hereby reenacted and adopted as
promulgated by the West Virginia State Fire Commission, Title No. 87, Series 4
“State Building Code” as approved by the West Virginia Legislature, by
Legislative Rule filed January 7, 2022 and effective August 1, 2022 as amended,
and which establishes the standards and requirements as set out and as
published in 2018 by the International Code Council and American Standards
Institute, and the following codes, as promulgated, be and the same are
incorporated by reference as if fully set out verbatim herein:
   (A)   2018 International Building Code, as modified or amended, to include
Section 4.1.g. The ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1 2013 Edition for commercial
buildings, as excepted, modified or amended;
   (B)   2018 International Residential Code, as excepted, modified or amended;
   (C)   2018 International Existing Building Code, as excepted, modified or
amended;
   (D)   2018 International Plumbing Code, as excepted, modified or amended;
   (E)   2018 International Mechanical Code, as excepted, modified or amended;
   (F)   2018 International Fuel Gas Code, as excepted, modified or amended;
   (G)   2018 International Property Maintenance Code, as excepted, modified or
amended;
   (H)   NFPA Life Safety Code 2021 Edition;
   (I)   2020 Edition of the National Electric Code NFPA 70, as excepted,
modified or amended;
   (J)   2017 ICC/ANSI Al17.1 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities
Code, as excepted, modified or amended;
   (K)   2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as excepted, modified
or amended;
   (L)   2015 International Energy Conservation Code for Residential Dwellings,
as excepted, modified or amended;
all of which will have an effective date of August 1,2022.
(1991 Code, § 5-7) (Ord. passed 7-1-1965; Ord. O-041, passed 5-18-2006; Ord.
140, passed 1-19-2012; Ord. 181, passed 8-21-2014; Ord. 189, passed 3-19-2015;
Ord. 196, passed 7-2-2015; Ord. 215, passed 7-21-2016; Ord. 259, passed 4-4-
2019; Ord. 271, passed 3-4-2020; Ord. 275, passed 8-20-2020; Ord. 299, passed
7-28-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to adopt a building code by reference, see W.Va. Code §
8-11-4(b)
§ 150.036 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The Building Official may designate an agent, representative or an employee
of the city to exercise the powers granted to him or her by the provisions of
the city code.
(1991 Code, § 5-8) (Ord. 134, passed 12-1-2011)
§ 150.037 ENFORCEMENT OF EXTERNAL SANITATION AND COMMON NUISANCE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to provide additional and
alternative methods and processes to enforce the municipal code provisions
regarding exterior sanitation and common nuisances related to property located
within the city in a fair, speedy and inexpensive manner, and to improve
compliance with such provisions.
      (2)   This section shall be in addition to those methods and processes
otherwise contained in the city code and shall be applied at the discretion of
the enforcement official enforcing the provisions of this section in compliance
with the current version of code enforcement protocol.
      (3)   This section shall apply to the following exterior sanitation and
common nuisance violations contained in the State Building Code and the
International Property Maintenance Code incorporated in the city code:
         (a)   Sanitation (IPMC 302.1 or any corresponding section to the
extent amended);
         (b)   Drainage (IPMC 302.2 or any corresponding section to the extent
amended);
         (c)   Sidewalks in disrepair (IPMC 302.3 or any corresponding section
to the extent amended);
         (d)   High weeds/grass (IPMC 302.4 or any corresponding section to the
extent amended);
         (e)   Graffiti (IPMC 302.9 or any corresponding section to the extent
amended); and
         (f)   Exterior garbage accumulation (IPMC 307.1 or any corresponding
section to the extent amended).
      (4)   Any and all planning, zoning, building and law enforcement officers
shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this section and shall be
referred to herein collectively as “enforcement officials”.
   (B)   Investigations. Upon receipt of information or observation of
circumstances indicating the likelihood of a violation of any provision of the
city code regarding external sanitation or common nuisance, the enforcement
official shall investigate the facts and may, to the extent permitted by law,
make an inspection of the premises.
   (C)   Notice of violation.
      (1)   (a)   If an enforcement official determines that a code violation
exists, the enforcement official shall provide written notice of such violation
to the person having either ownership or control of any land, building,
structure, sign, property, licensed or permitted business or operation which is
in violation, and shall order that the violation be corrected. Notice of the
violation shall be served in accordance with the law of the state concerning
the service of process in civil actions, except that a method of service
effectuated by a mailing by the clerk of a court (e.g., service pursuant to
West Virginia Rule of Civil Procedure 4(d)(1)(D)) shall be deemed to be
effectuated by a mailing by an enforcement official.
         (b)   If service is made by certified mail pursuant to West Virginia
Rule of Civil Procedure 4(d)(1)(D) and delivery of the notice of the violation
is refused, the enforcement official, promptly upon the receipt of the notice
of such refusal, shall mail to the person or entity being noticed, by first
class mail, postage prepaid:
            1.   A copy of the notice of the violation(s);
            2.   A notice that despite such refusal, the notice of the
violation(s) is valid; and
            3.   Advising that the city will proceed to enforce the notice of
violation(s).
         (c)   So long as such first class mailing is not returned as
undeliverable by the U.S. Postal Service, service of the notice of violation(s)
will be conclusively presumed to have been effectuated. Proof of service shall
be made at the time of service by a written declaration, under oath, executed
by the enforcement official effecting service and shall declare the time, date
and manner by which service was made.
      (2)   Any notice of violation(s) under this section shall be in writing
and shall contain the following:
         (a)   The date the notice of violation is given;
         (b)   The name and address of the person(s) charged with the
violation;
         (c)   The section of the ordinance being violated;
         (d)   The nature of the violation;
         (e)   A statement of the action required to be taken in order to
correct the violation;
         (f)   The time period allowed for the violation to be corrected prior
to the issuance of a citation. When determining the time period allowed for
correction, the enforcement official shall take into consideration the threat
posed by the violation to the health, safety and welfare of the public and the
nature of the work required to correct the violation, provided that no such
time period for correction shall be less than five days;
         (g)   The maximum fines that may be assessed if the violation is not
corrected; and
         (h)   The name, address and telephone number of the enforcement
official issuing the notice of violation.
   (D)   Issuance of citations.
      (1)   If the violation has not been corrected within the period
established in the notice of violation, or is a repeat violation as set forth
in division (G) below, the enforcement official may issue a citation to the
violator. The citation shall be in writing and shall contain the following:
         (a)   The date the citation is issued;
         (b)   The name and address of the person(s) charged with the
violation;
         (c)   The section of the ordinance that has been violated;
         (d)   The nature of the violation;
         (e)   The place and time the violation occurred;
         (f)   The date the notice of violation was given;
         (g)   The amount of the fine imposed for the violation;
         (h)   The name, address and telephone number of the enforcement
official issuing the citation; and
         (i)   The name, address and telephone number of the office of the
Municipal Court Clerk, where fines are to be paid, and of the Municipal Court,
where citations may be appealed.
      (2)   (a)   A citation shall be in accordance with the law of the state
concerning the service of process in civil actions, except that a method of
service effectuated by a mailing by the clerk of a court (e.g., service
pursuant to West Virginia Rule of Civil Procedure 4(d)(1)(D)) shall be deemed
to be effectuated by a mailing by an enforcement official.
         (b)   If service is made by certified mail pursuant to West Virginia
Rule of Civil Procedure 4(d)(1)(D) and delivery of the citation is refused, the
enforcement official, promptly upon the receipt of the notice of such refusal,
shall mail to the person or entity being noticed, by first class mail, postage
prepaid:
            1.   A copy of the citation;
            2.   A notice that despite such refusal, the citation is valid; and
            3.   Notice that the city will proceed to enforce the citation; so
long as such first class mailing is not returned as undeliverable by the U.S.
Postal Service, service of the citation will be conclusively presumed to have
been effectuated.
         (c)   Proof of service shall be made at the time of service by a
written declaration, under oath, executed by the enforcement official effecting
service and shall declare the time, date and manner by which service was made.
   (E)   Penalties. Any person issued a citation pursuant to division (D) above
shall be punished by a fine as follows:
      (1)   Within any 12-month period, $100 for the first citation;
      (2)   Two hundred dollars for the second citation;
      (3)   Three hundred dollars for the third citation; and
      (4)   Five hundred dollars for the fourth citation and each citation
thereafter.
   (F)   Nonpayment of fines. All fines imposed by citations under this section
shall be due within ten days of service of the citation except as otherwise set
forth herein. The failure to pay when due any fine imposed under this section
shall constitute a failure to appear or otherwise respond under W.Va. Code § 8-
10-2b(c) and may result in notification to the DMV.
   (G)   Repeat violations. If a person has been previously served with a
notice of violation for a violation contained in division (A)(3) above, whether
or not the violation is timely corrected or a citation is issued, he or she
shall not be entitled to receive an additional notice(s) of violation for the
same category of violation if the same category of violation is repeated within
a six-month period of the issuance of either a notice of violation or a
citation, the enforcement official may proceed in accordance with division (D)
above without further notice to the violator.
   (H)   Appeal.
      (1)   Any person who is issued a citation shall pay the fine indicated
for the violation, as set forth in division (E) above, in full to the office of
the Municipal Court Clerk within ten days of service of the citation. Any
person alleging he or she was improperly issued such citation may, within ten
days of service of such citation, file a petition for appeal of the citation,
along with the required bond, with the Municipal Court Clerk in accordance with
the following.
         (a)   In order to properly and timely appeal his or her citation,
within ten days of service of the citation, the recipient of the citation shall
pay the required amount of the applicable fine in full to the Municipal Court
Clerk, which amount will be held by the Municipal Court as bond pending hearing
and resolution of the case by the Municipal Court and the Municipal Court Clerk
shall issue a receipt to the recipient of the citation showing the amount of
the bond paid. In addition to the bond, the recipient of the citation shall
file with the Municipal Court Clerk a petition for appeal of the citation. If
any petition for appeal filed in accordance with this section is not timely
filed or is not accompanied with the required bond, the recipient of the
citation shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to appeal the
citation, and such petition shall be summarily denied as untimely filed;
provided, however, that nothing set forth hereinabove shall prevent the
Municipal Court Judge from finding, upon a proper application and showing, that
the recipient of the citation suffers from financial hardship, and, as a
result, waiving the requirement that the bond be posted.
         (b)   Any petition for appeal filed with the Municipal Court Clerk
must be in writing, on the form to be provided by the Municipal Court Clerk,
and must be signed by the recipient of the citation affirming that the contents
of the petition are true and accurate to the best of the recipient of the
citation’s knowledge at that time. Such petition for appeal shall state the
facts and reasons in support of the petition. Upon filing any such petition for
appeal with the Municipal Court Clerk, the recipient of the citation shall
serve a copy of the petition and receipt showing proof of bond, or application
for waiver thereof, upon the City Attorney.
      (2)   Upon filing of a petition for appeal with the Municipal Court
Clerk, the Clerk or his or her designee shall place the case on the Municipal
Court docket, set the case for hearing within 30 days from the date of the
filing of the petition for appeal, provide a notice of hearing to the recipient
of the citation, and forward a copy of the petition to the enforcement official
who issued the citation. Upon receipt of the petition, the enforcement official
shall cause a copy of the citation at issue to be forwarded to the Municipal
Court Clerk who shall file it as the original complaint alleging the violation
indicated therein.
      (3)   (a)   The Municipal Court shall treat the citation itself as the
original complaint before the court.
         (b)   At the close of all of the evidence presented at the hearing on
the petition for appeal, should the Municipal Judge find against the recipient
of the citation, the bond posted by the recipient of the citation shall be
applied as payment for the fine imposed for the violation.
         (c)   In the event the Municipal Court Judge finds that the recipient
of the citation suffers from financial hardship, the Municipal Court Judge may
permit alternative sentencing.
         (d)   Should the court find in favor of the recipient of the citation,
the bond, if applicable, shall be refunded to the recipient of the citation by
the Municipal Court Clerk, and the citation shall be dismissed.
(Ord. 216, passed 8-4-2016)
§ 150.038 AUTHORITY OF CITY TO FILE LIENS ON REAL PROPERTY FOR COSTS INCURRED
IN ABATING EXTERIOR SANITATION AND COMMON NUISANCE VIOLATIONS AND FOR COSTS
INCURRED IN REPAIRING, RELAYING OR CONSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   The city may file a lien on real property for costs incurred in
abating exterior sanitation and common nuisance violations, which include, but
are not limited to, those violations set forth in §
150.037(A)(3), and when the following occurs:
      (1)   A property owner, after receiving lawful notice pursuant to §
150.037(C) or pursuant to any other applicable provision of the city code,
fails to abate the violation;
      (2)   The enforcement official lawfully enters said property and performs
the work necessary to abate the violation; and
      (3)   A notice of the costs of abatement is sent to the property owner
and those costs are not remitted within a time satisfactory to the city.
   (B)   The city may file a lien on real property for costs incurred in
repairing, relaying, or constructing sidewalks in accordance with the city
code.
(Ord. 216, passed 8-4-2016)
CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRICIANS
§ 150.110 GENERALLY.
   (A)   No electrical work shall be performed within the jurisdictional limits
of the city by an electrical contractor or electrician, as those terms are
defined in division (B) below, unless such electrical work is performed by an
electrician holding an unexpired certificate of competency for the level of
electrical work in question issued by the State Fire Marshal in accordance with
the procedures of the State Fire Marshal relating thereto.
   (B)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         ELECTRICAL. Pertains to the installation of wires and conduits for the
purpose of transmitting electricity, the installation of fixtures and equipment
in connection therewith, or both.
         ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR. Any person who engages in the business of or
employs others for the construction, alteration or repair of any electrical
wiring used for the purpose of furnishing heat, light or power.
         ELECTRICIAN. Any individual who, either on his or her own or as an
employee of an electrical contractor, is engaged in the construction,
alteration or repair of any electrical wiring used for the purpose of
furnishing heat, light or power.
      (2)   The terms “electrical contractor” and “electrician” shall not be
construed so as to apply to:
         (a)   Any electrician who performs electrical work with respect to any
property owned or rented by him or her;
         (b)   Any electrician who performs electrical work at any
manufacturing plant or other industrial establishment as an employee of the
person operating such plant or establishment;
         (c)   Any electrician who, while employed by a person engaged in the
business of selling appliances at retail, performs electrical work with respect
to installation and repair of appliances as part of his or her regular duties;
         (d)   Any electrician who, while employed by a public utility or any
of its affiliates, performs electrical work in connection with the furnishing
of public utility service; or
         (e)   Any electrician who, while employed as a member of a permanent
maintenance staff of an institution or business enterprise, as part of his or
her regular duties performs electrical work with respect to property owned by
his or her employer.
   (C)   No electrician holding an unexpired certificate of competency shall be
required to obtain any type of municipal electrician’ s license as a condition
precedent to performing electrical work within the city or pay any license fee
therefor.
   (D)   Every person or corporation who shall apply for a building permit for
the construction, repair or alteration of any structure within the city, which
construction, repair or alteration shall include electrical work as defined
herein, shall describe the nature of the electrical work to be performed, shall
provide the name of the electrician who shall perform it, and, if applicable,
shall provide evidence that such electrician holds an unexpired certificate of
competency for the level of electrical work to be performed. Compliance with
this section, if applicable, shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of
such building permit.
(1991 Code, § 5-28) (Ord. passed 8-18-1978; Ord. passed 7-19-1979) Penalty, see
§
150.999
RENTAL HOUSING
 § 150.125 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote health and safety standards for
rental housing and to secure and preserve the integrity and character of
residential districts within the city. These standards relate to the condition,
maintenance and occupancy of rental dwelling units and are intended to ensure
that rental housing is safe, sanitary and suitable in accordance with
applicable provisions of the International Building Code and other regulations
as adopted by the city.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.126 SCOPE.
   (A)   This subchapter applies to all rental dwelling units within the city.
This subchapter shall not apply to owner occupied dwellings wherein roomers or
boarders are maintained in common living areas in accordance with other
applicable codes and ordinances. This subchapter shall not apply to hotels,
motels, dormitories, lodging and boarding houses and other transient
residential occupancies. Buildings housing business or commercial uses in
addition to rental dwelling units shall be subject to the provisions of the
State Building Code which apply to such mixed uses.
   (B)   Where a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued, in
accordance with the International Building Code for any building that has been
erected, altered or converted to a residential use, said dwelling shall not be
subject to reinspection for the purpose of this subchapter for rental
registration for three years following the date of issuance.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.127 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY. The certificate issued by the Code
Official which permits the use of a building and which certifies compliance
with the provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the building in its
several parts together with any special stipulations or conditions.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with the
administration and enforcement of the Building Code of the city, or a duly
authorized, licensed, bonded and certified representative appointed by the CODE
OFFICIAL to temporarily serve in that role.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
   OWNER OCCUPIED. Occupied by the actual property owner or by any person or
persons related thereto by blood, marriage or adoption and where no
remuneration is received.
   RENTAL DWELLING UNIT. Any dwelling unit which is offered in whole or part
for residential purposes and for which remuneration is received.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.128 ILLEGAL CONDITIONS.
   An owner or operator shall not rent or offer for rent any dwelling unit for
use in whole or in part for human habitation unless a written application for a
certificate of use and occupancy has been filed for said dwelling unit or a
valid certificate of use and occupancy has been issued for said dwelling unit
by the Code Official indicating that inspection found the premises to be in
substantial compliance with the International Building Code.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.129 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY.
   Application for a certificate of use and occupancy shall be submitted in
writing, on forms provided, to the Code Official and shall contain at least the
following information:
   (A)   For the dwelling:
      (1)   The address(es) of the dwelling units;
      (2)   The zoning district of the dwelling;
      (3)   The number of units in the dwelling;
      (4)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners, agent or
operator, and any other person to be notified in case of emergency or
nonconforming condition requiring notification; and
      (5)   Any other uses within the building.
   (B)   For each dwelling unit:
      (1)   The story on which the unit is;
      (2)   Maximum occupancy;
      (3)   Number of off-street parking; and
      (4)   Dwelling unit identification number.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.130 FILING DEADLINES.
   (A)   Initial application. Application for a certificate of use and
occupancy for a rental dwelling unit where none has previously been issued
shall be in accordance with §
150.129.
   (B)   Renewal application. An application for renewal of the existing
certificate of use and occupancy shall be filed at least 30 days before the
expiration date of the existing certificate of use and occupancy. Upon
receiving an application for renewal of the certificate and use and occupancy,
the Code Official shall inspect the dwelling and shall reissue a certificate of
use and occupancy within ten days following inspection if said unit is found to
be in substantial compliance with the State Building Code.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.131 FEES AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Each property owner shall be charged a compliance inspection fee of an
amount set forth by Council from time to time per inspection per unit. If the
property is a multi-unit building, there shall be a maximum fee of an amount
set forth by Council from time to time charged for the compliance inspection
for that building, regardless of the number of units.
   (B)   Property owners missing scheduled inspections and failing to provide
24-hours’ notice shall be charged an additional fee in an amount set forth by
Council from time to time.
   (C)   All inspections shall be scheduled during regular business hours,
unless otherwise approved by the Code Official.
   (D)   Real estate pre-sale inspection fees of an amount set forth by Council
from time to time per man-hour with a one-hour minimum charge shall be assessed
where an inspection is requested to determine if a rental property is in
compliance with the State Building Code.
   (E)   Preparation and issuance of a duplicate certificate of use and
occupancy shall require a service charge in an amount set forth by Council from
time to time.
   (F)   Re-inspection fees of an amount set forth by Council from time to time
per unit shall be charged to the property owner for each inspection of property
requiring more than two inspections for compliance.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.132 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The Code Official shall inspect within six years of the
effective date of this subchapter all rental dwelling units constructed prior
to adoption of this chapter.
      (2)   The owner or authorized representative or agent, for purposes of
inspection under rental registration, shall provide the Code Official access to
all areas of any building containing rental dwelling units and the code shall
be accompanied by the owner or an agent of the owner during inspection.
   (B)   (1)   The housing authority of the city, Gateway Apartments and any
Section 8 of the Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. § 1437f) housing are exempt
from this subchapter to the extent it is responsible for its own inspections.
      (2)   However, the housing authority of the city, Gateway Apartments and
any Section 8 of the Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. § 1437f) housing must
provide the Code Official with the results of inspections performed by it
immediately after inspections are completed.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.133 CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY, DISPLAY, TRANSFER, EXPIRATION.
   (A)   If, upon inspection, the rental dwelling unit is found to conform to
the requirements of this subchapter, the Code Official shall issue a
certificate of use and occupancy within ten days.
   (B)   After the effective date of this subchapter, either upon an initial
application or a renewal application, a three-year certificate of use and
occupancy shall be issued for the dwelling unit after the Code Official finds
the unit in substantial compliance with this subchapter and the State Building
Code which has been adopted by the city.
   (C)   The certificate of use and occupancy shall be transferable to
subsequent owners of the respective dwelling unit(s).
   (D)   A copy of the certificate of use and occupancy shall be available for
inspection at the city code enforcement office during regular business hours.
   (E)   Certificates of use and occupancy issued after the effective date of
this subchapter shall expire three years from the date of issuance by the Code
Official unless sooner revoked.
   (F)   The owner/agent shall post a copy of the certificate of use and
occupancy in a conspicuous location in the interior of the premises or near the
interior electrical fuse or circuit box of each dwelling unit.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.134 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   (1)   When in the course of the inspection required under this
subchapter, violations are discovered on the premises which do not affect the
habitability or safety of a rental dwelling, such violations shall be cited in
accordance with the administrative provisions of the applicable code or
ordinance.
      (2)   Such violations shall not be construed as grounds to withhold or
revoke the certificate of use and occupancy.
   (B)   (1)   Where conditions exist which affect the habitability of the
dwelling but which do not pose an imminent hazard to the occupants, a
certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued along with a notice of
violation.
      (2)   The notice of violation shall be in writing, shall be served to the
owner or agent, shall contain a description of the property sufficient for
identification, and shall include:
         (a)   A statement of the reasonable time for which it was issued;
         (b)   A correction order specifying repairs to be made;
         (c)   A reasonable time not to exceed 60 days following the issuance
of the notice of violation in which repairs are to be completed; and
         (d)   A statement of the owners right of appeal.
      (3)   The owner shall, within the time period specified in the notice of
violation, correct all deficiencies cited in violation of the International
Building Code and city codes. The certificate of use and occupancy shall be
revoked and a notice to vacate issued if the dwelling unit is not in compliance
within the time specified in the notice of violation. However, the Code
Official may, upon written request, extend the period for compliance where the
work has been delayed despite good-faith efforts to comply and where such
extension presents no immediate threat to the health or safety of the occupants
of the dwelling unit or other units or properties. A notice of violation shall
not be construed to verify substandard housing except where conditions exist
which require the vacation of the dwelling or dwelling unit.
   (C)   (1)   Where violations are found which, in the judgment of the Code
Official, are sufficient to withhold or revoke the certificate of use and
occupancy, the Code Official shall issue a notice to vacate.
      (2)   The notice to vacate shall:
         (a)   Be in writing;
         (b)   Be served to the owner or owner’s agent;
         (c)   Contain a description of the property sufficient for
identification;
         (d)   State the reasons therefor;
         (e)   Include a copy of any relevant notice of violation; and
         (f)   Include notification of the owners right of appeal.
   (D)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the Code
Official from ordering the immediate vacation of any dwelling or dwelling unit
where violations are discovered which pose an imminent threat to the health or
safety of the occupants. Appeal shall not stay an order to vacate under such
conditions.
   (E)   Occupancy of any rental dwelling unit in violation of a notice to
vacate shall subject the owner/agent and/or the occupants to the penalties
prescribed in §
150.999.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.135 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   (A)   (1)   Any property owner or agent shall have the right to appeal to
the Board of Zoning Appeals from a decision of the Code Official where it is
alleged that the intent of this subchapter or the codes referenced herein have
been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this subchapter do not fully
apply, or an equivalent remedy to any violation may be employed.
      (2)   Such appeal shall be submitted to the Code Official within 20 days
of receipt of the notice of violation. Except where conditions warrant
immediate vacation of the dwelling, such appeal shall stay all action on the
part of the code official in furtherance of the notice of violation from which
the appeal was taken.
   (B)   Where a violation of the City Building Code is cited in a notice of
violation, appeal shall be to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.136 APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS.
   This subchapter is not intended to abrogate any of the rights and
responsibilities normally ascribed to the tenant or the landlord under the laws
of the state whether set out by case law or by the West Virginia Code, or any
other applicable laws.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.137 WAIVERABILITY.
   The minimum requirement of this subchapter may not be waived either
intentionally or impliedly by either party to a rental agreement.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 150.138 APPLICABILITY OF OTHER CODES AND ORDINANCES.
   This subchapter is in addition to all housing requirements of other city
ordinances and the laws of the state, as the case may be.
(Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013)
VACANT STRUCTURES
§ 150.150 ADOPTION.
   There is hereby adopted a Vacant Structure Code for the city.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.151 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The city has determined that an uninspected and unmonitored vacant
building may present a fire hazard, may provide temporary occupancy by
transients (including drug users and traffickers), may detract from private
and/or public efforts to rehabilitate or maintain surrounding buildings, and
that the health, safety and welfare of the public is served by the regulation
of such vacant buildings.
   (B)   Owners of uninspected and unmonitored vacant buildings shall register
such vacant buildings with the city, make payment of a fee for the registration
thereof, and otherwise conform to these vacant building regulations.
   (C)   This subchapter ensures that, through a registration, inspection and
monitoring process, vacant buildings will be kept weather-tight and secure from
trespassers, will provide safe entry to police officers and firefighters in
times of emergency, will not impede private and/or public efforts to
rehabilitate or maintain surrounding buildings and will not present otherwise a
public hazard.
   (D)   The city, by and through its departments, shall inspect and monitor
vacant buildings, shall assess the effects of the condition of those buildings
on nearby structures, and shall promote substantial efforts to rehabilitate and
develop such buildings when appropriate.
   (E)   These provisions will streamline and consolidate the existing
procedure (that is, complaint, research, notification, inspection, orders,
fines, liens, appeals and due process lien enforcement), by placing the
responsibility to register and maintain vacant structures on the building owner
before a building’s condition falls into disrepair or otherwise merits a
complaint.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.152 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BOARDED. A building or structure subject to the provision of this section
shall be deemed to be BOARDED if in place of one or more exterior doors, other
than a storm door, or of one or more windows, there is a sheet or sheets of
plywood or similar material covering the space for such door or window.
      EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE AND MAJOR SYSTEMS. The safe and lawful maintenance
of the facade, windows, doors, roof and other parts of the exterior of the
building and the maintenance of its major systems consisting of the roof, the
electrical and plumbing systems, the water supply system, the sewer system, and
the sidewalk, driveway, if any, area of the lot, as applicable and as enforced
by the Code Enforcement Officer, particularly in connection with codes adopted
by the city as well as all applicable local, state and federal laws.
      OCCUPIED. Any building or structure shall be deemed to be OCCUPIED if one
or more persons actually conducts a lawful business or resides in all or any
part of the building as the licensed business occupant, or as the legal or
equitable owner/occupant(s) or tenant(s) on a permanent, non-transient basis,
or any combination of the same. For purposes of this section, evidence offered
to prove that a building is so OCCUPIED may include, but shall not be limited
to: the regular receipt of delivery of regular mail through the U.S. Postal
Service; proof of continual telephone, electric, gas, heating, water and sewer
services; a valid city business license, or the most recent, federal, state or
city income tax statements indicating that the subject property is the official
business or residence address of the person or business claiming occupancy; or
proof of bona fide pre-rental inspection.
      OPEN. A building or structure subject to the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to be OPEN if any one or more exterior doors other than a storm
door is broken, open and/or closed but, without a properly functioning lock to
secure it, or if one or more windows is broken or not capable of being locked
and secured from intrusion, or any combination of the same.
      OWNER. An owner of the freehold of the premises or any lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee, a vendee-in-possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm or corporation that
is directly or indirectly in control of a building subject to the provisions of
this subchapter, and as set forth herein.
      VACANT. A building or structure shall be deemed to be VACANT if no person
or persons actually, currently conducts a lawfully licensed business, or
lawfully resides, dwells or lives in any part of the building as the legal or
equitable owner(s) or tenant-occupant(s), or owner-occupant(s), or tenant(s) on
a permanent, non-transient basis. A building or structure shall be deemed
VACANT and subject to the registration and possible penalty provisions provided
herein if the exterior maintenance and major systems of the building and the
surrounding real property thereof, as defined in this section, are in violation
of the Building Codes or Health and Sanitation Codes and if there is not proof
of continual utility service evidencing actual use of electric, gas (i.e.,
applicable heating sources), water service and the like. CONTINUED is meant to
be without more than one 30-day interruption in any given 360-day period. In
order for such continual utility service to be considered as being actually in
use as described in this section, it must be more than merely registered to the
owner for purposes of billing and must be utilized, at a minimum, in order to
keep the property and the major systems of the building in compliance with
Building and Safety Codes. The person or entity asserting that there has been
continued utility service has the burden to produce actual bills evidencing
utility service for the relevant period.
   (B)   Criteria. All vacant structures shall also comply with the following
criteria.
      (1)   Exterior property areas are to be mowed regularly and non-
cultivated gardens maintained at no more than 17 inches of growth. All noxious
weeds are prohibited.
      (2)   Structure is to be broom swept and cleared of all contents, not
including building materials or components to be used in the future renovation
at that structure.
      (3)   Unstable interior and exterior surfaces and components are to be
removed. Unstable or unsound accessory buildings are to be razed or renovated.
      (4)   Using wood sheet goods, all loose, deteriorated and broken windows
and doors are to be covered to eliminate the danger of their falling and to
prevent the unwanted entry of trespassers. Such wood sheet goods are to be cut
and neatly fit, not just nailed over the opening.
      (5)   All loose or deteriorated trim, gutter or overhang extensions
(masonry or frame) are to be removed or reattached to prevent falling.
      (6)   Regular routine monitoring of the structure is to occur by the
owner to ensure that the building is being kept in compliance with the above
items.
      (7)   Utilities need to be connected to the structure.
   (C)   Applicability.
      (1)   The requirements of this section shall be applicable to each owner
of any building that is found to be vacant pursuant to the language contained
herein. Each such owner shall cause to be filed a notarized registration
statement, which shall include the street address and parcel number of each
such vacant building, the names and addresses of all owners, as hereinafter
described, and any other information deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement
Officer. The registration fee(s) as required by this section shall be billed by
the city and shall be paid by last day of the month when the property has been
registered.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, the following shall also be
applicable:
         (a)   If the owner is a corporation, the registration statement shall
provide the names and residence addresses of all officers and directors of the
corporation and shall be accompanied by a copy of the most recent annual
franchise tax report filed with the Secretary of State;
         (b)   If an estate, the name and business address of the executor of
the estate;
         (c)   If a trust, the name and address of all trustees, grantors and
beneficiaries;
         (d)   If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of all
partners with an interest of 10% or greater;
         (e)   If any other form of unincorporated association, the names and
residence addresses of all principals with an interest of 10% or greater; and
         (f)   If an individual person, the name and residence address of that
individual person.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.153 INSPECTION.
   At the time of registration, the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement
Officer, Fire Chief and Police Chief shall determine whether it is necessary
for any or all of them to inspect the structure so as to identify any public
safety issues needing addressed. Inspections shall also be available to verify
the status of any property concerning occupancy, vacancy and the like. If an
internal inspection is deemed necessary, the owner will be notified of the same
and arrangements made for the same. If the owner fails or refuses to consent to
and arrange for an inspection, the city will seek an administrative search
warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction, which shall include the
Municipal Court, to authorize inspection of the premises for the purpose of
determining the structural integrity of the building, the repairs necessary to
ensure its structural integrity and that it will be safe for entry by
firefighters and police officers in time of emergency, and that the build in
and its contents do not present a hazard to the public during the time that the
building remains vacant.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.154 CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   The property owners shall be notified in writing of any corrective action
deemed necessary for Life, Safety and Building Code matters by city officials,
the applicable code provisions or regulations, and will be afforded a
reasonable time to the corrective action. Corrective action concerning the
occupancy of vacant structures is discussed later herein.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.155 REGISTRATION GENERALLY.
   (A)   Generally. At the time of adoption of this subchapter, all owners of
realty within the city that contain a vacant structure, as defined above, shall
register the same with the office of code enforcement of the city. For those
structures that qualify as a vacant structure and after the adoption of this
subchapter, the owner thereof shall be required to register the structure with
the code enforcement office within 30 days after the structure is found to meet
the definition of a vacant structure. The registration form shall require
information from the registrant deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement
Officer, Building Inspector, Fire Chief and Police Chief of the city, so as to
ensure that the purpose of this subchapter is met. Specifically, the above-
named city officers shall have the authority to require that the property owner
provide a professional opinion (architect, engineer and the like) to determine
the structural integrity of the building, the repairs necessary to ensure its
structural integrity and that it will be safe for entry by firefighters and
police officers in time of emergency, and that the building and its contents do
not present a hazard to the public during the time the building remains vacant.
The above- named officers shall have the authority to issue orders to the owner
for corrective action deemed necessary. The Building Inspector and Fire Chief
shall rely upon the State Building Code and Fire Code, as well as other
applicable law, for guidance during any such structural review.
   (B)   Registration statement and fees; local agent.
      (1)   If none of the persons listed, as above, is shown at an address
within the state, the registration statement also shall provide the name and
address of a person who resides within the state and who is authorized to
accept service of process on behalf of the owners and who shall be designated
as a responsible, local party or agent, both for purposes of notification in
the event of an emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare and
for purposes of service of any and all notices or registration statements as
herein authorized and in connection herewith. Registration shall be required
for all vacant buildings, whether vacant and secure, vacant and open or vacant
and boarded, and shall be required whenever any building has remained vacant
for 45 consecutive days or more. In no instance shall the registration of a
vacant building and the payment of registration fees be construed to exonerate
the owner, agent or responsible party for compliance with any other Building
Code or Housing Code requirement. One registration statement may be filed to
include all vacant buildings of the owner so registering, but each structure
constitutes a separate fee. The owner of the vacant property as of the last day
of the month when the property has been registered of each calendar year shall
be responsible for the payment of the non-refundable registration fee.
      (2)   Said fee shall be billed by the city; and based on the duration of
the vacancy as determined by the following scale:
         (a)   No fee for properties that are vacant for less than one year;
         (b)   Two hundred dollars for properties that are vacant for at least
one year but less than two years;
         (c)   Four hundred dollars for properties that are vacant for at least
two years but less than three years;
         (d)   Six hundred dollars for properties that are vacant for at least
three years but less than four years;
         (e)   Eight hundred dollars for properties that are vacant for at
least four years but less than five years; and
         (f)   One thousand six hundred dollars for properties that are vacant
for at least five years, plus an additional $300 for each year in excess of
five years.
   (C)   Failure to register. If the owner fails to register the building, the
Code Enforcement Officer may register the building as herein. Upon registration
by the Code Enforcement Officer, the owner shall be notified of the
registration and billed by the city, if applicable and at the appropriate rate.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.156 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   (A)   Appeal rights. The owner shall have the right to appeal the imposition
of the registration fees to the Code Enforcement Officer upon filing an
application in writing to that Department no later than 15 calendar days after
the date of the billing statement. On appeal, the owner shall bear the burden
of providing satisfactory objective proof of occupancy as defined in this
subchapter specifically.
   (B)   One-time waiver of registration fee. A one-time waiver of the
registration fee, or an extension of a waiver for up to 90 days from the date
of the current billing statement, may be granted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or his or her designee upon application of the owner and upon review
and advice of the Building Inspector; if the owner:
      (1)   Demonstrates with satisfactory proof to the Code Enforcement
Officer or his or her designee that he or she is in the process of demolition,
rehabilitation or other substantial repair of the vacant building;
      (2)   Objectively demonstrates to the Code Enforcement Officer or his or
her designee a reasonable anticipated length of time for the demolition,
rehabilitation or other substantial repair of the vacant building;
      (3)   Provides satisfactory proof to the Code Enforcement Officer or his
or her designee that he or she was actively attempting to sell or lease the
property during the vacancy period; or
      (4)   Provides satisfactory proof to the Code Enforcement Officer, to be
evaluated on a case-by-case basis, that the vacancy is temporary and may be due
to illness of the owner, active military service, or some other reasonable
explanation believed to be short term in nature and documentable as necessary.
   (C)   Within 30 days, or as soon thereafter as possible, after the waiver
application is received, the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designee
shall grant or deny the waiver, or request for extension, in writing, and
dispatch the written decision by mail to the owner. If the owner properly
submitted an application for a one-time waiver or request for extension to the
Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designee, and the Code Enforcement
Officer or his or her designee rendered a decision which the owner seeks to
appeal to the Council, the owner must file an application in writing no later
than 30 calendar days from the date of the Code Enforcement Officer or his or
her designee’s decision. Council shall either grant or deny the appeal.
Thereafter, the decision of Council is final unless within 30 days of such
decision the owner appeals for injunctive relief to the Circuit Court of the
county.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.157 AMENDING INFORMATION.
   (A)   Duty to amend registration statement. If the status of the
registration information changes during the course of any calendar year, it is
the responsibility of the owner, responsible party or agent for the same to
contact the Department of Licenses and Inspections with 30 days of the
occurrence of such change and advise the Department in writing of those
changes.
   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to any building owned by the
United States, the state, the city or any of their respective agencies or
political subdivisions.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.158 REINSPECTION.
   All vacant structures are subject to reinspection on an annual basis or as
deemed necessary pursuant to §
150.153.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.159 NONPAYMENT OF FEES/LIENS.
   (A)   Delinquent registration fees as a lien. After the owner is given
notice of the amount of the registration fee due, except for those owners that
have properly perfected an appeal pursuant to §
150.156, and the owner fails to pay the amount due, said amount shall
constitute a debt due and owing to the city and the city may commence a civil
action to collect such unpaid debt.
   (B)   Lien or liens, as used in this section, shall arise whenever the fees
and charges as described in this section are levied or imposed.
   (C)   If an owner fails to pay the registration fee as assessed and the city
begins the collection action to enforce its lien, then the Code Enforcement
Officer shall post the written notice on the property and send the written
notice to the owner(s) by certified and regular mail.
   (D)   (1)   The city may take action to sell the subject property by means
of forfeiture and the court ordered enforcement process to collect the debt
owed the city. Should the city take the steps necessary to sell the subject
property, the city shall do so, subject to all liens and real and personal
property taxes that are due.
      (2)   Purchasers of the subject property shall be similarly responsible
for registration pursuant to this section in the same manner as the prior owner
and must begin the registration process anew if said property remains vacant.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
§ 150.160 RELATION TO OTHER CODES AND LAWS.
   It is to be understood that the intent and purpose of this subchapter are
separate and distinct from other parts and sections of the codified ordinances
of the city and the general laws of the state which may also be applicable. The
provisions of this subchapter are applicable to the owners of such vacant
buildings as set forth herein and are in addition to and not in lieu of any and
all other applicable provisions of this chapter, the Health and Sanitation
Code, and any other applicable provisions of the city’s municipal code.
(Ord. 131, passed 9-1-2011; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
UNSAFE STRUCTURES
§ 150.175 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter provides a process for the identification, inspection,
correction and removal of unsafe structures within the city in a manner that
ensures adequate notice to the owners of such structures while protecting the
public from danger due to unsafe or unsanitary conditions.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.176 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. The City of Elkins Code Enforcement Department, a
code enforcement department as defined by Title 87 West Virginia Code of State
Rules Section 7-2, as it may be amended.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OFFICIAL. Any lawful agent of the Code Enforcement
Agency.
   OWNER or LANDOWNER. A person who individually or jointly with others:
      (1)   Has legal title to the property, with or without actual possession
of the property;
      (2)   Has charge, care or control of the property as owner or agent of
the owner;
      (3)   Is an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the owner;
      (4)   Is the agent of the owner for the purpose of managing, controlling
or collecting rents; or
      (5)   May control or direct the management or disposition of the
property.
   UNSAFE, UNSANITARY, DANGEROUS OR DETRIMENTAL TO THE PUBLIC SAFETY OR
WELFARE.
      (1)   Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of
egress that does not conform to the approved Building or Fire Code of the city
as related to the requirements for existing buildings;
      (2)   The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or
other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to
not provide safe and adequate means of egress;
      (3)   Any portion of a dwelling, building, structure or appurtenance that
has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect,
abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to an extent that it is likely to
partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged;
      (4)   Any portion of a dwelling, structure or building, or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior that is not of sufficient
strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so
as to be capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of one and one-half
the original designed value;
      (5)   The dwelling, building or structure, or part of the building or
structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction,
the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the
support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely
collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or
structure is likely to fail or give way;
      (6)   The dwelling, building or structure, or any portion, is clearly
unsafe for its use;
      (7)   The dwelling, building or structure is neglected, damaged,
dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to
children, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals, criminal activity or
enables persons to resort to the dwelling, building or structure for committing
a nuisance or an unlawful act;
      (8)   Any dwelling, building or structure constructed, exists or
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to any dwelling, building or structure provided by the approved Building or
Fire Code of the city or of any law or ordinance that presents either a
substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and
safety;
      (9)   A dwelling, building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
contamination by any hazardous substance or material including, but not limited
to, substance resulting from the illegal manufacture of drugs, damage, faulty
construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or
plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the Code Enforcement Agency to
be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely
to cause sickness or disease;
      (10)   Any dwelling, building or structure, because of a lack of
sufficient or proper fire resistance-rated construction, fire protection
systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing
system or other cause, is determined by the Code Enforcement Agency Official to
be a threat to life or health; or
      (11)   Any portion of a building or structure that remains on a site
after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or whenever
any building or structure is abandoned.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.177 CLOSING AND REMOVAL OF UNSAFE STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Agency may order the repair, alteration,
improvement, closing, demolition or removal of any dwelling, building or
structure that is determined by a Code Enforcement Agency Official to be
unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this subchapter.
   (B)   In order to make a determination regarding the classification of a
structure as unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety
or welfare pursuant to this subchapter, and to determine and enforce the
appropriate remedy for any such structure, Code Enforcement Agency Officials
shall be entitled to make inspections, perform investigations, obtain search
warrants, issue notices, require corrective measures, present complaints to the
Municipal Judge, and exercise all other powers and duties authorized by W.Va.
Code § 8-12-16, as it may be amended.
   (C)   The powers and duties granted in this subchapter are in addition to
those otherwise granted by law and shall not be construed to limit any other
lawful powers of the city, including the power of Code Enforcement Agency
Officials to interpret and enforce the Building Code of the city.
   (D)   This subchapter shall be construed broadly so as to promote the
purpose of efficiently removing dangerous conditions that are harmful to the
community.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.178 INSPECTION.
   For purposes of inspections performed pursuant to this subchapter, the
following rules shall apply.
   (A)   When a Code Enforcement Agency Official enters the premises of the
property for investigating or inspecting any structure, dwelling or building,
the investigation shall be conducted in a way that minimizes the inconvenience
to the owner or persons in possession.
   (B)   Except in exigent circumstances and as permitted by law, the Code
Enforcement Agency shall provide reasonable advance notice of the inspection to
the owner and request permission from the owner to enter the property.
   (C)   If the owner cannot be located after reasonable inquiry by the Code
Enforcement Agency, or if the owner refuses entry, the Code Enforcement Agency
may obtain an administrative search warrant from either the Municipal Court or
the County Magistrate Court. Before obtaining an administrative search warrant,
a Code Enforcement Agency Official is required to make a sworn statement and
prima facie case showing that the Code Enforcement Agency was unable to gain
access to the structure, dwelling or building after reasonable and good faith
efforts, and that there is a legitimate and substantial safety concern
involving the structure, dwelling or building that supports the requested
entry.
   (D)   (1)   If the administrative search warrant is granted by the court,
and if the owner can be located, the Code Enforcement Agency shall provide the
owner a copy of the administrative search warrant five days before entering the
property.
      (2)   If there is a tenant or other person in possession of the structure
who is not the owner, and if such person(s) can be located, the Code
Enforcement Agency shall also provide such person(s) a copy of the
administrative search warrant five days before entering the property.
   (E)   Any entry pursuant to this section shall be made for the sole purpose
of inspection of the structure, dwelling or building for unsafe or unsanitary
conditions and not for the purpose of criminal prosecution or gathering
evidence for use in any criminal charge or proceeding unrelated to the unsafe
or unsanitary condition of the structure, dwelling or building.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.179 CORRECTION OF UNSAFE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Upon a determination by the Code Enforcement Agency that a dwelling,
structure or building is unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the
public safety or welfare, the city may take corrective action by causing it to
be vacated, closed, removed or demolished, either directly or by the use of
third party agents, without either the agreement of the owner or a court order,
pursuant to the following conditions:
      (1)   The Code Enforcement Agency undertakes reasonable efforts to seek
agreement from the owner;
      (2)   The corrective action may only be taken as to a dwelling, structure
or building that is either:
         (a)   Defined in divisions (3), (5) or (8) of the definition for
unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare in
§
150.176; or
         (b) Defined in divisions (6), (7), (9) or (11) of the definition for
unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare in
§
150.176; and
            1.   Is vacant, abandoned or has been lawfully declared unfit for
human habitation; and
            2.   The reasonable estimated cost of repair, rehabilitation or
corrective action exceeds the fair market value of the dwelling, building or
structure.
      (3)   Prior to undertaking the correction, the city will meet the
following procedural requirements:
         (a)   The Code Enforcement Agency shall produce a written notice
containing a description of the real estate sufficient for identification, the
date of the last inspection, the name of the inspector, a reasonable
description of the unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental condition(s),
the corrective measures required, the allotted time to correct the substandard
condition(s), a statement of the city’s right to file a lien, a statement of
the right to appeal to Board of Appeals under the State Building Code and the
allotted time the owner has to apply to the Circuit Court for a temporary
injunction or other similar relief restraining action by the enforcement
agency.
         (b)   The notice shall be served upon the owner or landowner by
conspicuously posting and attaching a copy of the notice to the subject
property, and by serving the notice on the owner or landowner in the same
manner as service of a complaint as set forth in §
150.183.
         (c)   If the Code Enforcement Agency cannot effect personal service on
the owner, a Code Enforcement Agency Official shall subscribe a written
affidavit, to be maintained for a minimum of two years, that demonstrates the
structure, dwelling or building falls within one of the categories set forth in
divisions (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) above and sets forth the basis in reasonable
detail including documentation of same, and memorializes the Code Enforcement
Agency Official’s efforts to contact or get permission for entry and corrective
action from the owner; and the Code Enforcement Agency shall publish notice of
its intent to enter the property for the purpose of demolition or correction,
along with the address of the property, the name of the owner(s), and the date
of the proposed action, as a Class II legal advertisement consistent with the
requirements of W.Va. Code § 59-3-2, the first of which shall run at least 30
days before the date of the proposed action by the Code Enforcement Agency, and
the last being no later than 20 days before the date of the proposed action by
the enforcement agency
      (4)   If there is no response to the notice by the owner or landowner in
the time specified in the notice, then the city shall have the authority to
proceed in correction or demolition of the subject dwelling, building or
structure.
   (B)   It shall be an absolute defense to any civil action by an owner,
landowner or tenant for damages resulting from the closure, demolition or other
corrective action taken by the city under this section that the city followed
the procedures set forth herein; provided, that the city acted in good faith,
can demonstrate that the structure, dwelling or building falls within one of
the categories set forth in divisions (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) above, followed
the procedures set forth in this section, and had adopted the State Building
Code at the time the closure, demolition or other corrective action occurred.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.180 RELIEF FROM ORDER FOR CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   (A)   The owner of property subject to corrective action shall be given
notice of the right to apply to the Circuit Court of the county for a temporary
injunction or other similar relief restraining correction or demolition by the
city. Such notice shall be provided in the written notice produced pursuant to
§
150.179(A)(3)(a).
   (B)   If an application for relief is made by the owner to the Circuit
Court, a hearing shall be had within 20 days of the application, or as soon as
reasonably possible.
   (C)   Continuances of the hearing provided for in this section may be made
for cause only. If a continuance is granted upon request by the owner, the
owner is required to pay into court, in the form of a bond, any reasonable and
necessary costs related to the property likely to be incurred by the
municipality during the continuance. This requirement for security is in
addition to any other bond required or authorized by the West Virginia Rules of
Civil Procedure or other applicable law.
   (D)   At the conclusion of a hearing held under this division (D), if the
court finds that the structure, dwelling or building is unsafe, unsanitary,
dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare, the court shall make
and enter an order granting the relief as requested by the city. The court may
disburse any moneys paid into court by the owner in accordance with this
section.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.181 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS.
   (A)   The owner of any structure, dwelling or building under determination
of the State Fire Marshal, as provided in W.Va. Code § 29-3-12, or under order
of the Code Enforcement Agency of the city, shall be required to pay for the
costs of repairing, altering, improving, vacating, closing, removing or
demolishing any dwelling or building.
   (B)   In addition to any other rights provided by law, the city may file a
lien against the real property in question for an amount that reflects all
costs incurred by the city for repairing, altering, improving, vacating,
closing, removing or demolishing any dwelling or building.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.182 CIVIL ACTION FOR CORRECTIVE ACTION AND RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   (A)   In addition to any other rights provided by law, the city may also
institute a civil action in Circuit Court against the landowner or other
responsible party to get an order to take corrective action up to and including
demolition of any structure, dwelling or building that is unsafe, unsanitary,
dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare; and to recover all
reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city with respect to the property
and for reasonable attorney fees and court costs incurred in the prosecution of
the action.
   (B)   No fewer than ten days before instituting a civil action as provided
in this section, the city shall send notice to the landowner by certified mail,
return receipt requested, advising the landowner of the governing body’s
intention to institute such action.
   (C)   The notice shall be sent to the most recent address of the landowner
of record in the office of the County Assessor and to any other address for the
landowner as may exist on record with the city. If, for any reason, such
certified mail is returned without evidence of proper receipt, the municipality
shall resend the notice(s) by first class mail, postage prepaid, and shall also
post notice on the front door or other conspicuous location on the subject
property.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
§ 150.183 NOTICES.
   (A)   To the extent not otherwise authorized by state law, all notices of
violation or correction for violations that do not fall within one of the
categories set forth in §
150.179(A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) shall be served in accordance with the process
set forth in the State Building Code.
   (B)   (1)   Any violation of this subchapter may be prosecuted by the
municipality consistent with state and local laws. Unless otherwise authorized
by state law, prosecution of a violation shall be initiated by a complaint
presented to and sworn or affirmed before a Municipal Judge or other municipal
official with lawful authority to hear and determine violations of municipal
code in the municipality where the offense is alleged to have occurred. Unless
otherwise provided by statute, the presentation and oath or affirmation shall
be made by a Code Enforcement Agency Official or City Attorney showing reason
to have reliable information and belief. If from the facts stated in the
complaint the Municipal Judge or other municipal official with lawful authority
to hear and determine violations of municipal code finds probable cause, the
complaint becomes the charging instrument initiating a criminal proceeding. A
complaint lawfully authorized by this division (B) along with a summons setting
forth the date, time and place of appearance before a Municipal Judge and or
other municipal official with lawful authority to hear and determine violations
of municipal code shall be served in accordance with the law of the state
concerning the service of process in civil actions, except that personal
service of a summons and complaint may be made by a Code Enforcement Agency
Official.
      (2)   (a)   If service is made by certified mail under Rule 4(d)(1)(D) of
the West Virginia Rules of Civil Procedure and delivery of the summons and
complaint is refused, the Code Enforcement Agency Official, promptly upon the
receipt of the notice of the refusal, shall mail to the person or entity being
noticed, by first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy of the summons and
complaint.
         (b)   If the first class mailing is not returned as undeliverable by
the U.S. Postal Service, service of the summons and complaint is presumed to
have been effectuated. Upon service of the summons and complaint consistent
with this division (B), the violation may be prosecuted consistent with state
and local law.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-7-2018)
MEANS OF APPEAL
§ 150.195 PURPOSE.
   Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official, as the term
has been defined in the city code, or a notice or order issued pursuant to this
Chapter 150, shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals, as herein
set forth. The basis for an application for appeal under this subchapter shall
be based on a claim that the true intent of the city’s Building Code has been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the Code do not fully apply, or the
requirements of the Code are adequately satisfied by other means.
(Ord. 100, passed - -2009)
§ 150.196 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Membership of Board. The Board of Appeals shall consist of three
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters
pertaining to property maintenance and who are not employees of the city. The
Code Official shall be an ex officio member but shall have no vote on any
matter before the Board. The Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and the
Board members shall serve staggered and overlapping terms. After the
appointment of the founding members of the Board of Appeals, all appointments
shall be for a term of one year beginning on April 1 of the year of the
appointment. Any member of the Board of Appeals who has either a total of five
absences or three consecutive absences for meetings of the Board which are not
resulting from illness shall be removed from office upon the affirmative action
of the Chairperson of the Board and after approval of such removal by the
Mayor. The Mayor shall then appoint an alternate member as a replacement to
serve the remainder of the existing term and duly appoint a new alternate
member pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   Alternate members. The Mayor shall appoint two alternate members who
shall be called by the Board Chairperson to hear appeals during the absence or
disqualification of a member. Alternative members shall possess the
qualifications required for Board membership.
   (C)   Chairperson. At its first meeting of each year, the Board shall
appoint one of its members to serve as Chairperson.
   (D)   Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which
that member has personal, professional or financial interest. If a member does
have such interest, said member shall notify the Board Chairperson immediately
and the Board Chairperson shall call upon an alternate member to serve in the
place of the disqualified member.
   (E)   Compensation. Compensation of members shall be determined by law and
agreed upon by Board of Appeal members and city.
(Ord. 100, passed - -2009)
§ 150.197 PROCEDURES AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Quorum. All three members of the Board of Appeals, either consisting
of members or alternate members, must be present to constitute a quorum. No
action of the Board is official unless authorized by a majority of the Board.
   (B)   Adoption of rules. The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations
concerning the filing of appeals, applications for variances and exceptions,
giving of notice and conduct of hearings as shall be necessary to carry out its
duties under the provisions of the city code.
   (C)   Minutes and records. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
keep records of its examination and other official actions and shall record the
vote on all actions taken. All minutes and records shall be filed in the office
of the Code Official and shall be public records.
   (D)   Powers and duties. The Board shall have the following powers and it
shall be the Board’s duty to:
      (1)   Determine appeals and review any notice, order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Code Official charged with the
enforcement of the city’s Building Code;
      (2)   Permit and authorize exception to the city’s Building Code only in
particular instances as specified in this subchapter;
      (3)   Decide special exceptions to the terms of the city’s Building Code
upon which the Board is required to act under this subchapter; and
      (4)   Receive applications for appeal based on a claim that the true
intent of the city’s Building Code has been incorrectly interpreted, or the
provisions of the city’s Building Code do not apply, or the requirements of the
city’s Building Code are adequately satisfied by other means.
   (E)   Appeals.
      (1)   An appeal taken from the requirement, notice, order and/or decision
for determination made by Code Official charged with the enforcement of the
city’s Building Code shall be filed with the Board within 20 days after the day
the decision, notice or order was served. The appeal shall specify the grounds
thereof and in such form as may be prescribed by the Board by general rule. The
Code Official from whom the appeal is taken shall, upon request from the Board,
transmit to the Board all documents, plans and papers constituting the record
of the action from which an appeal was filed.
      (2)    The Board shall meet upon notice from the Chairperson, within 20
days of the filing of an appeal. Prior to the hearing, public notice shall be
given of the hearing by placing a classified legal advertisement in a qualified
newspaper of general circulation in the county, and due notice shall be given
to the interested parties by certified mail return-receipt requested. The Board
may require the party making the appeal to assume the cost of public notice and
due notice to interested parties. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in
person, by agent or by attorney.
      (3)    When an appeal from the decision of the Code Official has been
taken and filed with the Board, all work on the premises pertaining to the
Official’s decision shall be stayed unless the Official shall certify to the
Board that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
instance, work shall not be stayed except by an injunction which may be granted
by the Circuit Court of the county, on application, on notice to the officer to
whom the appeal is taken and the owner of the premises affected and on due
cause shown.
      (4)   All hearings before the Board shall be open to the public. The
party making the appeal, the party making the appeal’s representative, the Code
Official and any persons whose interest(s) may be affected shall be given an
opportunity to be heard.
      (5)   At the hearing the order of procedure shall be as follows:
         (a)   The party making the appeal, or the party making the appeals
representative;
         (b)   The Code Official;
         (c)   Any persons whose interest may be affected by the decision; and
         (d)   The party making the appeal, or the party making the appeals
representatives’ rebuttal.
      (6)   The Board shall adopt and make available to the public the
procedures under which the hearing will be conducted by and through the person
in charge of keeping minutes and records for the city. The procedures shall not
require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only
relative information be received for review by the Board.
      (7)   When the full Board is not present to hear an appeal, either the
person making the appeal, or that person’s representative, shall have the right
to request a postponement of the hearing.
      (8)   In exercising its powers, the Board shall reverse or affirm, wholly
or in part, or make, modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from as in the Board’s opinion deemed to be done on the premises and
to that end shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
The Board’s decision to reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or to modify an
order, requirement, decision or determination, may only be done by a concurring
majority vote of two of the three appointed Board members.
      (9)   The final decision of the Board shall be recorded. A copy shall be
furnished to the person making the appeal and to the Code Official.
      (10)   The Code Official shall take immediate action in accordance with
the decision of the Board.
   (F)   Variances and special exemptions.
      (1)   Requests for variances. The Board shall hear requests for variances
where it is alleged that the provisions of the city’s Building Code inflicts
unnecessary hardship upon the person making the appeal. The Board may grant a
variance, provided the following findings are made, where relevant, in a given
instance:
         (a)   There are unique physical circumstances or conditions to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of the city’s Building Code;
         (b)   Because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the
provisions of the city’s Building Code and that the authorization of a variance
is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;
         (c)   Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the party
making the appeal;
         (d)   The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district wherein the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of
adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; or
         (e)   The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
which will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of
the regulation at issue.
      (2)   Granting of variance. In granting any variance, the Board may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of the City Building Code.
      (3)   Special exceptions. The Board shall hear and decide requests for
all special exceptions as provided in this subchapter and in accordance with
such standards and criteria contained in this subchapter. In granting a special
exception, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this subchapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes and intent of the City Building Code.
(Ord. 100, passed - -2009)
§ 150.198 REMEDIES.
   (A)   Any person, whether or not a previous party to the appeal, shall have
the right to apply to the appropriate court to correct errors of law.
Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law
following the entering of the final decision of the Board of Appeals.
   (B)   The Board or any designated enforcement official may institute a suit
for injunction in the Circuit Court of the county, in the name of the city, to
restrain an individual or a governmental unit from violating the provisions of
the city’s Building Code. The Board or any designated Code Enforcement Official
may also institute a suit for mandatory injunction in the Circuit Court of the
county, in the name of the city, directing an individual or a governmental unit
to remove a structure or erect a structure in violation of the provisions of
this subchapter. If the Board or any designated enforcement official is
successful in the suit, the respondent shall bear the costs of the action.
(Ord. 100, passed - -2009)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   In accord with §
150.036, any person who shall violate a provision of the State Building Code,
as adopted by the city, or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure
in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building Official or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the city code, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine in an amount set forth by Council
from time to time. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
      (2)   The imposition of the penalty herein prescribed by division (B)(1)
above shall not preclude the City Attorney from instituting an appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, addition, alteration, conversion, removal, demolition,
maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent
the occupancy of a building or structure or portion thereof or of the premises,
or to prevent an illegal act, conduct business or use in or about any premises.
      (3)   Nothing contained in this
Chapter 150 shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of any
department of the city to enforce any provision of the city code, ordinances or
regulations of the city, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the
powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to the
powers conferred by any other law of the state or ordinance of the city.
(1991 Code, § 5-8)
   (C)   Any person who performs electrical work within the city without
compliance with the provisions of §
150.110 shall be subject to a fine of an amount set forth by Council from time
to time.
(1991 Code, § 5-28)
   (D)   Violation of §§
150.125 through
150.138 shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in an amount set
forth by Council from time to time. Each day that a violation continues after
notification of same by the Code Official shall be deemed a separate offense.
The imposition of penalties prescribed herein shall not relieve the property
owner of responsibility for full compliance with all other applicable codes and
ordinances, including any and all separate fines and penalties imposed
thereunder.
   (E)   The failure or refusal for any reason of any owner, or agent of an
owner acting on behalf of the owner, to register a vacant building upon
adoption of §§
150.150 through
150.160 or to pay any fees required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of §§
150.150 through
150.160, within 30 days after they become due, shall constitute a violation
punishable upon conviction thereof by a fine in an amount set forth by Council
from time to time for each failure or refusal to pay a required vacant building
fee, as applicable. In such cases, whenever the minimum fine of an amount set
forth by Council from time to time is imposed, it shall not be subject to
suspension or reduction for any reason.
(Ord. passed 8-18-1978; Ord. passed 7-19-1979; Ord. 097, passed - -2009; Ord.
134, passed 12-1-2011; Ord. 171, passed 10-17-2013; Ord. 213, passed 6-16-2016)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Intent
   
151.002   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.003   Applicability
   
151.004   Matters not provided for specifically
Interpretations and Definitions
   
151.015   Definitions
Establishment of the Floodplain Provisions
   
151.020   Identification
   
151.021   Descriptions of special flood hazard areas
   
151.022   Changes in designation of area
   
151.023   Elevations prevail
   
151.024   Boundary disputes
Utilization of the Special Flood Hazard Area
   
151.030   Floodway
   
151.031   AE Zone Without Floodway Area
   
151.032   Approximated Floodplain (Zone A)
   
151.033   Alteration or relocation of a stream
Criteria for Building and Site Plan Approval
   
151.040   General
   
151.041   Basic format
   
151.042   Elevation and flood proofing information
   
151.043   Site plan criteria
   
151.044   Restrictions to subdivision of land in special flood hazard areas
Specific Requirements
   
151.050   Design and construction standards
Administration
   
151.060   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
151.061   Development permits and site plan approvals required
   
151.062   Approval of permits and plans
   
151.063   Application procedures
   
151.064   Changes
   
151.065   Permit placards
   
151.066   Start of construction
   
151.067   Stop work orders, inspections and revocations
   
151.068   Certificate of compliance
   
151.069   Fees
Appeals
   
151.080   Appeals
   
151.081   Appeal review criteria
   
151.082   Variances
Government Actions
   
151.090   Municipal annexation
   
151.091   Permits for governmental entities
Severability and Municipal Liability
   
151.100   Severability
   
151.101   Liability
   
151.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the city.
   (B)   Encourage the utilization of appropriate minimum construction
practices in order to prevent or minimize flooding damage.
   (C)   Minimize danger to public health and safety by protecting the water
supply and sanitary sewage disposal, and to protect natural drainage.
   (D)   Assure the County Assessor obtains information concerning improvement
of real property as required by W.Va. Code § 11-3-3A.
   (E)   Assure all County E-911 addresses are obtained and kept current to
maintain the established emergency response dispatch systems.
   (F)   Reduce financial burdens imposed on the residents, real property
owners and its governmental units by preventing the unwise design and
construction of development in areas subject to flooding.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.002 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance provisions
shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are
more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of
this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.003 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any contractor, person, partnership,
business, or corporation to undertake or cause to be undertaken, any
development, new construction, substantial improvement, repair of substantial
damage, other repairs, or the placement or relocation of any structure
(including manufactured homes) within the city unless a permit application has
been completed and a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator.
      (2)   In addition, where land is partially or fully in the floodplain is
to be developed, subdivided, utilized for a manufactured home park or
subdivision or otherwise developed, a site plan with elevation data must be
submitted to, and approved by, the Floodplain Administrator prior to any
development.
   (B)   Provision of all other codes, ordinances, and regulations shall be
applicable insofar as they are consistent with the provisions of this chapter
and the city’s need to minimize the hazards and damage resulting from flooding.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.004 MATTERS NOT PROVIDED FOR SPECIFICALLY.
   Where conditions are encountered that are not specifically provided for
herein, the Floodplain Administrator shall determine the applicability of the
provisions of this chapter in accordance with its intent, and shall require the
applicant to take appropriate measures pursuant to such determination.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 151.015 DEFINITIONS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ead299bdbbd5d64237988ee0c60bb5e02d43e88c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2764.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 343, adopted 1-23-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or required a different meaning.
   ADJACENT PROPERTY. Includes any surface tract, regardless of whether such
surface tract is entirely within the city, so long as a portion of said surface
tract is located within the city, which shares an immediate and common boundary
up or down stream to the property that is the subject of the application for a
floodplain permit. ADJACENT PROPERTY also includes all other property that may
be affected by flooding.
   ADVERSELY AFFECT ADJACENT PROPERTIES. To adversely affect a property the
increase in the elevation of the 100-year base flood elevation must be more
than one foot at any point. Stated conversely, if the effect is that the 100-
year flood base flood elevation rises one foot or less the property is not
affected. This standard does not apply to the floodway. If prior permit(s) has/
have been approved in the same area of the floodplain, the above definition
would include the cumulative impact to the base flood elevation.
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure on the same parcel of property as the
principal structure and the use of which is incidental and used for storage
only to the use of the principal structure. This does not include a gas or
liquid storage tank. These structures cannot be used as living space.
   BASE FLOOD. Means the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The water surface elevation of the base flood in
relation to the datum specified on the county’s Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Forthe purposes of this chapter, the 100-year flood or 1% or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. (See also 100-YEAR FLOOD.)
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certification that the entire development,
including the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in
compliance with all the provisions of this chapter.
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the special flood hazard area used to balance the loss
of natural flood storage when artificial fill or structures are placed within
the special flood hazard area.
   CONTRACTOR. W.Va. Code § 21-11-3(c).
      (1)   A person who in any capacity for compensation, other than as an
employee of another, undertakes, offers to undertake, purports to have the
capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to construct, alter, repair, add to,
subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road,
railroad, structure or excavation associated with a project, development or
improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding
or other structures or works in connection therewith, where the cost of
undertaking is $2,500 or more.
      (2)   CONTRACTOR includes a construction manager who performs management
and counseling services on a construction project for a professional fee.
      (3)   Contractor does not include:
         (a)   One who merely furnishes materials or supplies without
fabricating or consuming them in the construction project;
         (b)   A person who personally performs construction work on the site
of real property which the person owns or leases whether for commercial or
residential purposes;
         (c)   A person who is licensed or registered as a professional and who
functions under the control of any other licensing or regulatory board, whose
primary business is real estate sales, appraisal, development, management and
maintenance, who acting in his or her respective professional capacity and any
employee of such professional, acting in the course of his or her employment,
performs any work which may be considered to be performing contracting work;
         (d)   A pest control operator licensed under the provisions of W.Va.
Code § 19-16A-7(a) to engage in the application of pesticides for hire, unless
the operator also performs structural repairs exceeding $1,000 dollars on
property treated for insect pests; or
         (e)   A corporation, limited liability corporation, partnership or
sole proprietorship whose primary purpose is to prepare construction plans and
specifications used by the contractors defined in this definition and who
employs a full time registered architect licensed to practice in this state or
a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in this state.
      (4)   CONTRACTOR also does not include employees of such corporation,
partnership or sole proprietorship.
   CRITICAL FACILITY.
      (1)   Any facility in which even a slight chance of flooding is too great
a threat.
      (2)   Typical critical facilities include hospitals, fire stations,
police stations, storage of critical records, and similar facilities. These
should be given special consideration when formulating regulatory alternatives
and floodplain management plans. A CRITICAL FACILITY should not be located in a
special flood hazard area if at all possible. If a CRITICAL FACILITY must be
located in a special flood hazard area it should be provided a higher level of
protection so that it can continue to function and provide services during a
flood.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real property,
including but not limited to buildings or other structure, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, oil/gas well
sites, pads, pits, retention ponds or storage of equipment or materials.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary inundation of water in an area of normally
dry land.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas
and the risk premium zones applicable to the city. A FIRM that has been made
available digitally is called a DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM).
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report in which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has provided flood profiles, floodway information, and water
surface elevations.
   FLOOD PROOFING. (Non-residential only). Any combination of structural and
non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real property or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and its contents.
   FLOODPLAIN.
      (1)   A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or
watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation;
      (2)   An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The Floodplain Administrator shall be a resident
of West Virginia and/or a person who has completed within one year of his or
her appointment the state/FEMA sponsored NFIP Class 273 entitled “Managing
Floodplain Development” and remain current with state required continuing
education training pursuant to W.Va. Code § 15-5-20A.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
area that must be reserved to discharge the base flood without increasing the
water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
or BFE for purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for
unknown factors that may contribute uncertainty to flood heights of any given
flood and floodway condition, such as wave action, blockage at stream
crossings, and increased runoff from urbanization of the watershed.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface immediately adjacent to the development or structure foundation. This
is primarily used for purposes of insurance rating in approximated floodplains.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing in the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)    Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved
programs.
   INTERESTED PERSON OR PARTY. Includes:
      (1)   The applicant;
      (2)   The owner(s) of the subject property;
      (3)   At least one adult residing in any residence on the subject
property at the time the floodplain permit application is filed;
      (4)   Owners of any adjacent property; and
      (5)   At least one adult residing in any residence on the adjacent
property at the time the floodplain permit application is filed.
   LICENSED MANUFACTURED HOME DEALER. A business licensed to sell manufactured
homes in the State of West Virginia as set forth in the West Virginia Code.
   LICENSED MANUFACTURED HOME INSTALLER. A contractor licensed to install
manufactured homes in the State of West Virginia as set forth in the West
Virginia Code.
   LICENSED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR. Any person licensed by the West Virginia
State Board of Examiners of Land Surveyors to engage in the practice of land
surveying as defined in the West Virginia Code.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). Lowest natural elevation of the ground surface
immediately adjacent to the proposed development or structure foundation. The
primary use of the LAG is to determine whether the structure is located within
a special flood hazard area by comparing it to the base flood elevation.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished enclosure constructed with flood resistant materials
as defined in FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) and usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such
enclosure has proper flood openings and is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of
this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction as herein
defined commenced on or after April 3,1987 and including any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   ONE HUNDRED-YEAR (100-YEAR) FLOOD. A flood that has one chance in 100 or a
1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (See also
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.)
   PERSON. Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, limited
liability corporation, partnership, association or other entity, including
state and local governments and agencies.
   PRACTICE OF ENGINEERING.
      (1)   Any service or creative work, as described in W.Va. Code §§ 30-13-
1 et seq., the adequate performance of which requires engineering education,
training and experience in the application of special knowledge of the
mathematical, physical, and engineering sciences to such services or creative
work as consultation, investigation, evaluation, planning and design of
engineering works and systems; planning the use of land and water; teaching of
advanced engineering subjects, engineering surveys and studies; and the review
of construction for the purpose of assuring compliance with drawings and
specifications any of which embraces such services or work, either public or
private, in connection with any utilities, structures, buildings, machines,
equipment, processes, work systems, projects and industrial or consumer
products or equipment of a mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, pneumatic or
thermal nature, insofar as they involve safeguarding life, health or property,
and including such other professional services as may be necessary to the
planning, progress and completion of any engineering services. Engineering
surveys include all survey activities required to support the sound conception,
planning, design, construction, maintenance and operation of engineered
projects.
      (2)   Any person who practices any branch of the profession of
engineering or who, by verbal claim, sign, advertisement, letterhead, card or
in any other way represents himself or herself to be a registered professional
engineer, or by using another title implies that he or she is a registered
professional engineer or that he or she is registered under W.Va. Code §§ 30-
13-1 et seq. or who holds himself or herself out as able to perform, or who
performs any engineering service or work or any other service designated by the
practitioner which is recognized as engineering, is considered to practice or
offer to practice engineering within the meaning and intent of W.Va. Code §§
30-13-1 et seq.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. Where at least 51% of the actual cash value of a
structure, less land value, is above ground. [44 Code of Federal Regulations §
59.1]
   PROFESSIONAL. Any PROFESSIONAL including but not limited to a contractor,
developer, engineer, architect, hydrologist, land surveyor, etc., acting in any
capacity with respect to this chapter, must be licensed by the State of West
Virginia, when certification or licensure from the State of West Virginia is so
required.
   REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING. During the base flood, or any other known
flooding by the Floodplain Administrator, water should not damage structures
and any subsurface waters related to the base flood, and should not damage
existing or proposed structures. Ways of determining REASONABLY SAFE FROM
FLOODING may be three feet above highest adjacent grade, above high water marks
from historic flooding, using topographic extrapolation from contour lines or
utilizing the advisory flood height data on the WV Flood Tool.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designated to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person who has been duly registered or
licensed as a registered professional engineer by the West Virginia State Board
of Registration for Professional Engineers as required by W.Va. Code §§ 30-13-
13 et seq.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring a structure or other development into
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, or if full compliance is not
possible, to reduce the adverse impact of the noncompliance to the greatest
extent feasible.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Loss is flood damage to a structure on two occasions during
a ten-year period that ends on the date of the second flood loss for which the
cost to repair the flood damage, on average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the
market value of the structure at the time of each loss.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land in the floodplain area subject to a 1%
or greater chance of flooding in any given year. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS are
designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in Flood Insurance
Studies and on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as Zones A, AE, AO, A1-30, and A99.
The term includes areas shown on other flood hazard maps that are specifically
listed or otherwise described in this chapter.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date the floodplain permit was issued, including
floodplain permit for substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of
the floodplain permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement
of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Although a floodplain permit must be obtained prior to beginning, permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the ACTUAL
START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STATE COORDINATING OFFICE. The West Virginia Division of Homeland Security
and Emergency Management.
   STREAM. As defined in W.Va. Code § 7-1-3U, any watercourse, whether natural
or man-made, distinguishable by banks and a bed, regardless of its size,
through which water flows continually or intermittently, regardless of its
volume.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBDIVISION. Development that includes a creation of individual land parcels
for future sale. It does not include development where rights-of-way or
easements are obtained and recorded.
   SUBJECT PROPERTY. Includes the surface tract(s) upon which the proposed
development is planned and for which the floodplain permit application is
submitted.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the fair market value of the structure before the damage
occurred. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means cumulative flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for
which the cost of repairs at the time of each flood event equals or exceeds 25%
of the fair market value of the structure before the damage occurred. (See also
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.)
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the fair
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement.
      (2)   This term includes structures, which have incurred substantial
damage, as defined herein regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violation(s) of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local Code Enforcement
Official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
      (3)   Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined above, must comply with all
chapter requirements that do not preclude the structure’s continued designation
as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific chapter requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places or
the state Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the Secretary of
the Interior or the state Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from
chapter requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
      (4)   For the purpose of this definition IMPROVEMENT is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural
part of the building commences whether or not the alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure.
   TOP OF BANK. The lines depicted on the FIRM maps delineating each side of a
stream indicate the TOP OF THE BANK. In the field a professional familiar with
fluvial geomorphology should document the TOP OF THE BANK. When a professional
is not employed the TOP OF THE BANK will be considered to be the top of the
first significant slope landward of the water’s edge when it is followed by at
least 50 feet of relatively flat land.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation.
   VIOLATION. The failure of any structure or development to be fully compliant
with all requirements of this chapter. A structure or other development without
the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such
time as the documentation is provided. No future improvements or developments
can be made to structures found to be in violation unless the development is to
bring the structure into compliance with the current ordinance.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021; Ord. 343, passed 1-23-2025)
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
§ 151.025 IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   The identified special flood hazard area shall be those areas of the
city which are subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year
as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and described in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) prepared for the city by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) dated September 29, 2010 or the most recent revision thereof
including all digital data developed as part of the FIS.
   (B)   The identified special flood hazard area shall also be those special
flood hazard areas which have been identified as flood hazard areas by the city
by use of historic or other technical data and shown on an officially
recognized FIRM. These areas shall be designated as appropriate with the level
of technical data described below and shall be managed accordingly.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.021 DESCRIPTIONS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The identified special flood hazard area shall consist of the following four
specific areas:
   (A)   Floodway Area. The Floodway Area shall be those areas of AE Zone
identified as floodways in the FIS and as shown on the FIRM. The term shall
also include any floodway areas delineated by developers in the approximated
floodplain and designated as such by the community.
   (B)   AE Area Without Floodway. The AE Area Without Floodway shall be those
areas identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA
for which 100-year flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been
delineated.
   (C)   Approximated Floodplain. The Approximated Floodplain shall be those
areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA
and for which no 100-year flood elevations have been provided.
   (D)   AO and AH Floodplain. The AO and AH Floodplain are those areas
identified as Zones AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are
subject to inundation the by 1% annual-chance shallow flooding where average
depths are between one and three feet. In Zones AO and AH, drainage paths shall
be established to guide floodwaters around and away from structures on slopes.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.022 CHANGES IN DESIGNATION OF AREA.
   (A)   The delineation of the identified special flood hazard area may be
revised by the city where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or more
detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, a
River Basin Commission or other qualified agency or individual document the
necessity for such changes. However, prior to any such change, approval must be
obtained from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (B)   A city’s base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from
physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practical but, not
later than six months from the date such information becomes available, the
city shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific
data.
   (C)   The city may identify and regulate new flood hazard or ponding areas.
These areas shall be delineated on a local flood hazard map using best
available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of
record, historic high water marks and/or approximate study methodologies.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.023 ELEVATIONS PREVAIL.
   (A)   If the lowest natural grade adjacent to proposed development is above
the base flood elevation, and the following is provided to the Floodplain
Administrator: (i) elevation information and a site plan demonstrating that all
proposed development will occur above the base flood elevation; or (ii) a
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA removing the site from the SHFA; then
the site shall be considered to be outside the floodplain area and shall not be
required to conform to the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   If the lowest natural grade adjacent to proposed development is below
the base flood elevation, the site shall be considered to be within the
floodplain area and the proposed structure shall be required to conform to all
appropriate provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.024 BOUNDARY DISPUTES.
   Should a dispute concerning any district boundary arise, an initial
determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator and any party
aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the City Council sitting as the
Floodplain Appeals Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant/
applicant.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
UTILIZATION OF THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
§ 151.030 FLOODWAY.
   (A)   Within any Floodway Area (Fl), no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted
unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed
encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge. The resultant engineering study shall
include a cover letter, signed and sealed by the responsible professional,
providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In addition, studies,
analyses, computations, and the like, shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   Because floodways present increased risk to human life and property
due to their relatively faster and deeper flowing waters the floodways shall be
preserved to the greatest extent possible.
      (1)   New development shall not be permitted in the floodway where
reasonable alternatives exist elsewhere. In addition to the requirements below
the applicant shall demonstrate that there are no reasonable alternatives other
than the floodway encroachment before a permit is issued.
      (2)   When the floodway is the only reasonable alternative the applicant
shall demonstrate that the floodway encroachment is the minimum necessary to
accomplish the project.
      (3)   All permitted uses, activities, and development shall be undertaken
in strict compliance with the flood proofing and related provisions contained
herein, and in all other applicable federal and state law, ordinances and
regulations.
      (4)   In special flood hazard areas for which no regulatory floodway has
been designated, the regulatory floodway for small, single lot development not
incorporating significant amounts of fill can, at the discretion of the city,
be determined to be the channel of the stream and the adjacent land areas to a
distance of one-half the width of the special flood hazard area as measured
from the top of the bank nearest the site to the upland limit of the 1% annual
chance special flood hazard area boundary.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.031 AE ZONE WITHOUT FLOODWAY AREA.
   Within any AE Zone Without Floodway Area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the elevation of the 100-year flood more than
one foot at any point.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.032 APPROXIMATED FLOODPLAIN (ZONE A).
   Within any Approximated Floodplain Area:
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator shall use elevation and floodway
information from federal, state, or other acceptable sources when available to
determine the elevation above which development will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
   (B)   When data from an acceptable source is not available, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review, or shall cause to be reviewed; all proposed
development to determine (1) the amount being invested and (2) the specific
flood risk at the site. The Floodplain Administrator shall then require the
applicant to determine the elevation above which the development and adjacent
properties including but not limited to existing buildings will be reasonably
safe from flooding using hydrologic and hydraulic analyses or other techniques.
When hydrologic and hydraulic analyses are required, they shall only be
prepared by a registered professional engineer who shall certify that the
methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. The
resulting study shall include a cover letter, signed by the responsible
professional, providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In addition,
studies, analyses, computations, etc. shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   Any development and/or use of land shall be permitted provided that
all such uses, activities and/or development shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the flood proofing and related provisions contained herein and
in all other applicable federal and state laws, ordinances and regulations.
   (D)   Within any apportioned Floodplain Zone (Zone A) without Floodway Area,
no new construction or development shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated
that the cumulative impact of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the elevation of
the 100-year flood more than one foot at any point.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.033 ALTERATION OR RELOCATION OF A STREAM.
   (A)   Whenever a developer intends to alter or relocate a stream within the
special flood hazard area the developer shall notify in writing, by certified
mail, the city Floodplain Administrator, the state Coordinating Office, any
adjacent communities and any adjacent property owners of all such intended
activities prior to the alteration or relocation of the stream. Copies of all
required notifications must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. In addition, prior to issuing the local permit the Floodplain
Administrator shall require copies of all necessary permits from those
governmental agencies from which federal or state law requires approval.
   (B)   The developer shall also assure the city in writing that the flood
carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the stream will be
maintained. The Floodplain Administrator may require the applicant to
demonstrate that the altered or relocated portion of stream will provide equal
or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. If hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses are required, they shall only be undertaken by a registered
professional engineer, who shall certify that the methods used correctly
reflect currently accepted technical concepts. The resulting study shall
include a cover letter, signed by the responsible professional, providing a
statement of findings in basic terms. In addition, studies, analyses and
computations shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough
technical review by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   Alteration of a stream includes placement of temporary or permanent
culverts, bridges or other stream crossings. The Floodplain Administrator may
require the use of certain best practice techniques in the construction of
bridges, culverts or stream crossings to prevent damage, loss of stream
crossings and localized flooding caused by blockage. These techniques may
include, but are not limited to, wing walls, trash grates or requiring openings
to be of sufficient size to pass debris and/or anticipated future increases in
flood heights.
   (D)   All new and replacement bridges, culverts and other stream crossings
shall adhere to the relevant anchoring requirements contained in this chapter.
   (E)   The developer is required to provide the city of a legal agreement
detailing all scheduled inspections and maintenance to be performed on altered
or relocated watercourses including culverts, bridges and other stream
crossings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to transfer the
agreement to the purchaser when the land associated with the watercourse
alteration is transferred. A copy of all new agreements shall be provided to
the Floodplain Administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a
signed copy to the Floodplain Administrator shall subject the violator to the
penalties set forth in §
151.999.
   (F)   When any watercourse alteration has occurred, the applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
and/or Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), when notified by the Floodplain
Administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this
purpose.
(Ord. 208, passed 3-4-2021) Penalty, see §
151.999
CRITERIA FOR BUILDING AND SITE PLAN APPROVAL
§ 151.040 GENERAL.
   A permit is required in order to determine whether all new construction or
substantial improvements are:
   (A)   Located in an identified floodplain, floodway or other special flood
hazard area.
   (B)   Designated (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
   (C)   Constructed with material and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage as outlined in FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) or the most
recent revision thereof.
   (D)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (E)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during flooding.
   (F)   To comply with W.Va. Code § 11-3-3A concerning County Assessor
“Building or Real Property Improvement Notice”.
   (G)   Approved by County Health Department for well, septic and other
permits to assure facilities are designed and located in compliance with the
flood damage reduction requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 208, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 150.041 BASIC FORMAT.
   The basic format of the permit shall include the following:
   (A)   Name and address of applicant.
   (B)   Name and address of owner of land on which proposed development is to
occur.
   (C)   Applicant shall provide names, addresses, and valid West Virginia
license numbers of all contractors working at the building site, or affidavits
stating that work is being performed by individuals exempt from contractor
licensing as set forth in Title 28, Series 2, § 3.9(b) of the West Virginia
Code of State Regulations or the most recent revision thereof, if known at the
time the permit application is submitted. If not known, applicant shall provide
the information within 14 days of execution of a contract with its contractor
(s) prior to beginning construction.
   (D)   A description of site location sufficient to locate the proposed
development including tax map and parcel numbers and most recent deed book and
page number.
   (E)   A standard site plan showing size and location of the proposed
development as well as any existing buildings or structures. The site plan
shall also show all adjacent roads and watercourses with direction of flow, the
lowest adjacent grade to the proposed foundation and/or toe of fill, the base
flood elevation and the location of the floodway boundary when applicable.
   (F)   An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to pay any and all fees
associated with the permitting process as set forth in §
151.069.
   (G)   An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to allow the Floodplain
Administrator and authorized representatives of floodplain management programs
access to the development to inspect for compliance.
   (H)   The contract required by West Virginia Code of State Regulations,
Title 28, Series 4, and all addendums to the contract(s) shall be presented to
the Floodplain Administrator for review within 14 business days of contract
signing. The Floodplain Administrator shall keep copies of all contracts or
addendums and shall file redacted copies of the contracts and addendums with
the Clerk of the County Court in the applicant’s permit application file. The
Floodplain Administrator shall consult with the applicant to redact proprietary
and confidential information from the contracts and addendums that are not
otherwise public information. Failure to present contract(s) or addendums for
review shall void the permit. If a licensed contractor is not involved, or the
work is of an aggregate construction cost value of less than $10,000 including
material and labor, a brief written description of proposed work and the
estimated value will suffice.
(Ord. 208, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.042 ELEVATION AND FLOOD PROOFING INFORMATION.
   (A)   All applicants are encouraged to exceed the minimum elevation
requirements contained herein. Flood insurance rates can be lowered
significantly by increasing the elevation of the lowest floor above the
freeboard height required by this chapter.
   (B)   Depending on the type of structure involved, the following information
shall also be included in the application for work within the special flood
hazard area:
      (1)   All structures, ductwork and electrical connections shall be
elevated two feet above the base flood elevation and:
         (a)   A plan showing the size of the proposed structure and its
relation to the lot where it is to be constructed.
         (b)   A determination of elevations of the base flood, existing
ground, proposed finished ground and lowest floor, certified by a registered
professional engineer or licensed professional surveyor.
         (c)   Plans showing the methods of elevating the proposed structure
including details of proposed fills, pile structures, retaining walls,
foundations, erosion protection measures, and the like. When required by the
Floodplain Administrator, a registered professional engineer or architect shall
prepare the plans.
         (d)   Plans showing the methods used to protect utilities (including
sewer, water, telephone, electric, gas, etc.) from flooding to two feet above
the base flood elevation at the building site.
         (e)   During the course of construction, as soon as the basic elements
of the lowest floor are in place and before further vertical construction, it
is highly recommended that the applicant check for error by obtaining elevation
data completed by a registered professional engineer or licensed professional
surveyor certifying the height of the lowest floor. If a mistake in elevation
has been made this is the best time to correct the error.
         (f)   A finished construction elevation certificate must be prepared
by a licensed professional surveyor or others of demonstrated qualification.
The elevation certificate must confirm the structure in question together with
attendant utilities are elevated in compliance with permit conditions.
         (g)   A non-conversion agreement shall be signed by the applicant
whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that the area below the first
floor could be converted to a non-conforming use (generally applies to enclosed
areas below base flood elevation that are five feet high or more). This
agreement shall state:
            1.   The area below base flood elevation shall not be converted for
use other than for parking, building access or for allowable storage as
detailed in this chapter.
            2.   The applicant agrees to notify prospective purchasers of the
existence of the non-conversion agreement. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to transfer the agreement at closing to the purchaser through
notarized signature, a copy of all new non-conversion agreements shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator. Failure to transfer the non-
conversion agreement and provide a signed copy to the Floodplain Administrator
shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in §
151.999.
      (2)   (a)   All structures shall be flood proofed to two feet above the
base flood elevation (nonresidential structures only):
         (b)   All applicants shall meet or exceed the minimum flood proofing
requirements contained herein. Flood insurance rates can be lowered
significantly by increasing the level of flood proofing above the height
required by this chapter. In order to obtain an elevation credited flood
insurance rate on dry flood proofed buildings, flood proofing must extend at
least one foot above the base flood elevation.
            1.   Plans showing details of all flood proofing measures, prepared
by a registered professional engineer, showing the size of the proposed
structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed.
            2.   A determination of elevations of the base flood, existing
ground, proposed finished ground, lowest floor, and flood proofing limits,
certified by a registered professional engineer or licensed professional
surveyor.
            3.   A Flood Proofing Certificate, FEMA 81-65, as revised by FEMA,
shall be prepared by the registered professional engineer who prepared the
plans in 1. above, stating the structure in question, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities are designed so that:
               A.   The structure is water tight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water from the lowest structural element to two
feet above the base flood elevation.
               B.   The structure will withstand the hydrostatic, hydrodynamic,
buoyant, impact, and other forces resulting from the flood depths, velocities,
pressures, and other factors associated with the base flood.
      (3)   For appurtenant structures constructed of flood resistant materials
- used solely for parking of vehicles, or limited storage (appurtenant
structures only):
         (a)   A site plan prepared by a licensed professional surveyor or
others of demonstrated qualifications showing elevation of existing ground,
proposed finished ground and lowest floor. The plan shall also show details of
proposed flood resistant materials usage and the size of the proposed structure
and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed. The location of the
floodway boundary shall be represented on the plan when a floodway is present
on the site.
         (b)   An elevation certificate, based on finished construction, must
be prepared by a licensed professional surveyor or others of demonstrated
qualifications. This certificate or report must confirm that the structure in
question, together with attendant utilities is designed so that:
            1.   Flood resistant materials as detailed in FEMA Technical
Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) are used in the construction of the structure from the
lowest structural element to two feet above the base flood elevation and that
all utilities are located at least two feet above the base flood elevation.
            2.   Hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls are equalized by
allowing for automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
               A.   A minimum of two openings have a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
               B.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
               C.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
         (c)   In addition, the applicant shall sign a non-conversion agreement
and notify prospective purchasers of the existence of the non-conversion
agreement. It shall be, the responsibility of the applicant to transfer the
non-conversion agreement to any purchaser at closing through notarized
signature. A signed copy of the transferred non-conversion agreement shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator. Failure to transfer the non-
conversion agreement and provide a signed copy to the Floodplain Administrator
shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in §
150.999.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.043 SITE PLAN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Site plans are required for all development, new construction and
substantial improvements determined to be located in a special flood hazard
area and all proposed subdivisions and manufactured home parks. These proposals
shall be reviewed by the Floodplain Administrator to assure that they are
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (B)   The owner or developer shall submit a preliminary site plan to the
Floodplain Administrator that includes the following information:
      (1)   Name of registered professional engineer, licensed professional
surveyor or other qualified person responsible for providing the information
required in this section.
      (2)   A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or
development with respect to floodplain areas, proposed lot sites, and fill
areas.
      (3)   Where the subdivision or manufactured home park lie partially or
completely in the special flood hazard areas, the plan map shall include
detailed information giving the location and elevation of proposed roads,
utilities and building sites. All such maps shall also show contours at
intervals of two or five feet depending upon the slope of the land and identify
accurately the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas. A registered
professional engineer or licensed professional surveyor must certify the site
plan.
      (4)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments which
are proposed to take place either fully or partially within the Approximated
Floodplain Area (F4) and which are greater than ten lots or two acres,
whichever is the lesser, shall include base flood elevation data and shall
delineate the floodway.
         (a)   When a Flood Insurance Study (FIS) is available from FEMA, the
data contained in that study must be used to substantiate the base flood
elevation.
         (b)   If a FEMA Flood Insurance Study is not available the required
data may be available from an authoritative source, such as the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, U.S. Geological Survey, Natural Resource Conservation Service or
state and local Water Resource Department.
         (c)   If the required data is not available from other sources the
applicant shall develop the technical data using detailed methodologies
comparable to those contained in a Flood Insurance Study. This data shall be
prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer, who shall certify
that the methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
   (C)   Where the subdivision or other development site lies partially in the
special flood hazard area and all proposed development including fill will take
place on natural grade a significant vertical distance above the Approximated
Floodplain Area (Zone A) boundary depicted on the map, development of detailed
base flood elevation data may not be necessary. In these cases the site plan
for the proposed development must show contours at intervals of two or five
feet depending on the slope, and clearly delineate the area to be developed and
the location of the special flood hazard boundary as scaled from the FEMA map.
A registered professional engineer, licensed professional surveyor or others of
demonstrated qualifications must certify the site plan.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.044 RESTRICTIONS TO SUBDIVISION OF LAND IN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   Subdivision of land in the special flood hazard area shall result in lots
that include a buildable portion outside of the special flood hazard area and
be served by streets within the proposed subdivision having surfaces not lower
than one foot below the elevation of the line defining the special flood hazard
area limits. All new structures shall be sited on the portion of the subdivided
lot that is located outside of the special flood hazard area.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021) Penalty, see §
151.999
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.050 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings, structures, and related
utilities and facilities, the following restrictions apply to all development,
subdivision proposals, manufactured home parks, new construction and to
construction of substantial improvements, and the repair of substantial damage,
to existing structures occurring in the special flood hazard area.
   (A)   Basements and lowest floors.
      (1)   Residential structures. All new construction, relocation,
substantial improvements, including repair of substantial damage, of
residential structures must have the lowest floor, including basement, ductwork
and utilities, elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation.
      (2)   Non-residential structures. All new construction, relocation,
substantial improvements, including repair of substantial damage, of non-
residential structures must have the lowest floor, including basement, ductwork
and utilities, elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation; or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that
the structure is water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water from the lowest structural element to two feet above the base
flood elevation.
      (3)   Openings. For all new construction, relocation, substantial
improvements, and repair of substantial damage, those fully enclosed areas
below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding, shall be provided.
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      (4)   A non-conversion agreement shall be signed by the applicant on all
flood proofed structures and any elevated structures when the Floodplain
Administrator determines that the area below the first floor could be converted
to a non-conforming use (generally applies to the enclosed areas below base
flood elevation that are five feet high or more). This agreement shall state:
         (a)   The area below the base flood elevation shall not be converted
for use other than for parking, building access or for allowable storage as
detailed in this chapter.
         (b)   The applicant agrees to notify prospective purchasers of the
existence of the non-conversion agreement. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to transfer the non-conversion agreement at closing to the
purchaser through notarized signature. A copy of a non-conversion agreement
shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. Failure to transfer the non-
conversion agreement and provide a signed copy to the Floodplain Administrator
shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in §
150.999.
   (B)   Manufactured home placement. Certain unique characteristics of
manufactured homes installed in special flood hazard areas pose an elevated
risk of substantial damage to property. Therefore, it is required that:
      (1)   All manufactured homes to be installed within the special flood
hazard areas of the city shall be installed by a contractor possessing a valid
West Virginia Manufactured Home Installer’s License. The installer shall use an
installation design engineered to withstand flood hazards specific to the
particular home site. Manufactured homes to be installed or substantially
improved within the special flood hazard areas shall be installed in accordance
with the following standards:
         (a)   The lowest floor, ductwork and utilities including HVAC/heat
pump shall be elevated two feet above the base flood elevation.
         (b)   Elevation shall be on reinforced piers on a permanent foundation
or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength engineered for use
in a flood hazard area. Installation designs incorporating dry stacked block
piers shall not be used in special flood hazard areas.
         (c)   All manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system in compliance with the requirements of 42
West Virginia Code of State Regulations, Series 19, Sections 10A and 10B as
authorized by W.Va. Code §§ 21-9-1 et seq. The anchoring shall be adequate to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include but are not limited to the over-the-top and frame ties, attached to
permanent foundation elements. Ground anchors may not be adequate to satisfy
flood specific anchoring requirements. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
         (d)   Permanently attached rigid skirts and perimeter wall skirts of
brick or block must have openings to prevent collapse and damage to supporting
piers. The openings must be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces by allowing for entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
            1.   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot
above grade.
         (e)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
         (f)   Any additions to a manufactured home shall be similarly anchored
and vented.
         (g)   The licensed West Virginia manufactured home installer
installing the unit shall perform a site inspection and certify in writing that
the manufactured home has been installed to the standards set forth in this
chapter.
   (C)   Appurtenant structures.
      (1)   When possible, appurtenant structures shall be located out of the
special flood hazard area.
      (2)   Where appurtenant structures not connected to the principal
structure are to be located on sites below the base flood elevation, the
following flood damage reduction provisions apply:
         (a)   Use of the structure shall be restricted to parking or limited
storage.
            1.   Structures shall be no more than 300 square feet in size and
valued at less than $7,000.
            2.   Floors shall be at or above grade on at least one side.
            3.   Structures shall be located, oriented and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
            4.   Structures shall be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
            5.   Flood resistant materials as detailed in FEMA Technical
Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) shall be used in the construction of the structure
from the lowest structural element to two feet above the base flood elevation.
            6.   Machinery, electric devices or appliances, and all utilities
shall be located at least two feet above the base flood elevation.
            7.   Opening requirements. Hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls are equalized by allowing for automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
               A.   A minimum of two openings have a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
               B.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
               C.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
         (b)   In addition, a non-conversion agreement shall be signed by the
applicant stating that the use of the appurtenant structure or detached or
attached garage shall not be changed from the use permitted, acknowledging that
the structure may be subject to greater flood risk and that higher flood
insurance premiums may be possible, and that a change in use may require full
compliance with this chapter. The applicant agrees to notify prospective
purchasers of the existence of the non-conversion agreement. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to transfer the non-conversion agreement at
closing to the purchaser through notarized signature. A copy of the non-
conversion agreement shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. Failure
to transfer the non-conversion agreement and provide a signed copy to the
Floodplain Administrator shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth
in §
150.999.
   (D)   Recreational vehicle placement. Recreational vehicles to be placed
within any special flood hazard area shall either:
      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnected utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions; or
      (3)   Be installed in accordance with the manufactured home placement
requirements and all other flood reduction requirements contained in this
chapter.
   (E)   Fill.
      (1)   The city officially recognizes the beneficial functions the
floodplain area serves in storage and transportation of water during floods.
Placement of fill in the special flood hazard area is discouraged and should be
minimized.
      (2)   Placement of fill in other areas of the special flood hazard area
shall be restricted to functional purposes such as elevating a structure. Fill
shall only be permitted in the same permit with the related structure or other
functional purpose. Placement of fill to dispose of spoil from excavation or to
elevate yards, parking lots, or fields will not generally be considered a
functional purpose. The Floodplain Administrator may require the developer to
provide compensatory storage before permitting fill.
      (3)   No fill shall be permitted in the floodway unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with currently accepted technical standards that the proposed fill will not
result in any increase in the base flood elevation.
      (4)   All fill placed in the special flood hazard area shall meet or
exceed the following standards:
         (a)   Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not
adversely affect the subject property and adjacent properties. The Floodplain
Administrator may require the applicant to demonstrate through engineering
reports that proposed fill would not adversely affect the subject property and
adjacent properties. When required, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by a professional engineer who shall certify that the technical
methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. The
resulting study shall include a cover letter, signed and sealed by the
responsible professional, providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In
addition, studies, analyses, computations, and the like, shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Floodplain
Administrator. During permit review the Floodplain Administrator shall consider
the following issues that have the potential to cause adverse impact to the
subject property and adjacent properties:
            1.   Unacceptable increases in flood heights.
            2.   Blocking drainage from the subject property and adjacent
properties.
            3.   Deflection of floodwaters onto adjacent existing structures.
            4.   Increases to stream velocity initiating or exacerbating
erosion problems.
            5.   Other unique site conditions may be considered when
determining whether fill will cause adverse impact to the subject property and
adjacent properties including, but not limited to, subsidence areas, karst
topography, stream blockages, and steep topography adjacent to the channel.
         (b)   Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not
adversely affect the capacity of channels or floodways of any tributary to the
main stream, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system.
         (c)   A fill site must be contoured to drain properly (avoid ponding)
consistent with pre-construction conditions. This provision does not apply to
properly constructed impoundments which comply with the remainder of this
chapter and which are properly permitted by the West Virginia Department of
Environmental Protection.
         (d)   Fill shall extend beyond a structure for a sufficient distance
to provide acceptable access. For residential structures, fill shall extend
laterally 15 feet beyond the building line from all points before the start of
sloping required in division (E)(4)(e) below. For non-residential structures,
fill shall be placed to provide access acceptable for intended use.
         (e)   At grade access, with fill extending laterally 15 feet beyond
the building line shall be provided to a minimum of 25% of the perimeter of a
nonresidential structure.
         (f)   Fill shall consist of soil or rock material only. Sanitary
landfills shall not be permitted; no trash or woody debris shall be buried on
site.
         (g)   Fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary
stability and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling. Fill compaction
standards must be appropriate to proposed post fill use, particular attention
is necessary when fill is being used to elevate a structure.
         (h)   Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one vertical on two
horizontal, unless substantiating data justifying steeper slopes are submitted
to and approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
         (i)   Fill site and fill must be protected from erosion.
            1.   Fill slopes exposed to floodwaters with expected velocities
during the occurrence of the base flood of five feet per second or less will be
protected from erosion by covering them with grass, vines, weeds, or similar
vegetative undergrowth.
            2.   Fill slopes exposed to floodwaters with expected velocities
during the occurrence of the base flood of greater than five feet per second
will be protected from erosion by armoring them with stone or rock slope
protection.
         (j)   All applicants placing fill in a special flood hazard area shall
obtain a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR-F) from FEMA when directed
to do so by the Floodplain Administrator before a permit can be issued. After
fill is finished the applicant shall convert the CLOMR-F to a Letter of Map
Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F) before a certificate of compliance/occupancy
can be issued. The Floodplain Administrator is hereby appointed as the
designated official to approve a request for a (CLOMR-F) or (LOMR-F), and shall
cooperate with the applicant with respect to any requirements of FEMA for
requesting a (CLOMR-F) or (LOMR-F), which includes, but is not necessarily
limited to, approving said request and executing Form 1, “Overview &
Concurrence Form” or other form as may be required by FEMA.
         (k)   The applicant shall submit any maps, computations or other
material required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise
the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and/or Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), when
notified by the Floodplain Administrator, and shall pay any fees or other costs
assessed by FEMA for this purpose.
   (F)   Placement of structures and other development. All structures and
other development shall be constructed and placed on the property so as to
offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum obstruction effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
      (1)   Whenever possible, structures and other development shall be
constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow;
and
      (2)   Insofar as practicable, structures and other development shall be
placed approximately on the same flood-flow lines as those of adjoining
structures or development.
   (G)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All structures and other development including stream crossings
shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to
prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, thus reducing the threat to
life and property and decreasing the possibility of the blockage of bridge
openings and other restricted sections of the watercourse.
      (2)   All air ducts, large pipes, swimming pools and storage tanks
located at or below the base flood elevation shall be firmly anchored to resist
flotation.
   (H)   Flood protection setback.
      (1)   A flood protection setback equal to twice the width of the
watercourse channel measuring from the top of one bank to the top of the
opposite bank of 50 feet, whichever is less, shall be maintained from the top
of the banks of all watercourses. Specifically, as for oil and gas wells and
well pads, no well pad may be prepared or well drilled within 100 feet from any
perennial stream, natural or artificial lake, pond, reservoir or wetland. [See
W.Va. Code § 22-6A-12(b)]. To reduce erosion, natural vegetation shall be
maintained in this area. Where natural vegetation does not exist along the
watercourse and conditions for replanting are suitable, high priority shall be
given to planting vegetation in the setback area to stabilize banks and enhance
aquatic resources.
      (2)   Necessary public works and temporary construction may be exempted
from this division (H) at the discretion of the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   At the discretion of the Floodplain Administrator the flood
protection setback requirement can be waived in whole or part if the applicant
demonstrates that it is impossible to allow any development without
encroachment into the flood protection setback area. The conditions shall be
the minimum necessary and shall be made only after due consideration is given
to varying other siting standards, such as side, front and back lot line
setbacks.
   (I)   Storage.
      (1)   No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in times of
flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, shall be stored
below base flood elevation except for mineral storage properly and wholly
within the ground in compliance with other state environmental agency(ies)
requirements.
      (2)   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to substantial damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent
flotation or readily removable from the area within the time available after
flood warning.
      (3)   Due to the potential of masking the natural elevation and making it
more difficult to enforce this chapter, material that resembles fill material
shall not be considered storage material for purposes of this division (I).
   (J)   Utility and facility requirements.
      (1)   All new or replacement water systems whether public or private,
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems.
      (2)   All new or replacement sanitary disposal systems, whether public or
private, shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      (3)   All other new or replacement public or private utilities and
facilities shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
      (4)   Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to the system or contamination from the system during flooding.
   (K)   Drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazard areas as well as around structures on slopes within zones AH and
AO to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
   (L)   Backflow preventers. Back flow prevention valves should be used for
all enclosed structures with sewage or drainage facilities located in the
special flood hazard area floodplain area.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021) Penalty, see §
151.999
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.060 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The city Code Enforcement Office is hereby appointed as Floodplain
Administrator and is vested with the responsibility, authority and means to
implement the commitments made. Upon appointment of a new Floodplain
Administrator, the meeting minutes with the applicable floodplain ordinance
shall be provided to the state Coordinating Office and FEMA. Within one year of
his or her appointment the new Floodplain Manager must attend the state/FEMA
sponsored NFIP Class 273 entitled “Managing Floodplain Development” and remain
current with state required continuing education annual training. (See W.Va.
Code § 15-5-20A.) In the absence of a formally appointed Floodplain
Administrator the duties set forth in this chapter for the Floodplain
Administrator shall be temporarily fulfilled by the Mayor of the City of
Elkins.
   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator shall administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying floodplain development permits in accordance
with its provisions. The Floodplain Administrator shall also be responsible for
submitting all required reports to FEMA concerning participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.061 DEVELOPMENT PERMITS AND SITE PLAN APPROVALS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any contractor, person, partnership, business,
limited liability corporation or corporation to undertake or cause to be
undertaken, any development or the new construction, substantial improvement,
repair of substantial damage, the placement or relocation of any structure
(including manufactured homes) within the city unless a permit application and
standard site plan has been completed, and a permit has been obtained from the
Floodplain Administrator. In addition, where land that is either partially or
fully in the special flood hazard area is to be subdivided, utilized for a
manufactured home park or subdivision or otherwise developed, a detailed site
plan must be submitted to, and approved by, the Floodplain Administrator prior
to any development.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.062 APPROVAL OF PERMITS AND PLANS.
   (A)   (1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review, or shall cause to be
reviewed, all permit applications and plans within 90 days from the permit
application submission date in order to determine whether the proposed
development is reasonably safe from flooding. Further, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review all objections, comments, protest letters and other
writings submitted in opposition of said floodplain permit application and give
due consideration to the same before granting or denying said permit.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall ensure that substantial
improvements, including any repair of a building that has been substantially
damaged or suffered repetitive loss, are undertaken only with valid permits.
All permits and plans shall be approved only after it has been determined that
the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements
of this chapter, state and federal laws and regulations. All the decisions made
by the Floodplain Administrator shall be made according to the Administrative
Procedure for Review of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage
previously adopted by the City Common Council.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall not issue a permit to any person
who does not possess a valid contractor’s license when a contractor’s license
is required by W.Va. Code § 21-11-7.
      (4)   The Floodplain Administrator, before issuance of the permit, shall
require the applicant to furnish satisfactory proof that such person is duly
licensed as a contractor under the provisions of the West Virginia State Code.
If the applicant is not licensed under W.Va. Code § 21-11-6 a written affidavit
that such person is not subject to licensure as a contractor or subcontractor
as defined in W.Va. Code § 21-11-6 shall be filed with the County Clerk, date/
time stamped and filed in the official floodplain permit application file.
      (5)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require and keep on file copies
of any documentation pertaining to the permit from any other governmental
agencies. Whether federal or state or local, that requires site approval, this
shall be submitted to the City Clerk, date/time stamped and filed in the
official floodplain permit application file prior to final issuance of said
permit and prior to the start of construction. This information shall be
maintained for the life span of the development.
      (6)   The Floodplain Administrator shall provide a copy of all permits to
the County Assessor as required by W.Va. Code § 11-3-3A and provide a copy of
all floodplain permits for new structures to the County E-911 Addressing
Coordinator.
   (B)   After the filing of an application for a floodplain permit and
receiving a properly and timely filed objection to the issuance of a floodplain
permit application, but prior to the Floodplain Administrator’s decision to
grant or deny the same, the Floodplain Administrator may, in his or her sole
discretion, hold a public meeting wherein evidence can be taken or given by
interested persons or parties. Said meeting shall have a court reporter present
to record all testimony and receive all exhibits and evidence. Said meeting
notice shall be mailed by certified mail return receipt requested to the permit
applicant and the objecting person or entity and placed upon the agenda of a
regularly scheduled city meeting announcing the date, time and place of said
meeting not prior to ten calendar days from official announcement. The meeting
transcript and exhibits presented shall be filed in the official floodplain
application permit file.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021; Ord. 343, passed 1-23-2025) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.063 APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   Application for a permit and/or site plan approvals shall be filed, in
writing, in duplicate, on the forms supplied by the city and shall include all
information stipulated under §§
151.040 through
151.044.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.064 CHANGES.
   After the issuance of a floodplain permit or site plan approval by the
Floodplain Administrator or Floodplain Appeals Board, no changes of any kind
shall be made to the application, permit, or any of the plans, specification or
other documents submitted with the application without the written consent and
approval of the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.065 PERMIT PLACARDS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit placard, which shall be
prominently displayed on the subject property during the time development is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator or the City Council
sitting as the Floodplain Appeals Board.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.066 START OF CONSTRUCTION.
   Work on the proposed development shall begin within 180 days after the date
of issuance of the floodplain permit or the floodplain permit shall expire
unless a time extension request made in writing to the Floodplain Administrator
and filed in the official floodplain permit application file by the City Clerk
is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator after a showing by the
applicant of “justifiable delay” not caused by the negligence or lack of due
diligence of the applicant. Any extension of the 180-day start of construction
timeframe shall only be granted if the permit holder can demonstrate compliance
with this chapter, FIRM and/or FIS in effect at the time the extension is
granted. All work on the proposed development must be completed within 18
months of permit issuance, at which time the permit shall expire, unless a time
extension made in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and filed in the
official floodplain permit file by the City Clerk is granted in writing by the
Floodplain Administrator. The request for a time extension shall be in writing
and shall state the reasons for the extension. When considering an extension,
the Floodplain Administrator shall consider the following criteria:
   (A)   Has the applicant diligently pursued the completion of the proposed
development during the 18 months?
   (B)   Will the granting of the extension be detrimental to public safety,
health, or welfare or injurious to other property?
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.067 STOP WORK ORDERS, INSPECTIONS AND REVOCATIONS.
   (A)   Stop work orders.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a
“stop work order notice” for any development found ongoing without having
obtained a floodplain permit. Disregard of a stop work order notice shall
subject the violator to the penalties described in §
151.999.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a
“stop work order notice” for any development found non-compliant with the
provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the floodplain permit.
Disregard of a stop work order notice shall subject the violator to the
penalties described in §
151.999.
      (3)   In the event that the Floodplain Administrator issues a stop work
order notice, the floodplain permit shall be stayed pending a determination of
whether a violation actually occurred and/or abatement of the alleged
violation, whichever occurs first.
      (4)   In the event of an appeal on a floodplain permit, the Floodplain
Administrator shall immediately issue a stop work order notice that shall
remain in effect until a resolution of said appeal.
   (B)   Inspections and revocations.
      (1)   During the development period, the Floodplain Administrator or
other authorized county, state or federal government officials may inspect the
premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the
information provided on the floodplain permit application, this chapter and
with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and ordinances.
      (2)   If the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not
comply with the floodplain permit application, this chapter or that there has
been a false statement(s) or misrepresentation(s) by any applicant in the
permitting process, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a “stop work order
notice”, revoke the permit and request a temporary injunction in the Circuit
Court of Randolph County. The Floodplain Administrator shall notify any
appropriate agency or authority if the Floodplain Administrator finds a
violation of any non-floodplain law, regulation or ordinance.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator or other authorized county, state or
federal government officials may inspect any development covered by this
chapter or previous floodplain ordinances to determine whether any portion of
the development has been altered to be non-compliant with the requirements of
this chapter or other ordinances.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.068 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   In the special flood hazard area it shall be unlawful to occupy, or to
permit the use of occupancy, of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, installed, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the Floodplain Administrator stating that the
building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter. Occupying or
using a building or premises in violation of this section shall subject the
violator to the penalties described in §
151.999.
   (B)   In the special flood hazard area it shall be unlawful to inspect and
approve a permanent utility connection to any building or premises, or both, or
part thereof hereafter created, erected, installed or rebuilt until the utility
inspector is in possession of a copy of the certificate of compliance issued by
the Floodplain Administrator stating that the particular development being
inspected conforms to the requirements of this chapter. Inspection and approval
of utilities in violation of this section shall subject the violator to the
penalties described in §
151.999.
   (C)   In the special flood hazard area it shall be unlawful to install a
permanent utility connection to any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, installed or rebuilt until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the Floodplain Administrator stating that the
development conforms to the requirements of this chapter. Installation of
utilities in violation of this section shall subject the violator to the
penalties described in §
151.999.
   (D)   A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the Floodplain
Administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in the special
flood hazard.
   (E)   Issuance of the certificate of compliance shall be based upon the
inspection conducted as prescribed in this chapter and any finished
construction elevation certificate, hydraulic data, flood proofing certificate,
or encroachment analyses which may have been required as a condition of the
floodplain permit approval process.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.069 FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Floodplain determination fee shall be assessed on all proposed
development. This shall be a flat fee approved by Common Council.
      (2)   Proposed development determined to be occurring in a special flood
hazard area regulated by this chapter shall be assessed an additional fee,
payable to the city based upon a set schedule approved by Council using the
estimated value of the proposed construction as determined by the Floodplain
Administrator.
      (3)   In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the
city for any additional costs for services necessary for review and/or
inspection of proposed development. Services include, but are not limited to,
professional engineering and surveying. The Floodplain Administrator may
require a deposit towards these additional costs. Additional costs may include
reimbursement for contracted services.
   (B)   Due to the increased cost of processing, when any work for which a
permit is required by this chapter is started or proceeded with prior to
obtaining a permit the fees above specified shall be doubled. The additional
fee is intended to partially reimburse the city for the additional cost of
processing permits for work already underway. To more fully recover this cost
the fees above shall be tripled for every subsequent occurrence by the same
person. Payment of the increased fee shall not relieve any person from
complying fully with the requirements of this chapter in the execution of the
work or from other penalties prescribed herein.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021) Penalty, see §
151.999
APPEALS AND PENALTIES
§ 151.080 APPEALS.
   (A)   Whenever a person or entity is aggrieved by a decision of the
Floodplain Administrator with respect to the provisions of this chapter, it is
the right of that person or entity to appeal to the City Council sitting as the
Floodplain Appeals Board. Such appeal must be filed with the City Clerk, in
writing, within 30 days after notification of the decision of the Floodplain
Administrator as announced at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting. Said
appeal shall be served by the aggrieved person by regular mail on all
interested parties on the date that said appeal is filed. Upon receipt of such
appeal, the Floodplain Appeals Board shall set a time, date and place not less
than ten nor more than 60 calendar days for the purpose of hearing the appeal.
Notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be given to all
interested parties by placing an announcement of said hearing date, time and
place on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting notice
and to announce the date, time and place of the appeal hearing not sooner than
ten calendar days from said announcement date, at which time all may appear and
be heard. The determination by the Floodplain Appeals Board shall be final in
all cases, subject to any appeal to the Circuit Court of Randolph County, West
Virginia or any other court of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   In the event an appeal is filed wherein a floodplain permit has been
granted by the Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain Administrator shall
immediately issue a stop work order notice that shall remain in effect until a
resolution of said appeal is approved or denied.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.032 APPEAL REVIEW CRITERIA.
   All appeals contesting only the permit fee, the cumulative substantial
damage requirement, the flood protection setback requirement, or the freeboard
requirements, may be handled at the discretion of the Floodplain Appeals Board.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.033 VARIANCES.
   (A)   If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would
result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or
landowner, the city may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application
of the requirements.
   (B)   Considerations for the issuance of variances to this chapter shall
adhere to the following criteria:
      (1)   A decision granting or denying the variance request shall only be
issued by the Floodplain Appeals Board upon (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the permit would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that
granting the permit will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing laws,
regulations or ordinances;
      (2)   An affirmative decision granting a variance shall be issued only
upon determination that it is the minimum necessary, considering the special
flood hazard area, to afford relief. Financial hardship, used as sole criteria,
shall not be considered sufficient justification to grant a variance;
      (3)   An affirmative decision granting a floodplain variance shall be
issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is
the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (4)   The Floodplain Appeals Board shall notify the applicant in writing
and signed by a majority of the Floodplain Appeals Board that (i) the issuance
of a decision to allow construction of a structure below the base flood
elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance, and (ii)
such construction below the base flood elevation increases risk to life and
property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all decisions
as required in this chapter; and
      (5)   The Floodplain Appeals Board shall (i) maintain a record of all
decisions including justification for the decisions, and (ii) report such
decisions issued in its biannual report to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
      (6)   An affirmative decision shall not be granted for issuance of a
floodplain variance for any construction, development use or activity within
any floodway area that would cause any increase in the base flood elevation.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021) Penalty, see §
151.999
GOVERNMENT ACTIONS
§ 151.090 MUNICIPAL ANNEXATION.
   (A)   The city floodplain ordinance in effect on the date of annexation
shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the Floodplain Administrator
for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces a floodplain
ordinance which meets or exceeds the requirements for participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
   (B)   Municipalities with existing floodplain ordinances shall pass a
resolution acknowledging and accepting responsibility for enforcing floodplain
ordinance standards prior to annexation of any area containing identified
floodplain areas.
   (C)   All plats or maps of annexation shall show the floodplain boundaries,
base flood elevation and location of the floodway where determined.
   (D)   In accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 44, Subpart
(B), § 59.22(a)(9)(v) all Federal Emergency Management Agency participating
governments must notify the state Coordinating Office and Federal Insurance
Administration in writing whenever the boundaries of the governments have been
modified by annexation or the governments has otherwise assumed or no longer
has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a
particular area. In order that all Flood Insurance Rate Maps accurately
represent the government’s boundaries, a copy of a map of the government
boundaries suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new boundaries or
new area for which the government has assumed or relinquished floodplain
management regulatory authority must be included with the notification.
   (E)   NFIP participating governments must notify the state Coordinating
Office in writing whenever the boundaries of the governments have been modified
by annexation or the government has otherwise assumed or no longer has
authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a
particular area. A copy of a map of the government boundaries suitable for
reproduction, clearly delineating the new boundaries or new area for which the
government has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory
authority must be included with the notification.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.091 PERMITS FOR GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES.
   Unless specifically exempted by law, all public utilities and municipal,
county, state and federal entities are required to comply with this chapter and
obtain all necessary permits. Any entity claiming to be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter must provide a written statement setting forth the
rationale for exemption and file the same with FEMA. In addition the entity
claiming exemption shall provide copies of all relevant legal documentation
demonstrating the exemption.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
SEVERABILITY AND MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
§ 151.100 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall
not affect the remaining portions of this chapter which shall remain in full
force and effect and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are hereby
declared to be severable.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.101 LIABILITY.
   The granting of a permit or approval of a subdivision, development plan in
an identified special flood hazard area, shall not constitute a representation,
guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the city or by any official or employee
thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and shall create
no liability upon the city. This chapter does not create a private cause of
action. All applicants proposing construction in or near a floodplain area are
urged to locate construction as far away from, and as high above, all flooding
sources as possible.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of this chapter or direction or order of the Floodplain
Administrator, or any other authorized employee of, shall be unlawful and shall
be referred to the City Attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such
violators.
   (B)   A violator shall, upon conviction, pay a fine to the city of not less
than $50 or more than $500 plus cost of prosecution. Each day during which any
violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby
reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this
chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or non-
compliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the violation or non-compliance
with this chapter or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or non-compliance within a
reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or
relocated in non-compliance with this chapter may be declared by the city to be
a public nuisance and abated as such subject to other applicable laws and
exhaustion of appellate rights.
(Ord. 280, passed 3-4-2021)
CHAPTER 152: ZONING
General Provisions
   
152.001   Title
   
152.002   Authority
   
152.003   Purpose
   
152.004   Scope; jurisdiction
   
152.005   Interpretation; conflict; severability
   
152.006   Non-exclusionary intent
   
152.007   Official zoning map
   
152.008   Enactment
   
152.009   Effective date
Administration; Enforcement; Amendments
   
152.020   Purpose
   
152.021   Powers and duties of Zoning Officer
   
152.022   Zoning permit
   
152.023   Fees
   
152.024   Amendments to this chapter
   
152.025   Powers and duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals
   
152.026   Appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals
   
152.027   Notice and hearing of appeals
   
152.028   Variances
   
152.029   Conditional use standards
Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots
   
152.040   Purpose
   
152.041   General provisions
   
152.042   Nonconforming uses
   
152.043   Nonconforming structures
   
152.044   Enlargement or extension of a nonconforming use
Definitions
   
152.055   Interpretation
   
152.056   Definitions
Zoning Districts and Regulations
   
152.065   Official zoning map and use table
   
152.066   Establishment of districts
   
152.067   Map and boundaries
   
152.068   Procedures relating to annexed lands, vacated areas and unzoned lands
   
152.069   Uses not expressly permitted or conditional
Single Family Residential (R-1) District
   
152.080   Single Family Residential (R-1) District
   
152.081   Permitted uses in the Single Family Residential (R-1) District
   
152.082   Conditional uses in the Single Family Residential (R-1) District
   
152.083   Single Family Residential (R-1) District lot requirements
City Residential (R-2) District
   
152.090   City Residential (R-2) District
   
152.091   Permitted uses in the City Residential (R-2) District
   
152.092   Conditional uses in the City Residential (R-2) District
   
152.093   City Residential (R-2) District lot requirements
Recreational (Rec) District
   
152.100   Recreational (Rec) District
   
152.101   Permitted uses in the Recreational (Rec) District
   
152.102   Conditional uses in the Recreational (Rec) District
   
152.103   Recreational (Rec) District lot requirements
Central Business (CBD) District
   
152.110   Central Business (CBD) District
   
152.111   Permitted uses in the Central Business (CBD) District
   
152.112   Conditional uses in the Central Business (CBD) District
   
152.113   Central Business (CBD) District lot requirements
Commercial (B-1) District
   
152.120   Commercial (B-1) District
   
152.121   Permitted uses in the Commercial (B-1) District
   
152.122   Conditional uses in the Commercial (B-1) District
   
152.123   Commercial (B-1) District lot requirements
Educational (E) District
   
152.130   Educational (E) District
   
152.131   Permitted uses in the Educational (E) District
   
152.132   Conditional uses in the Educational (E) District
   
152.133   Educational (E) District lot requirements
Industrial (I-1) District
   
152.140   Industrial (I-1) District
   
152.141   Permitted uses in the Industrial (I-1) District
   
152.142   Conditional uses in the Industrial (I-1) District
   
152.143   Industrial (I-1) District lot requirements
Telecommunications Overlay (TO) District
   
152.150   Telecommunications Overlay (TO) District
   
152.151   General provisions
Supplemental Regulations
   
152.160   Purpose
   
152.161   Adult business
   
152.162   Automobile car wash
   
152.163   Automobile repair/service
   
152.164   Bed and breakfast inn, I, II, and III
   
152.165   Child day care facility
   
152.166   Dog day care
   
152.167   Drive-through facility
   
152.168   Events, mass gathering
   
152.169   [Reserved]
   
152.170   Garage sales
   
152.171   Garden center
   
152.172   Greenhouse, noncommercial
   
152.173   Home-based business (no impact)
   
152.174   Home-based business (low impact)
   
152.175   Incinerator
   
152.176   Medical cannabis organizations
   
152.177   Reception facility
   
152.178   Salvage yards
   
152.179   Tourist or trailer camp
   
152.180   Urban agriculture
   
152.181   Vehicle, boat, and marine sales/rental and service
   
152.182   Video lottery establishment
   
152.183   Wind energy facility, small
General Regulations
   
152.195   Purpose
   
152.196   Accessory buildings, uses, and structures
   
152.197   Yard requirements
   
152.198   Additional principal buildings
   
152.199   Orientation of principal structures
   
152.200   Swimming pools
   
152.201   Fences, landscaping, and screening
   
152.202   Clear sight triangle
   
152.203   Lot lines and irregular lots
   
152.204   Height exceptions
   
152.205   Storage; general
   
152.206   Storage of trailer, camping, and recreational equipment
   
152.207   Performance standards
   
152.208   Lighting
   
152.209   Parking
   
152.210   Off-street loading requirements
   
152.211   Satellite signal receiving stations
   
152.212   Temporary uses
Sign Regulations
   
152.220   Findings; purpose; intent; interpretation
   
152.221   Permit required
   
152.222   Permit not required
   
152.223   Prohibited signs
   
152.224   General requirements
   
152.225   Nonconforming signs
   
152.226   Maintenance; removal
   
152.227   Temporary signs
   
152.228   Signs for Single Family Residential (R-1) and City Residential (R-2)
Districts
   
152.229   Signs for Recreational (Rec) District
   
152.230   Signs for Central Business (CBD) District
   
152.231   Signs for Educational (E) and Commercial (B-1) Districts
   
152.232   Signs for Industrial (I-1) District
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
   
152.240   Purpose
   
152.241   Applicability
   
152.242   Substantial change criteria
   
152.243   General requirements
   
152.244   Approval authority and process
   
152.245   Changes to approved application
   
152.246   Abandonment
   
152.247   Retention of expert assistance and reimbursement by applicant
   
152.248   Indemnification
   
152.249   Other permits required
Small Cell Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
   
152.260   Purpose
   
152.261   Requirements for permitted use status; zoning applicability
   
152.262   Design guidelines
   
152.263   Permit application requirements
   
152.264   Permit application processing
   
152.265   Revocation of permit
   
152.266   Rates
   
152.267   Public right-of-way requirements
   
152.268   Additional local rules
   
152.269   Indemnification
 
   
152.998   Injunction
   
152.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Official zoning map
   
Appendix B:   Land Use table
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the zoning ordinance of the City of Elkins,
West Virginia, hereinafter referred to as “this code” or “this chapter.”
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.002 AUTHORITY.
   Whereas, by act of the West Virginia State Legislature, as recorded in West
Virginia Code, the governing body of any county or municipality may, by
ordinance, classify the territory under its jurisdiction into districts of such
number, shape, and size as it may deem best suited to carry out the purpose of
zoning.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.003 PURPOSE.
   This code is consistent with the city’s comprehensive plan and was developed
to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. Other
purposes of this code include:
   (A)   To plan so that adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety
from fire, flood, and other danger is secured;
   (B)   To ensure attractiveness and convenience is promoted;
   (C)   To lessen congestion;
   (D)   To preserve historic landmarks, sites, districts, and buildings;
   (E)   To promote the orderly development of land; and
   (F)   To preserve agriculture.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.004 SCOPE; JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, addition,
alteration, moving, repair, and use of any building, structure, parcel of land,
or sign within the city, except work located primarily on a public way or road,
or on public utility towers and poles, and public utilities, unless
specifically mentioned in this code.
   (B)   In fulfilling these purposes, this code is intended to benefit the
public as a whole and not any specific person or class of persons. Although,
through the implementation, administration, and enforcement of this code,
benefits and detriments will be enjoyed or suffered by specific individuals,
such is merely a byproduct of the overall benefit to the whole community.
Therefore, unintentional breaches of the obligations of administration and
enforcement imposed on the city hereby shall not be enforceable in tort.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.005 INTERPRETATION; CONFLICT; SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, these regulations shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or
annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provisions of
law. Where the conditions imposed by, or pursuant to, these regulations are
different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any
other ordinance rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law, the
provisions which are more restrictive, and which impose the higher or greater
standards shall control. If any portion of this code held invalid for any
reason, the remaining herein shall not be affected.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.006 NON-EXCLUSIONARY INTENT.
   It is not the intent of this code to exclude any persons or groups with
differing economic, race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability, or
familial status from enjoyment of a residence, land ownership, or tenancy
within the city; nor is it the intent of this code to use public powers in any
way to promote the separation within the city of economic, racial, religious,
or ethnic groups, except as may be an incidental result of meeting the purposes
outlined in this subchapter.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.007 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The zoning ordinance of the city shall include this code and the
accompanying official zoning map, which shall be considered part of this code.
The official zoning map shall be the map certified by the City Council. All
subsequent amendments (i.e., rezoning) of the official zoning map shall be
certified by the City Council and then filed with both the office of the Clerk
of Randolph County and the City Clerk.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.008 ENACTMENT.
   The Council of the City of Elkins hereby ordains for the purpose of
accomplishing the objectives set out in the West Virginia Code, and §
152.003 above, that the following be enacted as the zoning code of the city.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.009 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect upon final adoption.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT; AMENDMENTS
§ 152.020 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to ensure that the processes by which the
zoning ordinance is effectuated have been clearly identified and delineated.
This subchapter shall outline the duties and powers of the Board of Zoning
Appeals, the zoning permit process, the appeals process, and other enforcement
related provisions.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.021 POWERS AND DUTIES OF ZONING OFFICER.
   Council shall appoint a Zoning Officer, who shall have the authority to
administer and enforce this code. Duties of the Zoning Officer include but are
not limited to the following:
   (A)   Keep a record of plans and applications for permits and all permits
issued with notations as to special conditions. All records shall be open for
public inspection.
   (B)   Review permit applications and notifications as necessary to determine
compliance with the provisions of this code. No permit shall be issued unless
it conforms to all applicable ordinances, statutes, and regulations.
   (C)   All questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be initially
presented and determined by the Zoning Officer. Subsequent recourse shall be,
in order, to the Board of Zoning Appeals and the courts.
   (D)   Upon finding that provisions of this code have been violated, notify
the person or party in writing responsible for the violation(s), order the
action necessary to correct the violation, and if correction is not completed
within the time specified in the notice of violation, begin legal actions
necessary to compel correction of the violation.
   (E)   Maintain official zoning maps.
   (F)   Provide information on planning and zoning upon request by citizens
and public agencies.
   (G)   Submit at least annually, a written report on all permits issued and
notice and orders issued.
   (H)   Perform additional tasks and duties as may be prescribed by the City
Council.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.022 ZONING PERMIT.
   (A)   No building or structure shall be constructed, erected, expanded,
enlarged, or otherwise structurally altered until a zoning permit has been
issued by the Zoning Officer.
   (B)   Applications for a zoning permit shall be made available at City Hall.
   (C)   All applications for zoning permits shall be made in writing by the
owner or authorized agent and shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. The
application shall:
      (1)   Include a statement as to the proposed use of the structure or
land.
      (2)   Be accompanied by a plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of
the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location of the building to be
constructed upon the lot, and accessory buildings to be erected, and such other
information as may be deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer in determining and
provided for the enforcement of this chapter.
   (D)   If the zoning permit application is approved by the Zoning Officer,
then an appropriate placard issued by the city and containing the approval of
the Zoning Officer, shall be returned together with the zoning permit to the
applicant, following payment of the appropriate fee as determined by City
Council. The placard shall be posted by the applicant in a conspicuous place
upon the building or construction site prior to the commencement of any
construction and shall remain upon the building or construction site during all
construction operations.
   (E)   A zoning permit does not alleviate the necessity to obtain a building
permit as required by the city.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.023 FEES.
   Fees to be charged for the issuance of a zoning permit shall be determined
by a schedule maintained at City Hall.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.024 AMENDMENTS TO THIS CHAPTER.
   The City Council may amend this chapter. Before amending this chapter, the
City Council with the advice of the Planning Commission, must find that the
amendment is consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan. If the amendment
is inconsistent, then the governing body with the advice of the Planning
Commission, must find that there have been major changes of an economic,
physical, or social nature within the area involved which were not anticipated
when the comprehensive plan was adopted and those changes have substantially
altered the basic characteristics of the area.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.025 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)   A Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby established with membership and
appointment provided in accordance with the West Virginia Code.
   (B)   (1)   The Board shall consist of five members appointed by City
Council. The members of the Board shall be residents of the city for at least
three years preceding his or her appointment. Members cannot be a member of the
Planning Commission and cannot hold any other elective or appointive office in
municipal government. Upon creation of the Board of Zoning Appeals, the members
shall be appointed for the following terms: one for a term of one year; two for
a term of two years; and two for a term of three years. The terms shall expire
on the first day of January of the first, second, and third year, respectively,
following their appointment. Thereafter, members shall serve three-year terms.
If a vacancy occurs, Council shall appoint a member for the unexpired term. A
Board member may be removed only for official misconduct or neglect of duty by
action of Council upon presentation of written charges.
      (2)   The governing body may appoint up to three additional members to
serve as alternate members of the Board of Zoning Appeals. The alternate
members must meet the same eligibility requirements as set out in division (A)
above. The term for an alternate member is three years. The governing body may
appoint alternate members on a staggered term schedule.
   (C)   An alternate member shall serve on the Board when one of the regular
members is unable to serve. The alternate member shall serve until a final
determination is made in the matter to which the alternate member was initially
called on to serve during the alternate member’s term.
   (D)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall establish written rules and
procedures for designating an alternate member. An alternate member shall have
the same powers and duties of a regular Board member.
   (E)   The members and alternate members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
serve without compensation but shall be entitled to reimbursement for all
reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in the performance of their
official duties.
   (F)   At the first regular meeting each year, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson from its members. The vice
chairperson shall have the power and authority to act as chairperson during the
absence or disability of the chairperson.
   (G)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall meet semi-annually and may meet more
frequently at the written request of the chairperson or by two or more members.
Notice for a special meeting must be in writing; include the date, time, and
place of the special meeting; and be sent to all members at least two days
before the special meeting. Written notice of a special meeting is not required
if the date, time, and place of the special meeting were set in a regular
meeting. The Board of Zoning Appeals must have a quorum to conduct a meeting. A
majority of the members of the Board of Zoning Appeals is a quorum. No action
of a Board is official unless authorized by a majority of the members present
at a regular or properly called special meeting.
   (H)   The Board of Zoning Appeals has the following duties:
      (1)   Hear, review, and determine appeals from an order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official or board charged
with the enforcement of this code or rule and regulation adopted pursuant
thereto;
      (2)   Authorize exceptions to the district rules and regulations only in
the classes of cases or in particular situations, as specified in this code;
      (3)   Hear and decide conditional uses of this code upon which the Board
is required to act;
      (4)   Authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, a variance to this code;
      (5)   Reverse, affirm, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from and have all the powers and authority of the
official or Board from which the appeal was taken;
      (6)   Adopt rules and regulations concerning:
         (a)   The filing of appeals, including the process and forms for the
appeal;
         (b)   Applications for variances and conditional uses;
         (c)   The giving of notice; and
         (d)   The conduct of hearings necessary to carry out the Board’s
duties under the terms of this chapter;
      (7)   Keep minutes of its proceedings;
      (8)   Keep an accurate and complete audio record of all of the Board’s
proceedings and official actions and keep the audio record in a safe manner,
which audio record is accessible within 24 hours of demand, for three years;
      (9)   Record the vote on all actions taken;
      (10)   Take responsibility for the custody and preservation of all papers
and documents of the Board. All minutes and records shall be filed in the
office of the Board and shall be public records;
      (11)   With consent from the governing body, hire employees necessary to
carry out the duties and responsibilities of the Board; provided, that the
governing body sets the salaries; and
      (12)   Supervise the fiscal affairs and responsibilities of the Board.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 325, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 152.026 APPEAL TO THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   An appeal from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official or board charged with the enforcement of this code, or
rule and regulation adopted pursuant to this code, shall be filed by an
aggrieved person with the Board of Zoning Appeals. The appeal shall:
   (A)   Specify the grounds of the appeal;
   (B)   Be filed within 30 days of the original order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by an administrative official or board charged with the
enforcement of this code; and
   (C)   Be on a form prescribed by the Board.
   (D)   Upon request of the Board of Zoning Appeals, the administrative
official or board shall transmit all documents, plans, and papers constituting
the record of the action from which the appeal was taken.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.027 NOTICE AND HEARING OF APPEAL.
   (A)   Within ten days of receipt of the appeal by the Board of Zoning
Appeals, the Board shall set a time for the hearing of the appeal and give
notice. The hearing on the appeal must be held within 45 days of receipt of the
appeal by the Board.
   (B)   At least 15 days prior to the date set for the hearing on the appeal,
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall publish a notice of the date, time, and place
of the hearing on the appeal as a Class I legal advertisement in compliance
with the provisions of the West Virginia Code, and written notice shall be
given to the interested parties. The publication area shall be the area covered
in the appeal.
   (C)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may require the party taking the appeal to
pay for the cost of public notice and written notice to interested parties.
   (D)   At the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent, or by an
attorney licensed to practice in this state.
   (E)   Every decision by the board must be in writing and state findings of
fact and conclusions of law on which the Board based its decision. If the Board
fails to provide findings of fact and conclusions of law adequate for decision
by the Circuit Court and as a result of the failure, the Circuit Court returns
an appealed matter to the Board and dismisses jurisdiction over an applicant’s
appeal without deciding the matter, whether the court returns the matter with
or without restrictions, the Board shall pay any additional costs for court
filing fees, service of process, and reasonable attorneys’ fees required to
permit the person appealing the Board’s decision to return the matter to the
Circuit Court for completion of the appeal.
   (F)   The written decision by the Board shall be rendered within 30 days
after the hearing.
   (G)   If the Board fails to render a written decision within 30 days after
the hearing, then any party may pursue additional legal remedies to obtain a
decision, including, but not limited to, seeking a writ of mandamus.
   (H)   When an appeal has been filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals, all
proceedings and work on the premises in question shall be stayed, except as
provided below:
      (1)   If the official or board from where the appeal was taken certifies
in writing to the Board of Zoning Appeals that a stay would cause imminent
peril to life or property;
      (2)   Upon further administrative proceedings, including, but not limited
to, submissions to and reviews by the staff or any administrative body; or
      (3)   Upon engineering or architectural work that does not disturb the
real estate beyond what is necessary to complete engineering, survey work, or
other tests.
   (I)   Petition for writ of certiorari. The final decision of the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall be subject to review by the Circuit Court of Randolph
County, West Virginia, by certiorari, as provided by W.Va. Code §§ 8A-9-1 et
seq.
   (J)   Nothing in this section prevents a party from obtaining an injunction.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.028 VARIANCES.
   (A)   A VARIANCE is a deviation from the minimum standards of this code and
shall not involve permitting land uses that are otherwise prohibited in the
zoning district nor shall it involve changing the zoning classifications of a
parcel of land.
   (B)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall grant a variance to this code if it
finds that the variance:
      (1)   Will not adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare, or
the rights of adjacent property owners or residents;
      (2)   Arises from special conditions or attributes which pertain to the
property for which a variance is sought and which were not created by the
person seeking the variance;
      (3)   Would eliminate an unnecessary hardship and permit a reasonable use
of the land; and
      (4)   Will allow the intent of this code to be observed and substantial
justice done.
   (C)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not grant a variance to allow the
establishment of a use in a zoning district when such use is prohibited by the
provisions of this code.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.029 CONDITIONAL USE STANDARDS.
   (A)   The conditional use permit procedure is intended to provide the Board
of Zoning Appeals with review of requests to establish uses that may be
appropriate in a zoning district, but that may have the potential for negative
impacts on the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The conditional use
standards provided in this subchapter are intended to avoid, minimize, or
mitigate adverse impacts conditional uses may have on the health, safety, and
welfare of the public.
   (B)   All applications for a conditional use permit shall demonstrate that:
      (1)   The use is consistent with the policies and intent of the
corresponding purpose for the zoning district in which it lies and the city’s
comprehensive plan.
      (2)   The use is physically and operationally compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood and surrounding existing uses.
      (3)   The use will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so
that it does not cause substantial injury to adjoining property.
      (4)   The use will be adequately served by public facilities and services
which include but are not limited to water, sewer, electric, schools, streets,
fire and police protection, storm drainage, public transit, and public parks
and trails.
      (5)   Adequate off-street parking will be provided on the same property
as the proposed conditional use as well as adequate ingress and egress to the
property in compliance with the standards set forth in this code.
      (6)   Any storage of hazardous material will comply with all state,
federal, and local regulations, and all such material will be listed and made
known to the Chief of the City of Elkins Fire Department.
      (7)   The use will not endanger public health or safety or constitute a
public nuisance.
      (8)   The use will not conduct operations in connection with the use
which are offensive, dangerous, or destructive of the environment.
   (C)   Conditions may be imposed on a proposed conditional use to ensure that
potential significant adverse impacts on surrounding uses will be reduced to
the maximum extent feasible, including but not limited to conditions or
measures addressing:
      (1)   Location on a site of activities that generate potential adverse
impacts such as noise and glare;
      (2)   Hours of operation and deliveries;
      (3)   Location of loading space and delivery zones;
      (4)   Light intensity and hours of full illumination;
      (5)   Placement of outdoor vending machines;
      (6)   Loitering;
      (7)   Litter control;
      (8)   Placement of trash receptacles;
      (9)   On-site parking configuration and facilities;
      (10)   On-site circulation; and
      (11)   Privacy concerns of adjacent uses.
   (D)   Conditional use permit decisions are made by the Board of Zoning
Appeals (BZA). In considering the proposed conditional use, the BZA must
determine whether the applicable general standards under this subchapter have
been met. The BZA may impose additional conditions and safeguards deemed
necessary.
   (E)   The breach of any condition, safeguard, or requirement shall be
considered a violation of the conditional use permit approval. If the applicant
fails to comply with any of the applicable requirements of this chapter, the
BZA shall have the authority to revoke any conditional use permit after
providing notice to the property owner and after public hearing is held in the
same manner as the original approval.
   (F)   Validity of approval. Any conditional use approved by the Board of
Zoning Appeals under which the premises are not used, work is not started
within six months, or the use or work has been abandoned for a period of one
year, shall lapse and cease to be in effect. The BZA may permit one six-month
extension if the extension is applied for in writing by the applicant prior to
the expiration of the approval, provided that the BZA finds that the extension
is warranted due to circumstances beyond the control of the applicant.
   (G)   No application which has been denied wholly or in part by the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of
the last denial, unless permitted by the BZA after demonstration by the
applicant of a change of circumstances from the previous application.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS
§ 152.040 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This purpose of this subchapter is to set forth standards and
regulations regarding the continued existence of uses, structures, and lots
established prior to the effective date of this chapter (or any amendment
subsequent thereto) that do not conform to this chapter. These standards shall
apply to all nonconforming uses, structures, and lots, as defined by this code.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.041 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Nonconforming lots, structures, or uses may continue to exist, be
bought or sold, altered, restored, or extended only in accordance with the
provisions of this code.
   (B)   Nothing in this code shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition any portion of a nonconforming structure declared unsafe by a
proper authority.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorization for or
approval of the continuance of the illegal use of a structure or premises in
violation of zoning controls in existence at the time of the effective date of
legal enactment of this code.
   (D)   Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to
transfer an area from one district to another district of a different
classification, the foregoing provisions shall apply to any nonconformities
existing therein.
   (E)   Nothing in this section prohibits alterations or additions to or
replacement of buildings or structures owned by any farm, industry, or
manufacturer, or the use of land presently owned by any farm, industry, or
manufacturer but not used for agricultural, industrial, or manufacturing
purposes, or the use or acquisition of additional land which may be required
for the protection, continuing development, or expansion of any agricultural,
industrial, or manufacturing operation of any present or future satellite
agricultural, industrial, or manufacturing use.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.042 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   These regulations shall apply to any use of a structure or lot in any
zoning district that is a nonconforming use as defined by this code.
   (B)   Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this code, a
lawful use of a lot or structure exists that is made no longer permissible
under the terms of this code as enacted or amended, such use may be sold or
otherwise transferred to other owners and may be continued as long as it
remains otherwise lawful in accordance with the provisions of this code.
   (C)   Normal structural repair and maintenance may be performed to allow the
continuation of a nonconforming use.
   (D)   No nonconforming use of a lot or nonconforming use of a structure
shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a greater area of the lot
or structure than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this code.
   (E)   Once a nonconforming use has been changed or converted to a conforming
use, it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use.
   (F)   When a nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 months, abandonment is
presumed and the nonconforming use shall not be allowed to be re-established.
If the property has been abandoned, then any future use of the land, buildings,
or structures shall conform and be in accordance with all applicable rules,
regulations, and requirements of the particular zoning district wherein the
property is located.
   (G)   Abandonment of a nonconforming use shall be presumed if one or more of
the following conditions exists, indicating intent on the part of the property
owner to abandon the nonconforming use:
      (1)   Utilities, such as water, gas, and electricity to the property have
been disconnected;
      (2)   The property, buildings, and grounds, have fallen into disrepair as
evidenced by proper code violation documentation;
      (3)   When it has been replaced by a conforming use;
      (4)   When it has been changed to a use permitted by conditional use by
the Board of Zoning Appeals; or
      (5)   The business license issued by the city has expired.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.043 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   A nonconforming structure containing a use permitted in the zoning
district in which it is located may continue only in accordance with the
provisions of this code.
   (B)   Normal repair and maintenance may be performed to allow the
continuation of nonconforming structures.
   (C)   A nonconforming structure may not, under any circumstances, be
enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity except as
permitted under §
152.044.
   (D)   Nonconforming structures and uses may enlarge principal structures by
adding decks or porches provided that nonconformities are not increased.
   (E)   Any legal, pre-existing nonconforming structure damaged by fire,
flood, explosion, or other disaster event may be reconstructed and used as
before, so long as the structure is damaged no more than 50% of its appraised
value exclusive of foundations, if such reconstruction is undertaken within 12
months of such disaster, and if the restored structure has no greater coverage
and contains no greater content (measured in cubic feet) than before such
disaster. An application to the Board of Zoning Appeals for permission to
undertake to re-construct the structure must be filed prior to undertaking the
repairs after the use has been destroyed or damaged, otherwise any structure
shall conform to and be in accordance with all applicable rules, regulations,
and requirements of the particular district as provided in this chapter.
   (F)   If any building occupied by a nonconforming use is damaged more than
50% of its reconstruction cost exclusive of foundations, such building may not
be restored for any nonconforming use.
   (G)   The extension of a lawful use to any portion of a nonconforming
structure shall not be deemed the extension of a nonconforming use.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.044 ENLARGEMENT OR EXTENSION OF A NONCONFORMING USE.
   (A)   Nonconforming uses existing at the time this code was passed, or at
the time a subsequent amendment creates the nonconforming use, may enlarge the
building which housed the nonconforming use at the time this code was passed,
or at the time a subsequent amendment creates the nonconforming use, and extend
within such enlargement, provided that:
      (1)   The enlargement becomes an attached part of the main structure and
does not utilize additional or adjoining land area other than the original
parcel.
      (2)   The enlargement meets all requirements of this code, including but
not limited to setback and yard requirements.
      (3)   The enlargement is for the purpose of expanding the area housing
the use which existed at the time this code was passed, or at the time a
subsequent amendment creates the nonconforming use.
      (4)   The enlargement and extension does not:
         (a)   Adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of persons
residing or working in the district;
         (b)   Cause a depreciation of the value of other property and uses
permitted in the district;
         (c)   Significantly increase traffic congestion;
         (d)   Adversely affect the privacy of persons residing in the
immediate vicinity;
         (e)   Increase the hazard in the area of fire, offensive noise, smoke,
dust, debris, or other objectionable influences;
         (f)   Adversely affect any recreational, institutional, or other
authorized use;
         (g)   Inhibit the desirability, feasibility, or likelihood of future
residential or commercial development or expansion in the immediate vicinity;
or
         (h)   Occur in a residential zoned district.
      (5)   The enlargement or expansion brings all off-street parking
requirements into conformity.
      (6)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may impose such other reasonable
restrictions upon the proposed expansion as deemed necessary to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of persons residing within the vicinity of the
nonconforming use.
   (B)   Enlargement or extension approval shall be void if construction work
does not begin within one year from the date of approval, or if work is
suspended or abandoned for a period of 90 days at any time after the work is
commenced.
   (C)   All enlargement or extension of a nonconforming use must comply with
the applicable floodplain management requirements.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
DEFINITIONS
§ 152.055 INTERPRETATION.
   For the purpose of this chapter certain terms and words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
   (A)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
   (B)   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and words
used in the plural number shall include the singular.
   (C)   The word “person” shall include a firm, association, organization,
limited liability company, limited partnership, corporation, trust, company, as
well as a natural individual.
   (D)   The word “city” shall mean the City of Elkins.
   (E)   The word “shall” and “must” are used to indicate mandatory directives.
   (F)   The word “structure” shall include the word “building.”
   (G)   The word “map” or “zoning map” or “zoning map, City of Elkins, West
Virginia” or “official zoning map” shall mean the map that geographically
illustrates all zoning district boundaries within the city, pursuant to the
requirements of W.Va. Code Ch. 8A.
   (H)   The term “governing body” and “City Council” shall both mean the City
Council for the city pursuant to the Charter of the city.
   (I)   The term “Planning Commission” shall mean the Planning Commission for
the city, pursuant to W. Va. Ch. 8A.
   (J)   “Districts” or “zoning districts” shall mean administrative tracts
designating the uses to which land can legally be utilized. Boundaries of the
districts are shown on the official zoning map, which is a part of this code.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.056 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT. The relinquishment of property or a cessation of the use of the
property by the owner or lessee without any intention of transferring rights to
the property to another owner or resuming the nonconforming use of the property
for a period of one year. In the case of natural resources, the absence of
natural resources extraction or harvesting is not ABANDONMENT.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE or ACCESSORY BUILDING. A structure or building on the
same lot with or on an adjacent lot to, and of a nature customarily incidental
and subordinate to, the principal use or structure, including but not limited
to swimming pools, piers and other water related structures, parking, fences,
gazebos, satellite dishes, doghouses and dog-related structures, noncommercial
greenhouses, sheds, and private garages.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily
incidental and subordinate to, the principal use, including private garages,
noncommercial greenhouses, urban agriculture, and drive-through facilities.
   ACCESSWAY. A private vehicular facility for townhomes, multi-family
dwellings, and condominiums, serving more than four dwelling units, and
commercial developments that extends from the curb-line extended of a public or
private road to the parking lot.
   Accessway
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ead299bdbbd5d64237988ee0c60bb5e02d43e88c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2690.png]
 
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. Any commercial establishment in which is offered for sale
as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade videocassettes,
movies, books, magazines or other periodicals, or other media which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on nudity or sexual conduct or
on activities which, if presented in live presentation, would constitute adult
entertainment.
   ADULT BUSINESS. An adult bookstore, movie theater, or movie house or other
adult entertainment, as defined herein.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. An establishment providing, either as a sole use or in
conjunction with or in addition to other uses, entertainment consisting of the
use of nudity or of live dancing, posing, displaying, acting or other live
presentation or use of persons whose actions are distinguished or characterized
by emphasis on use of the human body in a manner intended to or resulting in
arousal of sexual excitation or sexual titillation or a prurient interest or
intended to or resulting in producing lustful emotions.
   ADULT MOVIE THEATER OR MOVIE HOUSE (including ADULT MINI-THEATERS). Any
movie theater which on a regular, continuing basis shows films rated X by the
Motion Picture Coding Association of America or any movie theater which
presents for public viewing on a regular, continuing basis so-called adult
films depicting sexual conduct.
   ADVERTISING. Any words, symbol, color, or design used to call attention to a
commercial product, service, or activity.
   AGENT. A person who is authorized to act for or in place of an applicant, or
someone who is a representative of the applicant.
   AGGRIEVED or AGGRIEVED PERSON. A person who:
      (1)   Is denied by the Planning Commission, Board of Subdivision and Land
Development Appeals, or the Board of Zoning Appeals, in whole or in part, the
relief sought in any application or appeal; or
      (2)   Has demonstrated that he or she will suffer a peculiar injury,
prejudice, or inconvenience beyond that which other residents of the county or
municipality may suffer.
   AGRICULTURAL BUILDING. A structure designed to house farm implements, hay,
grain, poultry, livestock or other agricultural products. For the purpose of
this definition, this structure shall not contain habitable space or a place of
employment where agricultural products are processed or treated or packaged;
nor shall it be a place used by the public.
   AGRICULTURE. The keeping of livestock, poultry, bees, and similar endeavors,
and the cultivation of the soil.
   AIRPORT. Any area of land or water designated, set aside, used, or intended
for use, for the landing and take-off of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas
designated, set aside, used, or intended for use, for airport buildings.
   ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of
lots or buildings in urban districts and not intended for the purpose of
through vehicular traffic.
   Alley
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ead299bdbbd5d64237988ee0c60bb5e02d43e88c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2692.png]
 
   ALTERATION. Any change, addition, or modification in construction or
occupancy of an existing structure.
   ALTERNATIVE SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Man-made trees, clock towers, steeples, light
poles, flag poles, power transmission towers, buildings, signs, and similar
alternative design mounting structures that partially or fully camouflage or
conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
   AMPHITHEATER. An outdoor gathering space typically for entertainment which
is often constructed with tiers of seats or sloping surfaces that gradually
rise outward from a central open space or stage. An AMPHITHEATER may include a
bandshell-type building or structure to provide weather protection to a stage.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL/VETERINARY OFFICE. An establishment for temporary occupation
by sick or injured animals for the purpose of medical diagnosis and treatment,
and shall exclude the treatment or other care of humans. An ANIMAL HOSPITAL/
VETERINARY OFFICE is not considered a “kennel” for the purpose of this code,
but may be combined with the kennel land use in districts where both uses are
permitted.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any building or structure other than a tower
which can be used for location of telecommunications facilities.
   AUTOMOBILE. A motorized road vehicle, typically with four wheels, able to
carry a small number of people.
   AUTOMOBILE CAR WASH. Any building, site, or premise or portions thereof,
used for washing the interior or exterior of automobiles. An AUTOMOBILE CAR
WASH shall include self-operated facilities, but shall not include incidental
one-bay washing facility in an automobile repair or service station where such
facilities are incidental to the operation of said automobile repair or service
station.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR/SERVICE. Any building, structure, improvements, or land
used for the repair or maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks,
trailers, or similar vehicles including but not limited to body, fender,
muffler or upholstery work, oil change and lubrication, painting, tire service
and sales, or installation of CB radios, car alarms, stereo equipment or
cellular telephones.
   BAKERY. An establishment used for the preparation of baked goods primarily
for retail sales but may include incidental wholesale for general distribution
or consumption off-site.
   BANK/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. An establishment that provides services such as
retail banking, collection services, loan services, and tax and investment
services to individuals and businesses.
   BASE STATION. The structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables
wireless telecommunications licensed or authorized by the FCC, between user
equipment and a communications network.
      (1)   Includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with wireless
telecommunications services, such as private, broadcast, and public safety
services, as well as unlicensed wireless telecommunication services and fixed
wireless telecommunication services, such as microwave backhaul.
      (2)   Includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas
affixed to the base station, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small-cell networks).
      (3)   Includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time an
eligible facilities modification application is filed with the city, supports
or houses equipment described in divisions (1) and (2) above, and that has been
reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under
another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not
built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support.
      (4)   Does not include any structure that, at the time a completed
eligible facilities modification application is filed with the city under this
chapter, does not support or house equipment described in divisions (1) and (2)
above.
      (5)   The term does not encompass a “tower” as defined in this section,
or any equipment associated with a tower.
   BASEMENT. A space having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height
below the average level of the adjoining ground.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN I. A private residence in which overnight
accommodations are provided for not more than eight transient paying guests in
up to four bedrooms at any particular time for not more than 31 consecutive
days and not more than 90 days in one calendar year. The residence is owner-
occupied.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN II. A private residence in which overnight
accommodations are provided for not more than ten transient paying guests in up
to ten bedrooms at any particular time. The residence is occupied by the owner
or a designee during the guests’ overnight stay and is otherwise occupied by
the owner or a designee.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN III. A private residence in which overnight
accommodations are provided for not more than eight transient paying guests in
up to four bedrooms at any particular time, for not more than 180 consecutive
days.
   BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. The officially constituted body appointed to carry
out duties and responsibilities in accordance with the W.Va. Code Ch. 8A, Art.
8, et seq., as amended.
   BOAT AND MARINE SALES/SERVICE. Any building or lot used for the sale of,
maintenance, servicing, repair, or painting of boats and other related
watercraft.
   BOAT STORAGE. An enclosed, partially enclosed, or open facility utilized for
the wet or dry storage of boats.
   BOLLARD. A short, vertical, and permanent post, usually ornamental in
nature, used to inhibit trespass by persons or vehicles, or to prevent
encroachment onto private property or other defined space.
   BREWERY. A state-licensed establishment where intoxicating or
nonintoxicating beer is manufactured or in any way prepared and may include a
tasting facility as defined in this section. Facilities are subject to federal,
state, and local regulations and guidelines.
   BREWERY PUB. A place of manufacture of nonintoxicating beer or
nonintoxicating craft beer owned by a resident brewer, subject to federal and
state regulations and guidelines, a portion of which premises are designated
for retail sales of nonintoxicating beer or nonintoxicating craft beer by the
resident brewer owning the brewpub.
   BROADCASTING STUDIO (RADIO/TELEVISION). Any premises or station authorized
by the appropriate regulating agency used for the purpose of providing
broadcasting services for general reception.
   BUILDING. Any structure having enclosing walls and roofs and requiring a
permanent location on the land.
      (1)   BUILDING FRONTAGE. The length of the main wall of a building which
physically encloses usable interior space and which is the architecturally
designed wall that contains the main entrance for use by the general public.
The frontage is measured at a height of ten feet above grade.
      (2)   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the site or lot on which it is situated. In all residential districts, a
dwelling is the PRINCIPAL BUILDING on the lot on which it is located.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average elevation
of the proposed finished grades immediately adjacent to the front lot line to
the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line for mansard
roofs, to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel
roofs. If there are two or more separate roofs on a single building, the height
of such building shall be calculated from the highest roof. See Figure 1 in the
Appendices to Ord. 301.
   BUILDING MATERIAL FACILITY. An establishment that sells home, lawn, and
garden supplies and tools and construction materials, such as brick, lumber,
hardware, and other similar materials. Construction goods may be located in
outdoor storage.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line establishing the minimum allowable distance
between the nearest part of any principal building, including decks, patios,
covered porches, steps, and landings exceeding 24 square feet, but excluding
eaves, overhangs, bay windows, sills, belt courses, cornices, and ornamental
features not exceeding two feet in width, to the nearest edge of a street
right-of-way, property line, or easement line, when measured perpendicular
thereto.
   Building Setback Line
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ead299bdbbd5d64237988ee0c60bb5e02d43e88c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2694.png]
 
   BUS/TRANSIT FACILITIES. A facility, including terminals, depots, and
passenger waiting, loading, and unloading stations of bus and other transit
companies and districts. Also, includes facilities providing any and all types
of general or specialized maintenance services or storage areas for buses and
other transit vehicles of a transit company or district, public or private,
providing transportation services primarily for people.
   BUS/TRANSIT SHELTER. A covered structure at a bus or other transit stop
providing protection against the weather.
   BUTCHER SHOP. An indoor business where the slaughter of animals, dressing
animal flesh, or selling animal meat, or any combination thereof, occurs for
the purposes of retail sale or sale to wholesalers.
   CAMOUFLAGE or CONCEAL or CONCEALMENT or STEALTH. Having similar design and
coloration features as the surrounding environment, utility pole, or building.
   CAMPGROUND. A publicly or privately owned site designed, designated,
maintained, intended, or used for the purpose of supplying a location for
seasonal, recreational, and temporary living purposes in cabins, tents, or
recreational equipment or vehicles open to the public for free or for a fee.
This definition excludes “tourist” or “trailer camps.”
   CANOPY. A roof-like structure either projecting from a building facade and
open on three sides, or standing alone and open on four sides, and used for the
purpose of protecting pedestrians and motorists from weather-related elements.
   CATERING BUSINESS. An establishment used for the preparation and delivery of
food and beverages for off-site consumption. This establishment may provide for
an on-site pickup, but may not provide for on-site consumption.
   CENTERLINE. An imaginary line running parallel to street or easement right-
of-way lines and equidistant from the lines on each side of the street or
easement, or a line following the center of a physical feature such as a
stream.
   CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY. Divided into four classes as defined in the West
Virginia Code.
      (1)   CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY, CLASS 1. A facility maintained by the
state or any county or municipality thereof, or any agency or facility
maintained by an individual, firm, corporation, association or organization,
public or private for the care of 13 or more children for child care services
in any setting, if the facility is open for more than 30 days per year per
child.
      (2)   CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY, CLASS 2. A facility which is used to
provide nonresidential childcare services for compensation for seven to 12
children, including children who are living in the household, who are under six
years of age. No more than four of the total number of children may be under 24
months of age. A facility may be in a provider’s residence or a separate
building.
      (3)   “CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY, CLASS 3. A facility which is used to
provide nonresidential childcare services for compensation in a provider’s
residence. The provider may care for four to six children, at one time
including children who are living in the household, who are under six years of
age. No more than two of the total number of children may be under 24 months of
age.
      (4)   CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY, CLASS 4. Residential childcare services
for compensation for three or fewer children, including children who are living
in the household, who are under six years of age. Care is given in the
provider’s own home to at least one child who is not related to the caregiver.
   CIDERY. A state-licensed establishment where intoxicating or nonintoxicating
cider is manufactured or in any way prepared for commercial (not solely
personal) use. These establishments are licensed under the winery provisions by
the WVABC.
   CITY OF ELKINS UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the city in
a public right-of-way.
   CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE. The triangular area formed by intersecting street,
alley, or other public right-of-way centerlines and a line interconnecting
points established on each centerline, 75 feet from the point of intersection
and the plane established two and one-half feet in elevation to a height of
eight feet from grade level at the intersection of the street, alley, or other
public right of way centerline.
   CLINIC. An establishment providing medical, chiropractic, psychiatric, or
surgical services exclusively on an outpatient basis, including emergency
treatment, and diagnostic services or any other human rehabilitation service.
   COLLAPSE ZONE. An area where a tower may collapse based on the site and
design specifications and which is certified and stamped by an engineer
licensed in the State of West Virginia.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. The set of equipment and network components,
including wires, cables, antennas, and associated facilities, used by a
communications service provider to provide communications service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53), as amended;
mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(33), as amended; or wireless
service other than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. Any entity that provides communications
service.
   COMMUNITY FACILITY. A nonprofit facility, whether publicly or privately
owned, with the primary goal to provide a community service. Services may
include information socializing, recreation and counseling, but shall exclude
the provision of sleeping quarters, except for one caretaker dwelling unit to
be used for security and maintenance purposes.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The comprehensive plan for the city.
   CONCEAL or CONCEALMENT. When an antenna, small wireless facility, decorative
pole, utility pole, or related equipment are designed to look like a feature
other than a small wireless facility and which has similar design and
coloration features as the surrounding environment.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use which because of special requirements or
characteristics may be permitted in a particular zoning district only after
review by the Board of Zoning Appeals and upon issuance of a conditional use
permit, and subject to the limitations and conditions specified in this code.
   CONFERENCE CENTER. A building or part of a building designed to host
conventions, trade shows, exhibits, assemblies, meetings, and similar events,
and may include large and small halls and meeting rooms. Services associated
with meetings and events, such as catering, meal service, bar service, and
related accessory uses and services shall also be permitted.
   CONTINUING CARE FACILITY. One or more of the following facilities:
      (1)   ADULT ASSISTED LIVING. Any facility, residence, or place of
accommodation available for four or more residents for the purpose of having
personal assistance or supervision, or both, provided to any residents therein
who are dependent upon the services of others by reason of physical or mental
impairment and who may also require nursing care at a level that is not greater
than limited and intermittent nursing care. Such facility shall comply with the
provisions of the West Virginia Code.
      (2)   NURSING HOME. Any institution, residence, or place, or any part or
unit thereof, however named, which is advertised, offered, maintained, or
operated by the ownership or management, whether for consideration or not, for
the express or implied purpose of providing accommodations and care, for a
period of more than 24 hours, for four or more persons who are ill or otherwise
incapacitated and in need of extensive, ongoing nursing care due to physical or
mental impairment or which provides services for the rehabilitation of persons
who are convalescing from illness or incapacitation.
      (3)   SKILLED NURSING FACILITY. An institution, or a distinct part of an
institution, that primarily provides inpatient skilled nursing care and related
services, or rehabilitation services, to injured, disabled, or sick persons.
   CONTRACTOR. A person who contracts to do work for an applicant, including
any person sub-contracted to a person contracted to do work for an applicant.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. An establishment engaged in the retail sale, from the
premises, of food, beverages, and other frequently or recurrently needed items
for household use, but not including the display of merchandise or products
outdoors, except where such display is required to sell the merchandise. This
land use does not include a gas station, but a CONVENIENCE STORE may be
combined with a gas station or large gas station provided that the combined
uses are each permitted within the district.
   CONVERSION. The remodeling or alteration of a structure so as to accommodate
more leasable or saleable units or a different use than what had originally
been intended for the structure, provided the existing zoning permits the
intended use. This includes the alteration of a non-residential structure into
a dwelling unit(s) for at least one family, the alteration of existing
dwellings into a commercial use, and the alteration of an existing dwelling
into a mixed commercial and residential use.
   CONVERSION OF SCHOOL/CHURCH. The conversion (as defined by this section) of
a former school or church for multi-family dwelling or commercial purposes.
   CORRECTIONAL FACILITY. A publicly or privately operated facility housing
persons awaiting trial, serving a sentence after being found guilty of a
criminal offense, being within the jurisdiction of a federal, state, or local
probation, parole, or corrections agency or receiving treatment other than at a
hospital while under the jurisdiction of such authority or agency, including
but not limited to jails, prisons, juvenile detention centers, work release
centers, prerelease centers, and treatment centers.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Elkins, West Virginia.
   COUNTY. Randolph County, West Virginia.
   COWORKING SPACE. A room or rooms which may contain desks or other workspaces
and facilities and is used by entrepreneurs, small teams, and/or employees of
multiple companies to work on their own projects. Rules for membership and
participation in the coworking space are explicit, transparent and are
available to the public. COWORKING SPACES may host classes or networking events
which are open either to the public or to current and prospective members.
Fabrication tools are limited to those which do not generate noise or
pollutants in excess of what is customary within a typical office environment.
   CULTURAL SERVICE. The use of a site engaging in the collection, display, or
preservation of objects of community or cultural interest.
   DAY. A calendar day. When computing any period of time prescribed by any
applicable provision of this chapter, the day of the act, event, default, or
omission from which the applicable period begins to run is not included. The
last day of the period so computed is included, unless it is a Saturday, a
Sunday, a legal holiday, or a designated day off, in which event the prescribed
period of time runs until the end of the next day that is not a Saturday,
Sunday, legal holiday, or designated day off.
   DECORATIVE POLE. A city utility pole that is specially designed and placed
for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than
a small wireless facility, specially designed informational or directional
signage, or temporary holiday or special event attachments have been placed, or
are permitted to be placed, according to nondiscriminatory municipal rules or
codes.
   DESIGNATED SCENIC RESOURCES. A specific location, view or corridor
identified as a scenic resource in the comprehensive plan or by a local, state,
or federal agency or government and consists of:
      (1)   A three dimensional area extending out from a particular viewpoint
on a public right of way, within a public recreational area, or within a
component of a state or national park system, focusing on a single object, such
as a mountain, resulting in a narrow corridor, or a group of objects, such as a
downtown skyline or mountain range, resulting in a panoramic view corridor; or
      (2)   Lateral terrain features such as valley sides or woodland as
observed to either side of the observer, constraining the view into a narrow or
particular field, as seen from a viewpoint on a public right of way, within a
public recreational area or within a component of a state or national park
system.
   DISTILLERY. An establishment where alcoholic liquor other than wine or beer
is manufactured or in any way prepared.
   DISTILLERY, MINI. A state-licensed mini distillery establishment where in
any year (as defined by WVABC) no more than 20,000 gallons of alcoholic liquor
is manufactured with no less than 25% of raw agricultural products being
produced by the owner of the mini-distillery on the premises of that
establishment, and no more than 25% of raw agricultural products originating
from any source outside this state.
   DISTRIBUTION FACILITY. Any premises or part thereof, which provide
logistical support for business, such as freight management, inventory control,
storage, packaging, and consolidation of goods for distribution.
   DOCK. A structure built over or floating upon the water and used as a
mooring place for boats and other marine transport, fishing, swimming, and
other recreational uses.
   DOG DAY CARE. An organized, controlled, and monitored environment for a
group of dogs to interact and play throughout the day. The purpose is to
provide stimulation, exercise, and socialization for dogs, and ancillary
services. Overnight stays are not permitted in dog day care facilities unless
the use is combined with a kennel.
   DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY. Any portion of a building or structure from which
business is transacted, or is capable of being transacted, directly with
customers located in an automobile during such business transactions.
   DRIVEWAY. An impervious surface for vehicular access to a building, garage,
parking facility, or other vehicular facility, lot, or parcel of land.
   Driveway
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ead299bdbbd5d64237988ee0c60bb5e02d43e88c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2696.png]
 
   DRY CLEANER. An establishment providing dry cleaning and laundering services
where dry cleaning and laundering are done on the premises. A DRY CLEANER may
also provide ancillary services such as tailoring.
   DWELLING. A house, apartment building, or other building designed or used
primarily for human habitation. The word DWELLING shall not include boarding
houses or rooming houses, tourist homes, motels, hotels, or other structures
designed for transient residence.
   DWELLING, ACCESSORY and CONVERSION DWELLING. A portion of a single-family
dwelling converted into two separate dwelling units within the principal
structure or new or existing accessory structures.
   DWELLING, CONVERSION APARTMENT. A dwelling unit created by the conversion of
an existing single-family dwelling into a three or four family dwelling.
   DWELLING, MIXED USE. A building containing residential uses with a
subordinate amount of commercial or office uses on the ground floor facing the
primary street frontage, with residential units located primarily above the
first floor or located on the first floor only when behind commercial uses.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A freestanding building containing three or more
dwelling units, whether they have direct access to the outside, or access to a
common building entrance. MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS may consist of rental
apartment buildings, rental or owner-occupied townhome buildings, and rental or
owner-occupied condominium buildings, provided that all such freestanding
buildings contain three or more dwelling units.
      (1)   DWELLING, APARTMENT. A building containing several and separate
dwelling units, having common corridors and stairways and having shared exit
and entrance facilities.
      (2)   DWELLING, CONDOMINIUM. Real estate, portions of which are
designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for
common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a
CONDOMINIUM unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in
the unit owners. Yard requirements apply to structures only and not individual
ownership units.
      (3)   DWELLING, TOWNHOME. A one-family dwelling unit, with private
entrance, which is part of a structure whose dwelling units are attached
horizontally in a linear arrangement, and having a totally exposed front and
rear wall to be used for access, light, and ventilation. For purposes of
determining the required yard for townhome developments, setbacks only apply
from the perimeter of the main building to the perimeter of the parent parcel
upon which the building is situated. Also known as a ROWHOUSE.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building containing not more than one
dwelling unit and not occupied by more than one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A residential building which is the only principal
structure on the lot, designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living
independently of each other, and containing two dwelling units, each with a
separate entrance directly to the outside.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any dwelling or portion thereof used or intended to be used
by one family and providing complete housekeeping facilities therefor.
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. A college or university giving general academic
instruction. Included within this term are areas or structures used for
administration, housing of students and faculty, dining halls, and social or
athletic activities, when located on land contiguous with land on which
classroom facilities are maintained.
   ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST. A request for modification of an existing tower
or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of
such tower or base station involving: collocation of new transmission
equipment, removal of transmission equipment, or replacement of transmission
equipment.
   ELIGIBLE SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any tower or base station, as defined in this
section, provided that such tower or base station is in existence at the time
the eligible facilities request application is filed with the city.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES. An area utilized for the maintenance, fueling, storage,
dispatching, or parking of vehicles or equipment providing rescue or ambulatory
services.
   EMERGENCY SHELTER. A structure or part thereof, operated on a non-profit
basis to temporarily house families or individuals who are victims of disaster,
who are affected through action on the part of or on behalf of the municipality
other than routine redevelopment related relocation activities, or who have
bona fide state or federal emergency housing needs.
   EQUIPMENT CABINET. An enclosure, room, shelter, structure, or building used
to encapsulate, enclose, contain or otherwise support equipment associated with
a wireless telecommunication facility.
   EQUIPMENT RENTAL/REPAIR. An establishment involved in renting or repairing
tools and equipment, janitorial equipment, and so forth.
   ESSENTIAL UTILITIES AND EQUIPMENT.
      (1)   Underground or overhead electrical, gas, communications not
regulated by the federal communications commission, water and sewage systems,
including pole structures, towers, wires, lines, mains, drains, sewers,
conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, public telephone structures, police call
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, regulating and measuring devices and the
structures in which they are housed, and other similar equipment accessories in
connection therewith.
      (2)   ESSENTIAL UTILITY EQUIPMENT is recognized in three categories: (a)
local serving; (b) nonlocal or transmission through the county or municipality;
and (c) water and sewer systems, the activities of which are regulated, in
whole or in part, by the Public Service Commission; Department of Environmental
Protection; or the Department of Health and Human Resources.
   EVENT. A planned public or social occasion, including but not limited to
activities such as community fairs, carnivals, parades, horse shows, horse
trials, dog shows, sporting events, music or art festivals, and holiday
celebrations. Excluded from the definition of EVENTS and from the regulations
of this code, are the following: any event sponsored by the Armed Forces of the
United States or the State of West Virginia; any event sponsored by the forces
of state or local police or fire departments; any event sponsored by an agency
of the state, county, or local government; and activities that are part of the
regular operations of a principal use, such as weddings at a church, annual
fund raising or social events, and typical accessory events at educational,
scientific, or institutional sites.
   EVENT, MASS GATHERING. An event, as defined herein, resulting in the
assemblage of more than 300 persons on any one parcel or any special event, as
defined herein, where camping or overnight lodging are offered.
   EXISTING TOWER OR BASE STATION. A lawfully constructed tower or base station
approved under the applicable zoning and siting process of the city, approved
under another state or local regulatory review process, or permitted to
continue to operate as a nonconforming use.
   EXISTING USE. Use of land, buildings, or activity permitted or in existence
prior to the adoption of a zoning map or ordinances by the county or
municipality. If the use is nonconforming to local ordinance and lawfully
existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance, the use may continue to exist
as a nonconforming use until abandoned for a period of one year, provided that
in the case of natural resources, the absence of natural resources extraction
or harvesting is not abandonment of the use.
   EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY. Heavy industry use that involves the extraction of
minerals, including solids, such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude
petroleum; and gasses, such as natural gasses. The term also includes
quarrying; well operation; milling, such as crushing, screening, washing, and
flotation; and other preparation customarily done at the extraction site or as
a part of the extractive activity.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration, or its lawful successor.
   FACTORY-BUILT HOME. Includes mobile home and manufactured homes.
      (1)   MANUFACTURED HOME. Meets the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.),
effective on June 15, 1976, and the federal manufactured home construction and
safety standards and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
      (2)   MOBILE HOME. A transportable structure that is wholly, or in
substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing
facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and
designed for long-term residential use and built prior to enactment of the
Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42
U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.), effective on June 15, 1976, and usually built to the
voluntary industry standard of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
— Al19.1 standards for mobile homes.
   FACTORY-BUILT HOME RENTAL COMMUNITY. A parcel of land under single or common
ownership upon which two or more factory-built homes are located on a
continual, nonrecreational basis together with any structure, equipment, road
or facility intended for use incidental to the occupancy of the factory-built
homes, but does not include premises used solely for storage or display of
uninhabited factory-built homes or premises occupied solely by a landowner and
members of his or her family.
   FAIRGROUND. An area of land used for fairs in accordance with local and
state requirements, exhibitions, and shows, including but not limited to animal
shows and judging, carnivals, circuses, concerts, food booths and stands,
games, rides, rodeos, sales and auctions, storage, racetracks, agricultural
related office buildings, and community meeting or recreational buildings and
uses.
   FAMILY. An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or
adoption, or under approved foster care; or a group of not more than four
unrelated persons and persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or foster
relationship to any of those four unrelated persons, living together on a
permanent basis as a single housekeeping unit on a nonprofit basis and sharing
common living, dining, and kitchen areas, subject to the requirements of the
building code.
   FARM/CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLY SALES. An establishment engaged in
the on-premises lease, rental, or retail sale of new or used construction or
farm equipment, with or without incidental service for minor repairs and
maintenance.
   FARMER’S MARKET. Offering for sale of fresh agricultural products directly
to the consumer at an open-air market or temporarily at an indoor location,
designated as a community activity.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time, nonrecurring charge.
   FENCE. An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal, or other manufactured material or combination of materials erected to
enclose, screen, or separate an area.
   FLEA MARKET. A place where any person or group of vendors, whether
professional or non-professional, offer for sale, trade, or barter any goods
regardless of whether they are new, used, antique, or homemade; and regardless
of whether they are offered for sale in open air, buildings, or temporary
structures. The term FLEA MARKET also shall not include any business or
occupation that has a valid business license or special use permit pertaining
to the sale, trade, or barter of goods.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The total area of a building measured by taking the
outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy
or storage.
   Gross Floor Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ead299bdbbd5d64237988ee0c60bb5e02d43e88c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2698.png]
 
   FREIGHT TERMINAL. Any premises used by a freight company which is the origin
or destination point of goods being transported for the purpose of storing,
transferring, loading, and unloading such goods.
   FRONT BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to the front lot line to the nearest
part of any principle building, including decks, patios, covered porches,
steps, and landings exceeding 24 square feet, but excluding eaves, overhangs,
bay windows, sills, belt courses, cornices, and ornamental features not
exceeding two feet in width.
   FRONTAGE. That side of a lot abutting on the street right-of-way or side of
a building regarded as the front.
   FUNERAL HOME/MORTUARY. A building or part thereon used exclusively for human
burial services. Such building may contain space and facilities for (1)
embalming and the performance of other services used in the preparation of the
deal for burial, (2) the performances of autopsies and other surgical
procedures, (3) the storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral
supplies, and (4) cremation services.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or portion thereof designed or used for the
commercial parking of vehicles.
   GARAGE SALE. The sale of personal property owned or maintained by occupants
of the premises in, at, or upon any residentially zoned or residentially
occupied property. GARAGE SALE includes, but is not limited to, any yard sale,
multi-family sale, home sale, patio sale, or any other sale similarly conducted
on any residentially zoned or residentially occupied property.
   GARDEN CENTER. Land and buildings where the wholesale or retail sale of
nursery stock and garden supplies take place. Such nursery stock and supplies
may include any of the following: ornamental plants, flowers, shrubs and trees
cultivated in a nursery; seed, fertilizer, garden pesticides and herbicides in
retail quantities and packaging; garden hand tools; plant containers; garden
statuary and furniture; landscape lighting; bird feeders and supplies; and
seasonal ornaments and novelties such as Christmas wreaths and decorations.
Such use may include the provision of landscape design and or installation
services, provided that such services are ancillary to the principal use and
offered to clients whose residence or place of business exists elsewhere.
   GAS STATION. Buildings and premises for the supply and retail dispensing of
motor fuels, and may include incidental sales of prepackaged food and drink.
Accessory uses may include minor servicing and repair of automobiles, sale of
lubricants, batteries, tires, motor vehicle accessories, and hand or machine
washing in a single bay auto wash.
   GAS STATION, LARGE. A gas station as defined in this section exceeding any
of the following criteria: four fuel pump islands, a total of eight fuel pumps,
or a gas station combined with a convenience store.
   GOVERNING BODY. The Council of the City of Elkins.
   GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS. Includes emergency services; municipal, county,
state, and federal buildings; and post offices.
   GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL. A building used for the growing of plants, all or
part of which are sold at retail or wholesale.
   GREENHOUSE, NONCOMMERCIAL. A structure consisting primarily of glass, clear
plastic, or other light transmitting material in which temperature and humidity
can be controlled for the cultivation or protection of plants or seedling, and
located in the side or rear yard or on rooftops.
   GROUP RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A facility which is owned, leased, or operated
by a behavioral health service provider and which: (1) provides residential
services and supervision for individuals who are developmentally disabled or
behaviorally disabled; (2) is occupied as a residence by not more than eight
individuals who are developmentally disabled and not more than three
supervisors or is occupied as a residence by not more than twelve individuals
who are behaviorally disabled and not more than three supervisors; (3) is
licensed by the Department of Health and Human Resources; and (4) complies with
the State Fire Commission for residential facilities.
   GROUP RESIDENTIAL HOME. A building owned or leased by developmentally
disabled or behaviorally disabled persons for purposes of establishing a
personal residence, and complying with all applicable requirements of the state
of West Virginia.
   HABITABLE STRUCTURE. Any structure intended to be used for living, sleeping,
eating, or assembly purposes, including but not limited to dwellings, churches,
schools, food facilities, and commercial and industrial buildings.
   HEALTH CLUB. Any establishment including, but not limited to, an athletic
club, exercise center, health spa, figure salon, gymnasium, physical fitness
center, or any other establishment by any other name that provides exercise
equipment and one or more of the following: steam cabinet, steam room, sauna,
vapor room, vapor cabinet, toilet facilities, lavatories, showers, lockers, and
dressing rooms intended for patron use, excluding facilities used by or under
direct supervision and control of licensed medical personnel located in a
medical facility, facilities located in athletic departments of schools, and
facilities of professional athletic teams. Accessory uses within the facility
may include massage therapy, aerobics and physical fitness services (Aerobic
and strength training activities, group exercise classes, fitness assessment
and counseling, and education seminars).
   HEIGHT. For the purposes of wireless telecommunications facilities means the
vertical distance measured from the base of the alternative support structure
at grade to the highest point of the structure, including any antennas.
Measurement of tower height includes antenna, base pad, and other appurtenances
and is measured from the finished grade of the facility site. If the tower is
located on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest
grades immediately surrounding the perimeter of the tower base is used in
calculating the antenna height. The highest point excludes farm building
components, flagpoles, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, domes, water towers,
bell towers, church spires, processing towers, tanks, bulkheads, or other
building accessory features usually erected at a height greater than the main
roofs of buildings.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A geographically definable area, designated as historic
on a national, state, or local register, possessing a significant
concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or
objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development.
   HISTORIC LANDMARK. A site, building, structure or object designated as
historic on a national, state or local register.
   HISTORIC SITE. The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or
historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure whether standing,
ruined or vanished, where the location itself possesses historical, cultural or
archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure and
designated as historic on a national, state or local register.
   HOME-BASED BUSINESS, LOW-IMPACT. An accessory use intended to allow
businesses that generate limited quantities of customer visitation or
merchandise deliveries to operate such business from a residence.
   HOME-BASED BUSINESS, NO-IMPACT. An accessory use intended to allow
businesses that rely solely on electronic or off-premise transactions to
perform such operations from a residence. The use involves no customer client
or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery, or
removal functions, to or from the premises, in excess of those normally
associated with residential use.
   HOSPITAL. An establishment for temporary occupation by the sick or injured
for the purpose of medical diagnosis and treatment, including sanitaria, and
shall be limited to the treatment or other care of humans.
   HOTEL/MOTEL. A building or group of buildings in which lodging is provided
and offered for compensation. The building may also include dining rooms,
kitchens, serving rooms, ballrooms, and other facilities and services intended
primarily for the accommodation of its patrons.
   INCINERATOR. An enclosed device using controlled combustion for the primary
purpose of thermally breaking down solid waste, and that is equipped with a
flue for the sole purpose of providing incineration service to the public.
   INDUSTRIAL PARK. An area of land arranged or constructed in accordance with
a plan for a group of industrial purposes, having separate building sites
designed and arranged on streets and having utility services, setbacks, side
yards, and covenants or other such regulations controlling or restricting uses.
   JUNK. Any worn, cast off, or discarded article or material which is ready
for destruction or which has been collected or stored for sale, resale,
salvage, or conversion to some other use.
   KENNEL. Any establishment wherein cats and dogs are kept or boarded.
Business may be conducted in conjunction with a dog day care. Such kennel must
follow the registration process set forth in the West Virginia Code.
   LABORATORY. A place where scientific studies are conducted, including
testing, research, or analysis of medical, chemical, physical, biological,
mechanical, or electronic nature.
   LANDOWNER. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or
contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if authorized under the lease
to exercise the right of the landowner, or other person having a proprietary
interest in land.
   LANDSCAPING. The bringing of the soil surface to a smooth finished grade,
installing sufficient trees, shrubs, ground cover, and grass to soften building
lines, provide shade, and generally produce a pleasing visual effect of the
premises.
   LAUNDROMAT. A commercial establishment where self-service washing machines
and clothes dryers are available for public use on the premises to wash or dry
clothing, apparel, or other fabric.
   LIBRARY. Any premises, building, or part of a building where books, films,
maps and other educational materials are kept for reading, reference, and
lending by the public.
   LIQUOR STORE. An establishment operated under the authority of the W.Va.
Code Ch. 60, Art. 3A primarily engaged in the retail sale of packaged alcoholic
beverages, such as ale, beer, wine, and whiskey, for off-premises consumption.
   LOADING SPACE. A space or berth available for the loading and unloading of
goods from commercial vehicles.
   LOT. A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed, or built upon as a
unit.
   Corner Lot, Flag Lot, Interior Lot, Irregular Lot, Through Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ead299bdbbd5d64237988ee0c60bb5e02d43e88c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2700.png]
 
   LOT AREA. The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any public
rights-of-way.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot at the junction of and abutting two or more intersecting
streets, where the interior angle of intersection is less than 135 degrees. A
lot abutting a curved street or streets shall be considered a CORNER LOT if the
tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the lot lines with the
street intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
   LOT COVERAGE. The total area covered, measured from the outside of the
exterior walls, by all principal and accessory buildings on a lot, but not
including open porches, decks, balconies, and similar features not covered by a
roof.
   LOT, FLAG. A polygonal-shaped lot with the appearance of a frying pan or
flag and staff in which the handle is most often used as the point of access.
The handle, when less than the minimum width for a building lot in the zoning
district in which it is located, is not to be used in computing the minimum
required lot area.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot where the side property lines do not abut a street.
   LOT, IRREGULAR. A lot of such shape or configuration that technically meets
the area, frontage, and width-to-depth requirements of this code but has
unusual elongations, angles, and curvilinear lines.
   LOT LINE. Property boundary line of any lot that divides one lot from
another or from a street or any other public or private space.
      (1)   FRONT LOT LINE. In the case of an interior lot, a line separating
the lot from the street or public right of way; and in the case of a corner
lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the
street.
      (2)   REAR LOT LINE. A lot line which is opposite and more distant from
the front lot line, except corner lots have no REAR LOT LINE. In the case of an
irregular lot, a line ten feet in length within the lot and parallel to and at
the maximum distance from the front lot line.
      (3)   SIDE LOT LINE. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
   Front Lot Line, Rear Lot Line, and Side Lot Line
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ead299bdbbd5d64237988ee0c60bb5e02d43e88c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2702.png]
 
   LOT MEASUREMENTS.
      (1)    LOT DEPTH. The mean distance from the right-of-way line of the lot
to its opposite rear line measured in a direction parallel to the side lot
lines. LOT DEPTH for triangular lots shall be the mean distance from the street
line to the point of intersection of the side yards.
      (2)   LOT, MINIMUM WIDTH. The minimum lot width at the building setback
line.
      (3)   LOT WIDTH. The distance measured between side lot lines, at the
required building setback line. In a case where there is only one side lot
line, lot width shall be measured between such side lot line and the opposite
rear lot lines or street line.
   Lot Width
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ead299bdbbd5d64237988ee0c60bb5e02d43e88c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2704.png]
 
   LOT, THROUGH. An interior lot in which the front lot line and rear lot line
abut upon streets. Where a single lot under individual ownership extends from a
street to a street, the widest street shall be deemed the street upon which the
property fronts.
   LUMBERYARD. The principal use of land and structures involving the loading
and unloading, storage, and sales of lumber and millwork materials.
   MANUFACTURING (HEAVY). Manufacturing or compounding process of raw
materials. These activities or processes would necessitate the storage of large
volumes of highly flammable, toxic matter or explosive materials needed for the
manufacturing process. These activities may involve outdoor operations as part
of their manufacturing process.
   MANUFACTURING (LIGHT). The manufacturing, compounding, processing,
assembling, packaging or testing of goods or equipment, including research
activities, conducted entirely within an enclosed structure and imposing a
negligible impact on the surrounding environment by noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, or pollutants.
   MEDICAL ADULT DAY CARE CENTER. An ambulatory healthcare facility which
provides an organized day program of therapeutic, social, and health
maintenance and restorative services and whose general goal is to provide an
alternative to 24 hour, long-term institutional care to elderly or disabled
adults who are in need of such services by virtue of physical and mental
impairment.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY. A place where processed medical cannabis
products are permitted to be sold to qualifying consumers, as provided for in
the W. Va. Code Ch. 16A, as amended. This term does not include a health care
medical cannabis organization as defined in the W.Va. Code Ch. 16A, as amended.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS GROWING FACILITY. A place where medical cannabis is
permitted to be grown, as provided for in the W.Va. Code Ch. 16A, as amended.
This term does not include a health care medical cannabis organization as
defined in the W.Va. Code Ch. 16A, as amended.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS ORGANIZATION, HEALTH CARE. A vertically integrated health
system approved by the West Virginia Bureau for Public Health to dispense
medical cannabis or grow and process medical cannabis, or both, in accordance
with a research study under the W.Va. Code Ch. 16A, as amended.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS PROCESSING FACILITY. A place where medical cannabis is
permitted to be processed, refined, or otherwise converted into a legally
permitted state, as provided for in the W.Va. Code Ch. 16A, as amended. This
term does not include a health care medical cannabis organization as defined in
the W.Va. Code Ch. 16A, as amended.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, that is no longer than 11 inches.
   MINERAL. Gas, oil, coal, other gaseous and solid hydrocarbons, oil shale,
cement material, sand and gravel, road material, building stone, chemical raw
material, gemstone, fissionable and nonfissionable ores, colloidal and other
clay, steam and other geothermal resource, or any other substance defined as a
mineral by the West Virginia Code.
   MODIFICATION or MODIFY. The physical change to any existing wireless
telecommunications tower or base station that may or may not be related to
eligible facilities request and that involves: collocation of new transmission
equipment; removal of transmission equipment; replacement of transmission
equipment; or any expansion of wireless telecommunication tower or base
station.
   MUSEUM. A building or part of a building that displays, preserves, and/or
exhibits objects of community and cultural interest in one or more of the arts
and sciences, intended to be used by members of the public for viewing, with or
without an admission charge.
   NIGHT CLUB. An establishment for evening entertainment, generally open until
the early morning that serves liquor and usually food and offers patrons music,
comedy acts, a floor show, or dancing. Adult businesses are not considered a
NIGHT CLUB.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A building, structure or part thereof
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use
provisions in this code or amendments heretofore or hereafter enacted, where
such building or structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such
ordinance or amendment, or prior to the application of this code or amendments
to its location by reason of annexation. Such NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES include,
but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
   NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot or parcel of land that was of record and lawfully
established and maintained but which, because of the enactment of this code, no
longer conforms to the land use standards or use regulations of the zone in
which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign which was lawfully erected in compliance with
applicable regulations of the city and maintained prior to the effective date
of this code and which fails to conform to current standards and restrictions
of this code.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not
comply with the applicable use provisions in this code or amendment heretofore
or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the
enactment of such ordinance or amendment, or prior to the application of such
ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
   NONINTOXICATING BEER. All natural cereal malt beverages or products of the
brewing industry commonly referred to as beer, lager beer, ale, and all other
mixtures and preparations produced by the brewing industry, including malt
coolers and nonintoxicating craft beers, with no caffeine infusion or any
additives masking or altering the alcohol effect containing at least 0.5%
alcohol by volume, but not more than nine and six-tenths of alcohol by weight,
or 12% by volume, whichever is greater.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva,
anus, anal cleft, cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering of any part
of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernible
turgid state.
   OFF-PREMISES, FREESTANDING SIGN. Also known as a BILLBOARD, means a large
outdoor sign not accessory to or associated with the principal use on a lot, or
signs which are the principal use of a lot.
   OFFICE SUPPLY ESTABLISHMENT. A place of business where stationery and other
supplies typically used in offices are the main items offered for sale.
   OPEN SPACE. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and
set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space.
   OWNER-OCCUPIED. A person who maintains his or her principal residence by
being physically present and spending the night on the property for more than
280 nights of each calendar year and who is:
      (1)   The sole owner of record of the property, as reflected in a deed
recorded in the County Clerk’s office;
      (2)   A tenant in common, tenant by the entirety or joint tenant with
right of survivorship, as reflected in a deed recorded in the County Clerk’s
office; or
      (3)   An owner of at least 25% percent of a business entity shown as the
owner of record, as reflected in a deed recorded in the County Clerk’s office.
The ownership interest shall be shown by a duly executed resolution of the
business entity, or such other method as determined by the Zoning Officer.
   PARCEL DELIVERY FACILITY. An establishment engaged in the delivery, receipt,
and transmittal of documents, packages, and parcels.
   PARK. A parcel of ground along with its buildings and fixtures intended
primarily for beautification and aesthetic improvement and designated as
recreational land.
   PARKING LOT. An area utilized to meet the parking requirements of this code,
including the parking aisles that provide access to the parking spaces, but not
including any streets or driveways that provide access to the parking lot.
   PARKING STRUCTURE. A building with multiple stories of off-street parking
spaces where vehicles are temporarily stored with or without a nominal fee, in
association with occupational, retail, entertainment, recreational, municipal,
educational or residential use(s).
   PATIO. An area consisting of natural or man-made material constructed at or
near grade level, intended for use as an outdoor living area, and not enclosed
by a permanent roof or awning.
   PERMIT. A document issued by the governing body authorizing an applicant to
undertake certain activities.
   PERMITTED USE. Any use allowed within a zoning district, subject to the
restrictions applicable to that zoning district; not a conditional use.
   PERSONAL SERVICE. A business providing services to a person, their apparel,
or personal effects commonly carried on or about their person, including, but
not limited to, shoe repair, tailoring, watch repair, beauty shops, barber
shops, tanning and nail salons, and the like.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES. Commercial mobile services,
unlicensed wireless telecommunication services, and common carrier wireless
telecommunication exchange access services.
   PET SHOP. An establishment where animals are bought, sold, exchanged, or
offered for sale or exchange to the general public.
   PHARMACY. A retail store which primarily sells prescription drugs, patient
medicines, and surgical and sickroom supplies.
   PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDIO. A retail establishment for the purpose of photographing
subjects and processing photographs for commercial purposes, but not including
photography requiring professional models.
   PLACE OF WORSHIP/RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A building wherein persons regularly
assemble for acts of religious devotion and which is maintained and controlled
by a religious body organized to sustain public worship, together with all
accessory buildings and uses customarily associated with such primary purpose.
Includes a church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or other such place for worship
and religious activities. Customary accessory uses include a wide range of
religious activities, including a caretaker’s residence; fellowship halls,
parish halls and similar buildings; rooms used for meetings, religious
education, and similar functions; a gymnasium; a playground; the sale of items
associated with the practice of religion; and faith-based social services such
as homeless shelters, group homes, and soup kitchens.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Elkins.
   PORCH. A covered but unenclosed projection from the main wall of a building
that may or may not use columns or other ground supports for structural
purposes. If a PORCH is uncovered, it is considered to be a DECK.
   POST OFFICE. A building or structure used and maintained by the Postal
Service of the United States of America for the purpose of collecting or
distributing mail to the public.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A building or structure in which the
principal use is conducted. In all residential districts, any dwelling is the
PRINCIPAL BUILDING on the lot on which it is located.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The primary use of land, buildings, or structures, whether
permitted by right or conditional, which exists independently of any other use
on the property.
   PRIVATE CLUB. Any establishment, other than an outdoor recreation facility,
operated by a private organization for recreational, educational, fraternal, or
social purposes, but only open to members and their guests and not to the
general public.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Any office of recognized professions, other than
medical, such as lawyers, architects, engineers, real estate brokers, insurance
agents, and others who are qualified to perform services of a professional
nature and other offices used primarily for accounting, corresponding,
research, editing or other administrative functions, but not including banks or
other financial institutions and personal services.
   PUBLIC RECREATIONAL AREA. A regionally or locally significant area, as
designated by state or federal regulation, or by the city, and which is meant
to serve a recreational purpose.
   RECEPTION FACILITY. A facility within an existing structure or outdoor area
for hosting receptions or similar activities, limited only to weddings, wedding
receptions, birthday events, anniversary events, reunion events, and family
gatherings, and not involving charging admission or gatherings primarily to
view a performance.
   RECREATION, COMMERCIAL INDOOR. Indoor facilities for leisure-time
activities, including facilities open to the public and those requiring
membership; including, but not limited to, such establishments as bowling
alleys, ice rinks, sportsman’s clubs, billiard and pool halls, video and other
coin-operated electronic games, trampolines, ball pits, indoor skating
facilities, and similar recreational diversions.
   RECREATION, COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR. Outdoor facilities for leisure-time
activities, including outdoor facilities open to the public and those requiring
membership; including, but not limited to, swimming pools, miniature golf, golf
practice facilities, tennis courts, riding stables, rifle range, archery range,
playing fields, golf courses, docks, and similar recreational diversions.
   RECREATION, MUNICIPAL. Developed or undeveloped open spaces or structures
and facilities which are provided by a governmental body for public use for the
purposes of play, amusement, or relaxation. Such uses may include, but not
limited to, sports facilities, parks, swimming pools, assembly buildings,
passive areas, gardens, docks, and related amenities.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any travel trailer or other vehicular portable
structure designed to be used as a temporary occupancy for travel or
recreational use. For example, any motor home, truck slide-in camper, fifth
wheel trailer, tent trailer, animal trailer, trailer used for transporting
recreational vehicles, any type of three- or four-wheeled sport racing vehicle,
boat, boat trailer, raft, aircraft, dune buggie, snowmobile, jet ski, all-
terrain vehicle, and vehicle dolly are included.
   RECYCLING FACILITY. A facility that accepts recyclable material from the
public by donation, redemption, or purchase and separates or recovers reusable
materials that can be sold to or reused by a manufacturer as a substitute for
or a supplement to, virgin raw materials. The term does not include transfer
facilities, municipal waste landfills, composting facilities or resource
recovery facilities.
   RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT. A structure or complex of structures designed or
used primarily for research and development functions related to industry and
similar fields.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food,
desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, primarily
consumed off the premises; to customers who order and are served food at a
counter or in an automobile in packages prepared to leave the premises, or able
to be taken to a table or counter to be consumed, and may include a drive-
through facility; or where food and beverages are prepared, served, and
consumed primarily within the principal building. Food sales constitute more
than 60% of the gross sales receipts.
   RETAIL STORE. A business having as its primary function the supply of
merchandise or wares to the end consumer. Three classes of RETAIL STORES:
      (1)   Retail store/shop less than 7,000 square feet of gross floor area.
      (2)   Retail store/shop 7,000 to 25,000 square feet gross floor area.
      (3)   Retail store/shop greater than 25,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a street, trail,
waterline, sanitary sewer, or other public utilities or facilities.
   ROADSIDE VENDOR STAND. Stands, trailers, truck beds or similar facilities
offering agricultural products for sale which are not produced on the immediate
premises.
   SALVAGE YARD. Any place which is maintained, operated or used for the
storing, keeping, buying, selling or processing of salvage, or for the
operation and maintenance of a motor vehicle graveyard.
   SATELLITE SIGNAL RECEIVING STATION. A device commonly parabolic in shape,
mounted at a fixed point on a structure, or on rooftops, for the purpose of
capturing electronic television or internet signals transmitted via satellite
communication facilities and serving the same or similar function as the common
television antenna. Such devices are accessory structures.
   SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL. A school establishment to provide for the teaching of
industrial, clerical, managerial, or artistic skills. This definition applies
to schools that are owned and operated privately for profit.
   SCHOOL, PREK-12. A public or private school offering educational instruction
in grades pre-kindergarten through 12, licensed by the West Virginia Department
of Education.
   SCREENING. The use of plant materials, fencing, or earthen berms to aid in
the concealment of such features as parking areas and vehicles within them, and
to provide privacy between two or more different land uses that abut.
   SELF-STORAGE FACILITY. A building or group of buildings containing separate,
individual, and private storage spaces of varying sizes available for lease or
rent for varying periods of time.
   SENIOR INDEPENDENT HOUSING. A single-family or multi-family development
intended, operated, and designed to accommodate residents 55 years of age or
older. SENIOR INDEPENDENT HOUSING communities are designed for seniors who are
able to live independently or need assistance with daily care. SENIOR
INDEPENDENT HOUSING can also include continuing care facilities.
   SETBACK. The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be
separated from a street right-of-way or lot line.
      (1)   FRONT YARD SETBACK. Measured as the shortest distance between the
street front lot line and the building setback line.
      (2)   REAR YARD SETBACK. Measured as the shortest distance between the
rear lot line and the building setback line.
      (3)   SIDE YARD SETBACK. Measured as the shortest distance between the
side lot line and the building setback line.
   Front Setback, Rear Setback, and Side Setback
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ead299bdbbd5d64237988ee0c60bb5e02d43e88c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2706.png]
 
   SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITY. A place or premises, including buildings, where
sewage or other solid or liquid wastes are treated or screened before
discharge.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A commercial facility of a single lot with common parking
facilities that uses or leases separate areas of space to retail or service-
oriented businesses.
   SIGN. Any device (writing, letter work or numeral, pictorial presentation,
illustration or decoration, emblem, device, symbol or trademark, flag, banner
or pennant, inflatable figures for attracting viewers, or any other device,
figure or character, or delineation) with the essential purpose to communicate,
designed to communicate, or where the context results in communication, and
such communication is aimed at persons in a public right-of-way. SIGNS directed
at persons within a facility and not viewable or only incidentally viewable to
persons in a public right-of-way are not subject to this code.
      (1)   A-FRAME SIGN. A two-faced sign with supports that are connected at
the top and separated at the base with an internal angle between the two faces
of no more than a 45-degree angle, forming an “A” shape not more than six
square feet on each side. These are also referred to as SANDWICH BOARD SIGNS.
      (2)   ANIMATED SIGN. A sign or part of a sign that is designed to rotate,
move, or appear to rotate or move. Such a sign is sometimes referred to as a
MOVING SIGN. ANIMATED SIGNS include signs with moving graphic features such as
scrolling text or images that appear to move; moving sign change features such
as fly-in, wipe-off, fading, dissolving, traveling, or expanding displays or
any other full message sign change taking longer than three-tenths of a
seconds; and static electronic message displays displayed less than seven
seconds. ANIMATED SIGNS also include signs propelled by vehicle, watercraft, or
aircraft where the primary purpose of the vehicle, watercraft, or aircraft at
the time of sign display is to propel the sign.
      (3)   AWNING SIGN. A sign placed directly on the surface of an awning.
      (4)   BANNER. A sign made of any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or
similar non-rigid material attached to any structure, staff, pole, rope, wire,
or framing of flexible material affixed to a framework or flat surface. BANNERS
are not flags for purposes of this chapter.
      (5)   BEACON. Any light with one or more beams directed into the
atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the
light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
      (6)   CANOPY SIGN. A sign attached to a canopy, which is a roof-like
structure either projecting from a building facade and open on three sides, or
standing alone and open on four sides, and used for the purpose of protecting
pedestrians and motorists from weather related elements.
      (7)   CHALKBOARD SIGN. A single-faced, framed slate, or chalkboard that
can be written on with chalk or similar markers.
      (8)   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign or part of a sign that is designed so
that characters, letters, or illustrations can be manually or physically
changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign.
      (9)   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY. A sign that is either light emitting or
light reflective and that is capable of changing the displayed message through
electronic programming. ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAYS are divided into four
categories:
         (a)   STATIC ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY. An electronic message display
that remains static, with no animated features or animated transition features
with each static display lasting longer than seven seconds.
         (b)   STATIC ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY WITH TRANSITION FEATURES. An
electronic message display that remains static except for no more than a two-
second transition feature such as fading, dissolving or a single instance of
fly-in, wipe-off, expansion, or traveling that occurs no more often than every
seven seconds.
         (c)   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY, PARTIALLY ANIMATED. An electronic
message display with animated or moving text or graphics.
         (d)   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY, FULLY ANIMATED. An electronic
message display with full animation features.
      (10)   FEATHER SIGN/FEATHER FLAG/TEARDROP FLAG/WIND FLAG. A lightweight,
portable flag made of cloth, plastic, or similar material mounted along one
edge on a single, vertical, flexible pole, the physical structure of which may
resemble a sail, bow, or teardrop.
      (11)   FLAG. A piece of cloth or similar material, typically oblong or
square, attachable by one edge to a pole or rope and used as a symbol or
decoration.
      (12)   FLASHING SIGN. A sign that includes lights that flash, blink, turn
on and off intermittently, or otherwise vary light intensity during the display
of a message.
      (13)   FREESTANDING SIGN or GROUND-MOUNTED SIGN or POLE SIGN. Any non-
portable sign supported by a fence, retaining wall, or by pole, upright
structural members, or braces on or in the ground and not attached to a
building.
      (14)   GEOLOGICAL SIGN. A sign made of or that appear to be made of
geological formations, including but not limited to standalone rocks or
mountainsides, and conveys a message that is etched, carved, painted, or
similarly incorporated into the sign’s material.
      (15)   ILLEGAL SIGN. Any sign erected without obtaining a required permit
or which otherwise does not comply with any provision of this code.
      (16)   INFLATABLE SIGN. A sign that is filled with air to convey a
commercial message or draw attention to a location.
      (17)   MARQUEE SIGN. A sign attached to and made a part of a canopy or
any similar projections from a building, with changeable, fixed, or both types
of lettering in use.
      (18)   MINOR SIGN. A sign not exceeding two square foot in area, not
exceeding four feet in height, and not illuminated.
      (19)   MONUMENT SIGN. A sign affixed to a structure built on grade in
which the sign and the structure are an integral part of one another; not a
pole sign.
      (20)   MULTI-TENANT SIGN. A freestanding sign structure at or near the
entrance of a shopping center to which are affixed signs of various dimensions
identifying tenants or businesses in the shopping center.
      (21)   NEON SIGN. A sign containing exposed tubes filled with light-
emitting gas.
      (22)   NON-CONFORMING SIGN.
         (a)   A sign which was lawfully erected in compliance with the
applicable regulations of the city prior to the effective date of this zoning
code and which does not conform to current standards and regulations of this
zoning code.
         (b)   For multi-tenant signs at a shopping center, the addition of new
signs not otherwise complying with the size restrictions of this zoning code
shall be considered non-conforming as in compliance with this definition,
provided that the addition of new signs, subject to the approval of the Zoning
Officer, does not substantially change the overall dimensions of the original
multi-tenant signs.
      (23)   OFF-PREMISES SIGNS. Commercial signs not accessory to or
associated with the principal use on a lot, or signs which are the principal
use of a lot.
      (24)   ON-PREMISES SIGNS. Commercial or noncommercial signs accessory to
or associated with the principal use of a lot.
      (25)   PENNANT. A geometric shaped flag made of flexible materials,
suspended from one or two corners fastened to a string, which is secured or
tethered so as to allow movement and used as an attention-getting form of
media.
      (26)   PERSON-ASSISTED SIGN. A sign that includes an individual paid to
hold, move, wear, or otherwise direct attention to a sign.
      (27)   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign attached to and projecting more than 12
inches from the face of a wall or building, but does not project above the
parapet or eave line of the building and is a minimum of eight feet above any
walking surface or 20 feet above any driving surface. Projecting signs may not
be more than 20 square feet in area.
      (28)   ROOF SIGN. A sign erected or constructed, in whole or in part,
upon or above the highest point of a building with a flat roof, or the lowest
portion of a roof for any building with a pitched roof.
      (29)   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign intended to be displayed for a limited
period of time not to exceed 30 days.
      (30)   VEHICLE OR TRAILER SIGN, ILLEGAL OR INOPERABLE. Any sign attached
to or displayed on a vehicle or trailer, if the vehicle or trailer is used for
the primary purpose of displaying the sign or signs and the vehicle or trailer
fails to display current license plates, inspection sticker, or municipal
decal; if the vehicle or trailer is inoperable; if evidence of paid-to-date
local taxes cannot be made available; or if the sign alters the standard design
of such vehicle or trailer.
      (31)   WALL SIGN. Any sign, inscription, artwork, figure, marking, or
design that is attached, painted, drawn, marked, etched, or scratched onto a
wall or against a flat vertical exterior surface of a structure. WALL SIGNS
include murals.
      (32)   WICKET SIGN. A sign with an H- or U-shaped frame that is put into
the ground or placed above the ground.
      (33)   WINDOW SIGN. Any sign visible outside the window and attached to
or within 18 inches in front of or behind the surface of a window or door.
   SIGN FACE. The portion of a sign structure bearing the message.
   SIGN HEIGHT. The maximum vertical distance from the base of the sign at
normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal
grade shall be construed to be the lower of: (1) existing grade prior to
construction; or (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive
of any filling, berming, mounding or excavating primarily for the purpose of
mounting or elevating the sign.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure bearing a sign face.
   SITE. The current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the
tower and base station and any access or utility easements currently related to
the site; and, for other eligible support structures, means that area in
proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed
on the ground. This term does not apply to towers or base stations in public
rights-of-way.
   SMALL CELL NETWORK. A collection of interrelated small wireless
telecommunication facilities designed to deliver personal wireless
telecommunication services.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY or WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, SMALL
CELLS. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications:
each antenna does not exceed six cubic feet; and all other wireless equipment
associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in
volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included
in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and communications services.
   SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY. An energy conversion facility, including
appurtenances, which converts radiant energy from the sun to a usable form of
energy to meet all or part of the energy or heating requirements of the on-site
user, or which is to be sold to a utility company to be used by others, or sold
directly to other users. A SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY may be ground-mounted (i.e.,
placed on top of the ground surface) or roof-mounted (i.e., placed on or as an
integral part of a building).
      (1)   SMALL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY. A solar energy facility installed for
personal use in residences, commercial properties, and institutions.
      (2)   LARGE SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY. A solar energy facility installed on
large parcels of land for the purpose of generating revenue, or utility-scale
facility installed to benefit the community or an entire institution.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREAS/FACILITY, PRIVATE. Any facility, land, contiguous
land, improvements on the land, structures, or other appurtenances or methods
used for processing, recycling, or disposing of solid waste, including
landfills, transfer stations, materials recovery facilities, mixed waste
processing facilities, sewage sludge processing facilities, commercial
composting facilities, recycling facilities, and other such facilities not
herein specified, but not including land upon which sewage sludge is applied in
accordance with the West Virginia Code. Such facility is situated in the city
or county where the majority of the spatial area of such facility is located.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREAS/FACILITY, PUBLIC. Any municipally owned facility,
land, contiguous land, improvements on the land, structures, or other
appurtenances or methods used for processing, recycling, or disposing of solid
waste, including landfills, transfer stations, materials recovery facilities,
mixed waste processing facilities, sewage sludge processing facilities,
composting facilities, recycling facilities, and other such facilities not
herein specified, but not including land upon which sewage sludge is applied in
accordance with the West Virginia Code. Such facility is situated in the city
or county where the majority of the spatial area of such facility is located.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The area that will be inundated by the flood
event having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The 1%
ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD is also referred to as the BASE FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   SPECTRUM ACT. The “Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012”
(Public Law 112-96; codified at 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a)).
   SPORTS ARENA. A central stage, ring, area, or similar structure, used for
sports and surrounded by seats for spectators.
   STEALTH. The same as CAMOUFLAGE, CONCEAL, or CONCEALMENT.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it,
then the space between such floor and the ceiling above it.
   STORY, HALF. A story under a gabled, hipped, or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two
feet above the finished floor of such story.
   STREET. Streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, lanes, alleys, and
all public ways.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, erected, or situated by man that requires
location on the ground or being attached to something having location on the
ground; but not including vehicles, recreational vehicles, campers, tents less
than 36 square feet in gross floor area, retaining walls, fences not over eight
feet in height, yard and play equipment, utility lines and underground
facilities.
      (1)   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. The structure or portion thereof housing the
main use of the land.
      (2)   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. Any structure which is erected to be in place
for not more than 12 months, including but not limited to tents, air-supported
structures, portable bandstands, reviewing stands, bleachers, mobile office
units, construction sheds, sales offices for lots or dwellings or other
structures of a similar character.
   STUDIO, DANCING, MUSIC, OR ART. A facility used for the rehearsal or
performance of performing arts, such as music, dance or theatre; teaching
classes in creative arts, such as painting, drawing, sculpting, potting, or
beading or otherwise creating art; or for the display or sale of art in general
or during special events. Food and alcoholic beverages may be served and fees
charged as accessory uses during special events.
   SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE CRITERIA. The criteria set forth in §
152.242.
   SURETY. A financial guaranty that the activities proposed in the application
are made as planned. If activities are not made by the applicant, the local
government can use surety funds to complete the work as planned or return the
land to its original state. Includes but is not limited to performance bonds,
cash in escrow, a letter of credit, and similar collateral.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any body of water (excluding natural bodies of water fed by
rivers, streams, or brooks) or receptacle for water intended to be used for
swimming and constructed, installed, or maintained in or on the ground outside
any building.
   TARGETED MARKET COVERAGE AREA. The area which is targeted to be served by
the wireless telecommunications facility proposed in an application.
   TASTING FACILITY. An area of a winery, brewery, or distillery where
complimentary samples of a beverage are served on the premises of manufacture,
in moderate quantities for tasting.
   TATTOO PARLOR/BODY PIERCING STUDIO. An establishment whose principal
business activity is the practice of placing designs, letters, figures,
symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or
other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means
of the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the
skin. The establishment also includes the creation of an opening in the body of
a person for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration.
   TAVERN/DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment engaged in the preparation
and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and
which may offer food for consumption on premises as an accessory use.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. Any structure that is designated and constructed
primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more telecommunication antennas.
This includes guyed towers, lattice towers, monopoles, and towers taller than
15 feet constructed on the top of another building, along with any separate
building on the lot used to house any supporting electronic equipment.
   TEMPORARY SHELTER. Any structure which is erected to be in place for not
more than 12 months, including but not limited to tents, air-supported
structures, portable bandstands, reviewing stands, bleachers, mobile office
units, construction sheds, sales offices for lots, or dwellings or other
structures of a similar character.
   THEATER. A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of movies,
musical performances, dance, or theatrical productions, usually on a paid
admission basis.
   THEATER, DRIVE-IN. An open lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant
facilities devoted primarily to the showing of movies or to theatrical
productions, usually on a paid admission basis, to patrons seated in motor
vehicles or on outdoor seats.
   TOURIST OR TRAILER CAMP. An area containing travel trailers, pick-up
coaches, and motorized homes designed or intended to be used as temporary
living facilities for one or more families.
   TOWER. Any structure capable of supporting any antennas affixed to the tower
and their associated facilities, licensed or authorized by the FCC, and
constructed for the sole or primary purpose of supporting wireless
telecommunications facilities.
   TRAILER, CAMPING AND RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Tents, travel trailers, pickup
coaches, motorized homes and recreational vehicles and equipment as follows:
      (1)   BOAT. A vessel designed to travel on water.
      (2)   BOAT TRAILER. A trailer designed to haul a boat as defined above.
      (3)   MOTORIZED HOME. Portable dwelling designed and constructed as an
integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
      (4)   PICKUP COACH. A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a
pickup or other truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable
for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation
purposes.
      (5)   TRAVEL TRAILER” means a portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be towed and used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational,
and vacation purposes, and permanently identified as a travel trailer by the
manufacturer of the trailer.
   TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT. Equipment that facilitates transmission for any
wireless telecommunication service licensed or authorized by the FCC,
including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-
optic cable, and regular and backup power supply.
   TRUCK TERMINAL. A facility where freight is unloaded from interstate trucks
or intermodal trailers and containers carried on the railroad and loaded onto
local delivery trucks.
   UNIT OF GOVERNMENT. Any federal, state, regional, county, or municipal
government or governmental agency.
   URBAN AGRICULTURE. Land used for beekeeping, community gardens, keeping up
to six hens, and other small-scale agricultural activities.
   USE. Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of land
may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied, or any activity,
occupation, business, or operation carried on in a building or other structure
on a tract of land.
   UTILITY. A public or private distribution service to the public that is
regulated by the Public Service Commission.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is or may be used, in whole
or in part, by a communication services provider or for electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, signage (if the pole is 15 feet or taller), or a
similar function, or for the collocation of small wireless facilities. However,
UTILITY POLE does not include wireless support structures or electric
transmission structures.
   VARIANCE. A deviation from the minimum standards of this code that does not
involve permitting land uses otherwise prohibited in the zoning district or
changing the zoning classifications of a parcel of land.
   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street, excepting tractors, agricultural machinery,
devices moved by human power or used upon stationary rails or tracks.
   VEHICLE SALES, RENTAL AND SERVICE. A facility for the repair, rental, sales,
or service of automobiles, trucks, buses, boats, and marine equipment,
motorcycles, campers, motor homes, and recreational vehicles. This definition
does not include the rental, sale, or service of heavy equipment.
   VIDEO GAMING OR LOTTERY ESTABLISHMENT. Video lottery machines licensed by
the West Virginia Lottery Commission pursuant to the West Virginia Code, but
excluding establishments that only sell lottery tickets.
   VIEWPOINT. A location identified either in the city’s comprehensive plan or
by a federal or state agency and which serves as the basis for the location and
determination of a designated scenic resource.
   WAREHOUSE. A structure primarily used for the storage of goods and
materials.
   WATER TREATMENT PLANT. Municipally-owned facilities that treat water and
produce potable water for public consumption.
   WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment primarily engaged in selling
merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or
professional business users; or to other wholesalers, or acting as agents or
brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling to, such individuals or
companies.
   WIND ENERGY FACILITY, SMALL. Any electric generation facility, whose main
purpose is to convert kinetic energy from the wind into electrical power and
store the power as usable forms of energy, and includes the wind turbine(s),
structural supports, electrical infrastructure, and other appurtenant
structures and facilities. Consists of a maximum of one wind turbine, installed
for personal use in residences, commercial properties, and institutions.
   WINERY. An establishment where wine is manufactured or in any way prepared.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that
enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications
network, including: equipment associated with wireless communications; and
radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration; any structure, antenna, tower, base station, or other device
that provides or is suitable to provide radio/television transmission,
commercial mobile wireless telecommunication services, cellular phone services,
specialized mobile radio communications (SMR), broadband telecommunications
services, common carrier wireless telecommunication exchange phone services,
and personal communications service (PCS) or pager service. Wireless facility
includes small wireless facilities. WIRELESS FACILITY does not include the
structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is
collocated; wireline backhaul facilities; coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is
between wireless support structures or utility poles; or coaxial or fiber-optic
cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to, or directly associated
with, an antenna. The following are not WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
for purposes of this chapter:
      (1)   AMATEUR (HAM) RADIO STATIONS. Any antenna of less than 100 feet in
height owned and operated exclusively by an amateur radio operator licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
      (2)   ANTENNAS AS ACCESSORY USES. An antenna that is an accessory use to
a residential dwelling unit.
      (3)   EMERGENCY WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. Wireless
telecommunication facilities exclusively for emergency communications.
      (4)   TEMPORARY WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. A temporary
wireless telecommunications facility, either operational or in operation for a
maximum period of 120 calendar days per calendar year within the jurisdiction.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person, including a person authorized
to provide telecommunications service in the state, that builds or installs
wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless
support structures, or utility poles, but that is not a wireless provider.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless service
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services, using licensed or unlicensed spectrum,
including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile location,
provided to the public using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A structure, such as a monopole; tower, either
guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure
designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. WIRELESS
SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
   WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY. A facility used for the transport of
communications service or any other electronic communications by coaxial,
fiber-optic cable, or any other wire.
   YARD. An open space at grade between the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided herein.
      (1)   YARD, FRONT. A space extending the full width of the lot between
the architectural front of the principal building or structure and the front
lot line.
      (2)   YARD, REAR. A space extending the full width of the lot between the
architectural rear of the principal building or structure and the rear lot
line.
      (3)   YARD, SIDE. A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between the principal building facade and the side lot line.
   Front, Rear, and Side Yard
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ead299bdbbd5d64237988ee0c60bb5e02d43e88c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2708.png]
 
   ZONING. The division of a municipality or county into districts or zones
which specify permitted and conditional uses and development standards for real
property within the districts or zones.
   ZONING OFFICER. That person appointed by the governing body and who has any
other authority this code may confer upon him or her to administer this code
and to issue zoning permits.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 308, passed 11-3-2022; Ord. 322, passed 37-
2024; Ord. 329, passed 5-16-2024; Ord. 331, passed 6-6-2024)
ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS
§ 152.065 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP AND USE TABLE.
   The official zoning map of the city can be found in Appendix A at the end of
this chapter. The use table can be found in Appendix B at the end of this
chapter. Where a discrepancy exists between the use table and the text of this
chapter, the use table controls.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.066 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   In order to apply the provisions of this code, the city is hereby divided
into the following classes of districts for the purpose of zoning:
   (A)   Single Family Residential (R-l);
   (B)   City Residential (R-2);
   (C)   Recreational (Rec);
   (D)   Central Business District (CBD);
   (E)   Commercial (B-l);
   (F)   Educational (E);
   (G)   Industrial (I-1)
   (H)   Telecommunications Overlay (TO).
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.067 MAP AND BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The boundaries of all zoning districts are shown on the official
zoning map, which is the official zoning map for the City of Elkins. The map is
part of this code and is included in Appendix A to Ord. 301.
   (B)   The district boundaries on the city zoning map are intended to follow
property lines; centerlines of roads, water courses, or railroads; other
identifiable physical features; or measured distances from property lines,
centerlines, or identifiable physical features. When the Zoning Officer cannot
determine the location of a zoning district boundary by reference to the zoning
district map, the Zoning Officer shall refuse action; and the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall interpret the location of the district boundary with reference to
the scale of the map, the comprehensive plan, and the purposes set forth in all
relevant provisions of this code, provided that no boundary shall be changed by
the Board of Zoning Appeals. When a district boundary line divides a lot held
in single or separate ownership at the effective date of this code, the
permitted use on the lot is limited to those uses permitted in the zoning
district in which the largest part of the lot is located, and the smaller part
of the lot located in a another zoning district will be subject to the
provisions where the largest portion of the lot is located.
   (C)   Unless a use is allowed as a “permitted use by right,” “use permitted
with supplemental regulations,” “conditional use,” “conditional use with
supplemental regulations,” “nonconforming use,” “temporary use” then such use
is prohibited.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.068 PROCEDURES RELATING TO ANNEXED LANDS, VACATED AREAS AND UNZONED
LANDS.
   (A)   Zoning of annexed lands. Zoning classification for any land annexed
into the city shall be established by ordinance, pursuant to W.Va. Code Ch. 8A,
Art. 7, simultaneously with the adoption of the annexation resolution required
by W.Va. Code Ch. 8, Art. 6, as amended. City Council shall hear zoning
recommendations from the Planning Commission for the subject area during the
required hearing for annexation. Prior to any hearings, the Elkins Planning
Commission shall submit its written recommendations, to be consistent with the
comprehensive plan, to City Council at least 30 days prior to the hearing for
annexation.
      (1)   Prior to the annexation hearing and formal zoning designation of
any parcel(s) of land being annexed, the city shall, at least 30 days prior to
the enactment of the zoning map amendment:
         (a)   Give written notice, by certified mail, to the landowner(s)
whose property is directly involved in the proposed amendment; and
         (b)   Publish a notice of the proposed amendment to the zoning
ordinance map as a Class II-0 legal advertisement, pursuant to W.Va. Code Ch.
59.
      (2)   After the required 30-day notice period ends and the property
owners have been notified by certified mail, the City Council shall hold a
public hearing regarding the zoning designation of the newly annexed land.
After the hearing, City Council can, by ordinance, designate the zoning
districts for the annexed land.
   (B)   Vacated areas. Whenever any street, place, alley, public right-of-way,
railroad right-of-way, waterway, or other similar area is vacated by proper
authority, the districts adjoining each side of such street, place, alley,
public way, railroad right-of-way, waterway, or similar area shall be extended
automatically to the center of such vacation and all area included in the
vacation shall then and thenceforth be subject to all appropriate provisions of
the extended districts. In the event of a partial vacation, the adjoining
district, or district nearest the portion vacated, shall be extended
automatically to include all of the vacated area.
   (C)   Zoning of lands unzoned within the city. Zoning of any unzoned lands
within the city shall be zoned and assigned a zoning district by ordinance,
pursuant to W.Va. Code Ch. 9A, Art. 7. City Council shall hear zoning
recommendations from the Planning Commission for the subject area. Prior to any
hearing, the Planning Commission shall submit its written recommendations, to
be consistent with the comprehensive plan to the City Council at least 30 days
prior to the hearing for zoning.
      (1)   Prior to the zoning hearing and formal designation of any unzoned
parcel(s) of land being zones, the city shall, at least 30 days prior to the
enactment of an ordinance amending the zoning map:
         (a)   Give written notice, by certified mail, to the landowner(s)
whose property is directly involved in the proposed zoning and amendment to the
zoning map; and
         (b)   Publish a notice of the proposed amendment to the zoning
ordinance map as a Class II-0 legal advertisement, pursuant to W.Va. Code Ch.
59.
      (2)   After the required 30-day notice period ends and the property
owners have been notified by certified mail, the City Council shall hold a
public hearing regarding the zoning designation of the unzoned land. After the
hearing, City Council can, by ordinance, designate the zoning district for the
unzoned land, treating the unzoned land in the same manner that vacated land is
treated in division (B) above.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 317, passed 12-7-2023)
§ 152.069 USES NOT EXPRESSLY PERMITTED OR CONDITIONAL.
   It is recognized that new types or forms of land use will develop within the
city that are not anticipated by this chapter. In order to provide for such
changes and contingencies, the classification of any new or unlisted land use
shall be made by the Zoning Officer to determine if the use can reasonably be
interpreted to fit into a similar use category described in this code.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) DISTRICT
§ 152.080 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the Single Family Residential (R-1) District is to preserve
availability of single-family neighborhoods by discouraging multi-family
dwellings and business, commercial, and industrial uses within the district.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.081 PERMITTED USES IN THE SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) DISTRICT.
   The following shall be uses permitted by right in the Single Family
Residential (R-1) District:
Bus/transit shelter
Child day care facility, Class 4
Dock dwelling, single-family
Essential utilities and equipment
Greenhouse, noncommercial
Group residential facility
Group residential home
Home-based business (no impact)
Park
Solar energy facility, small
Solid waste disposal area/facility, public
Wireless telecommunications facility, small cells
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 308, passed 11-3-2022)
§ 152.082 CONDITIONAL USES IN THE SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) DISTRICT.
   The following shall be conditional uses in the Single Family Residential (R-
1) District:
 
Bed and breakfast inn I
Bed and breakfast inn II
Conversion of school/church
Dwelling, accessory
Home-based business (low impact)
Reception facility
Recreation, municipal
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.083 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) DISTRICT LOT REQUIREMENTS.
Max. building height       40 feet
Min. lot size (sq. ft.)    No minimum
Min. lot width             No minimum
                           Interior:      40
Max. lot coverage (as a %) Corner lot:      50
                           Triangular lot:   60
                           Average of the two adjoining properties which have
Min. front setback         pre- existing structures*
                           15 feet for vacant lots**
Min. side setback          5 feet
Min. rear setback          Not less than 15% of the depth of the lot
*Only the setbacks on the lots that abut each side of the site and are on the
same street may be used. Setbacks across the street or along a different
street may not be used.
** When one adjacent lot is vacant, the average is of the setback of the
adjacent non-vacant lot and the required setback for the vacant lot. When the
subject lot is a corner lot, the average is of the setback of the adjacent
non-vacant lot and the required setback of the subject lot.   
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
CITY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) DISTRICT
§ 152.090 CITY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) DISTRICT.
Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 347,
adopted 7-24-2025). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
   The purpose of the City Residential (R-2) District is to encourage a wider
variety of housing and allow that housing at a higher density than in R-l. The
R-2 District also allows limited low-impact commercial, community, and
recreational facilities, provided that these are suitable for operation in
close proximity to housing.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.091 PERMITTED USES IN THE CITY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) DISTRICT.
   The following shall be uses permitted by right in the City Residential (R-2)
District:
Bed and breakfast inn I
Bed and breakfast inn II
Bus/transit shelter
Child day care facility, Class 3
Child day care facility, Class 4
Dock
Dwelling, accessory
Dwelling, single-family
Dwelling, two-family
Essential utilities and equipment
Factory-built home
Factory-built home rental community
Greenhouse, noncommercial
Group residential facility
Group residential home
Home-based business (no impact)
Park
Solar energy facility, small
Solid waste disposal area/facility, public
Water treatment plant
Wireless telecommunications facility, small cells
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 308, passed 11-3-2022)
§ 152.092 CONDITIONAL USES IN THE CITY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) DISTRICT.
   The following shall be conditional uses in the City Residential (R-2)
District:
Bakery
Brewery pub
Community facility
Child day care facility, Class 1
Child day care facility, Class 2
Dwelling, conversion apartment
Dwelling, multi-family
Emergency shelter
Event, mass gathering
Governmental operation
Home-based business (low impact)
Museum
Parking lot
Places of worship/religious institution
Reception facility
Recreation, municipal
School, preK-12
Senior independent housing
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 329, passed 5-16-2024; Ord. 347, passed 7-24-
2025)
§ 152.093 CITY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) DISTRICT LOT REQUIREMENTS.
Max. building height       80 feet
Min. lot size (sq. ft.)    No minimum
Min. lot width             No minimum
                           Interior:      40
Max. lot coverage (as a %) Corner lot:      50
                           Triangular lot:   60
                           Average of the two adjoining properties which have
Min. front setback         pre- existing structures*
                           15 feet for vacant lots**
Min. side setback          If structure height is 40 feet or less = 5 feet
                           If structure height is mor than 40 feet = 15 feet
Min. rear setback          Not less than 15% of the depth of the lot
*Only the setbacks on the lots that abut each side of the site and are on the
same street may be used. Setbacks across the street or along a different
street may not be used.
** When one adjacent lot is vacant, the average is of the setback of the
adjacent non-vacant lot and the required setback for the vacant lot. When the
subject lot is a corner lot, the average is of the setback of the adjacent
non-vacant lot and the required setback of the subject lot.   
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
RECREATIONAL (REC) DISTRICT
§ 152.100 RECREATIONAL (REC) DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the Recreational (REC) District is to provide for recreation
opportunities and facilities and to protect open space to preserve the natural
beauty of the city.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.101 PERMITTED USES IN THE RECREATIONAL (REC) DISTRICT.
   The following shall be uses permitted by right in the Recreational (Rec)
District:
Amphitheater
Bus/transit shelter
Dock
Essential utilities and equipment
Event, mass gathering
Farmer’s market
Greenhouse, noncommercial
Group residential facility
Group residential home
Park
Reception facility
Recreation, municipal
Solar energy facility, small
Wireless telecommunications facility, small cells
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 308, passed 11-3-2022)
§ 152.102 CONDITIONAL USES IN THE RECREATIONAL (REC) DISTRICT.
   The following shall be conditional uses in the Recreational (Rec) District:
 
Parking lot
Sports arena
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.103 RECREATIONAL (REC) DISTRICT LOT REQUIREMENTS.
 
Max. building height       No maximum
Min. lot size (sq. ft.)    No minimum
Min. lot width             No minimum
Max. lot coverage (as a %) No maximum
Min. front setback         No minimum
Min. side setback          No minimum
Min. rear setback          No minimum
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
CENTRAL BUSINESS (CBD) DISTRICT
§ 152.110 CENTRAL BUSINESS (CBD) DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the Central Business (CBD) District is to encourage a
centralized area of mixed commercial and residential uses. The goal of this
district is to provide convenient, pedestrian-oriented business that meet the
needs of residents in this neighborhood and surrounding neighborhoods, as well
as walkable dining and entertainment options that are attractive for residents
and visitors alike.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.111 PERMITTED USES IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS (CBD) DISTRICT.
   The following shall be uses permitted by right in the Central Business (CBD)
District:
Amphitheater
Animal hospital/veterinary office
Bakery
Bank/financial institution
Bed and breakfast inn I
Bed and breakfast inn II
Bed and breakfast inn III
Brewery pub
Bus/transit shelter
Butcher shop
Catering business
Child day care facility, Class 1
Child day care facility, Class 2
Child day care facility, Class 3
Child day care facility, Class 4
Clinic
Community facility
Conference center
Convenience store
Coworking space
Cultural service
Distillery
Dock
Dwelling, accessory
Dwelling, mixed-use
Dwelling, multi-family
Dwelling, single-family
Dwelling, two-family
Educational institution
Essential utilities and equipment
Event, mass gathering
Farmer’s market
Governmental operations
Greenhouse, noncommercial
Group residential facility
Group residential home
Health club
Home-based business (low impact)
Home-based business (no impact)
Laundromat
Liquor store
Medical cannabis dispensary
Medical cannabis organization, health care
Museum
Office supply establishment
Park
Personal service
Pet shop
Pharmacy
Photographic studio
Places of worship/religious institution
Professional services
Reception facility
Recreation, commercial indoor
Recreation, commercial outdoor
Recreation, municipal
Restaurant
Retail store/shop < 7,000 square feet
Senior independent housing
Solar energy facility, small
Studio, dancing, music or art
Tattoo parlor/body piercing studio
Tavern/drinking establishment
Theater
Wireless telecommunications facility, small cells
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 308, passed 11-3-2022; Ord. 329, passed 5-16-
2024)
§ 152.112 CONDITIONAL USES IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS (CBD) DISTRICT.
   The following shall be conditional uses in the Central Business (CBD)
District:
Conversion of school/church
Dog day care
Dwelling, conversion apartment
Emergency shelter
Garage, public
Gas station
Hotel/motel
Medical adult day care center
Night club
Parking lot
Parking structure
Private club
Retail store/shop 7,000 to 25,000 square feet
Roadside vendor stand
School, commercial
Shopping center
Sports arena
Winery
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.113 CENTRAL BUSINESS (CBD) DISTRICT LOT REQUIREMENTS.
Max. building height       72 feet
Min. lot size (sq. ft.)    No minimum
Min. lot width             No minimum
                           For commercial and industrial buildings, the maximum
                           percentage of lot occupancy may be 100%; provided,
Max. lot coverage (as a %) that the Building Code and the sanitary provisions
                           of this city code of ordinances, and the provisions
                           of this code with reference to parking area, are
                           fully complied with
Front setback              15 feet maximum
Min. side setback          No minimum
Min. rear setback          No minimum
Single-family and multi-family dwellings in the CBD District shall follow the
dimensional requirements for the City Residential Zoning District, except for
building height.
* No parking lots permitted within front yards.
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
COMMERCIAL (B-1) DISTRICT
§ 152.120 COMMERCIAL (B-1) DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the Commercial (B-1) District is to provide space for larger
scale commercial businesses that serve both the city and the traveling public.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.121 PERMITTED USES IN THE COMMERCIAL (B-1) DISTRICT.
   The following shall be uses permitted by right in the Commercial (B-l)
District:
Animal hospital/veterinary office
Automobile car wash
Automobile repair/service
Bakery
Bank/financial institution
Bed and breakfast inn I
Bed and breakfast inn II
Bed and breakfast inn III
Boat and marine sales/service
Brewery pub
Broadcasting studio (radio/television)
Building materials facility
Bus/transit facilities
Bus/transit shelter
Butcher shop
Catering business
Child day care facility, Class 1
Child day care facility, Class 2
Child day care facility, Class 3
Child day care facility, Class 4
Clinic
Community facility
Conference center
Continuing care facility
Convenience store
Coworking space
Cultural service
Distillery
Distribution facility
Dock
Dog day care
Dry cleaner
Dwelling, mixed-use
Dwelling, multi-family
Dwelling, single-family
Dwelling, two-family
Educational institution
Equipment rental/repair
Essential utilities and equipment
Event, mass gathering
Farm/construction equipment and supply sales
Farmer’s market
Funeral home/mortuary
Garden center
Governmental operations
Greenhouse, commercial
Greenhouse, noncommercial
Group residential facility
Group residential home
Health club
Home-based business (low impact)
Home-base business (no impact)
Hotel/motel
Laboratory
Laundromat
Liquor store
Medical adult day care center
Medical cannabis dispensary
Medical cannabis organization, health care
Museum
Office supply establishment
Park
Personal service
Pet shop
Pharmacy
Photographic studio
Place of worship/religious institution
Private club
Professional services
Reception facility
Recreation, commercial indoor
Recreation, commercial outdoor
Recreation, municipal
Restaurant
Retail store/shop < 7,000 square feet
Retail store/shop 7,000 to 25,000 square feet
School, commercial
School, preK-12
Senior independent housing
Shopping center
Solar energy facility, small
Studio, dancing, music or art
Tattoo parlor/body piercing studio
Tavern/drinking establishment
Theater
Vehicles sales/rental and service
Video gaming or lottery establishment
Winery
Wireless telecommunications facility, small cells
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 308, passed 11-3-2022; Ord. 329, passed 5-16-
2024)
§ 152.122 CONDITIONAL USES IN THE COMMERCIAL (B-1) DISTRICT.
   The following shall be conditional uses in the Commercial (B-l) District:
Conversion of school/church
Emergency shelter
Flea market
Gas station
Gas station, large
Hospital
Kennel
Manufacturing (light)
Night club
Parcel delivery facility
Parking lot
Parking structure
Recycling facility
Retail store/shop > 25,000 square feet
Roadside vendor stand
Sports arena
Theater, drive-in
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.123 COMMERCIAL (B-1) DISTRICT LOT REQUIREMENTS.
 
Max. building height       130 feet
Min. lot size (sq. ft.)    No minimum
Min. lot width             No minimum
Max. lot coverage (as a %) No more than 90%
Min. front setback         No minimum
Min. side setback          No minimum
Min. rear setback          No minimum
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
EDUCATIONAL (E) DISTRICT
§ 152.130 EDUCATIONAL (E) DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the Educational (E) District is to provide for buildings and
premises used by educational institutions. In addition to buildings and uses
associated directly with instructional activities, this district also allows
non-instructional uses related to or typically associated with educational
institutions, such as those necessary to meet the lodging, health, safety, and
entertainment needs of a student population and which may also benefit the
larger community.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.131 PERMITTED USES IN THE EDUCATIONAL (E) DISTRICT.
   The following shall be uses permitted by right in the Educational (E)
District:
Amphitheater
Bed and breakfast inn II
Broadcasting studio (radio/television)
Bus/transit shelter
Catering business
Clinic
Cultural service
Dock
Dwelling, single-family
Dwelling, two-family
Educational institution
Equipment rental/repair
Essential utilities and equipment
Event, mass gathering
Greenhouse, noncommercial
Group residential facility
Group residential home
Health club
Home-based business (low impact)
Home-based business (no impact)
Hotel/motel
Laboratory
Museum
Park
Parking lot
Pharmacy
Places of worship/religious institution
Reception facility
Recreation, commercial indoor
Recreation, municipal
Restaurant
School, preK-12
Solar energy facility, small
Solar energy facility, large
Sports arena
Studio, dancing, music, or art
Tavern/drinking establishment
Temporary shelter
Theater
Wind energy facility, small
Wireless telecommunications facility, small cells
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 308, passed 11-3-2022; Ord. 329, passed 5-16-
2024)
§ 152.132 CONDITIONAL USES IN THE EDUCATIONAL (E) DISTRICT.
   The following shall be conditional uses in the Educational (E) District:
 
Conversion of school/church
Hospital
Parking structure
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.133 EDUCATIONAL (E) DISTRICT LOT REQUIREMENTS.
Max. building height       100 feet
Min. lot size (sq. ft.)    No minimum
Min. lot width             No minimum
                           The maximum percentage of lot occupancy may be 100%;
                           provided, that the Building Code and the sanitary
Max. lot coverage (as a %) provisions of this city code of ordinances, and the
                           provisions of this code with reference to parking
                           area, are fully complied with.
                           Average of two adjoining properties which have pre-
Min. front setback         existing structures*
                           15 feet for vacant lots**
Min. side setback          5 feet
Min. rear setback          Not less than 15% of the depth of the lot
*Only the setbacks on the lots that abut each side of the site and are on the
same street may be used. Setbacks across the street or along a different street
may not be used.
** When one adjacent lot is vacant, the average is of the setback of the
adjacent non-vacant lot and the required setback for the vacant lot. When the
subject lot is a corner lot, the average is of the setback of the adjacent non-
vacant lot and the required setback of the subject lot.
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
INDUSTRIAL (I-1) DISTRICT
§ 152.140 INDUSTRIAL (I-1) DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the Industrial (I-1) District is to encourage location of
industrial uses in one area to more efficiently meet the infrastructure and
other needs of such uses and to minimize their external effects on the rest of
the city’s zoning districts.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.141 PERMITTED USES IN THE INDUSTRIAL (I-1) DISTRICT.
   The following shall be uses permitted by right in the Industrial (I-1)
District:
Animal hospital/veterinary office
Automobile car wash
Automobile repair/service
Bakery
Bank/financial institution
Boat and marine sales/service
Brewery pub
Broadcasting studio (radio/television)
Building material facility
Bus/transit facilities
Bus/transit shelter
Butcher shop
Clinic
Convenience store
Distillery
Distribution facility
Dock
Dog day care
Dry cleaner
Equipment rental/repair
Essential utilities and equipment
Event, mass gathering
Farm/construction equipment and supply sales
Farmer’s market
Garden center
Gas station
Gas station, large
Governmental operations
Greenhouse, commercial
Greenhouse, noncommercial
Group residential facility
Group residential home
Home-based business (no impact)
Industrial park
Laboratory
Manufacturing (light)
Medical cannabis dispensary
Medical cannabis growing facility
Medical cannabis processing facility
Parcel delivery facility
Parking lot
Places of worship/religious institution
Photographic studio
Reception facility
Recreation, indoor
Recreation, municipal
Recreation, outdoor
Recycling facility
Research and development
Restaurant
Retail store/shop <7,000 square feet
Retail store/shop 7,000 to 25,000 square feet
School, commercial
Self-storage facility
Solar energy facility, large
Solar energy facility, small
Solid waste disposal area/facility, private
Solid waste disposal area/facility, public
Tavern/drinking establishment
Warehouse
Wholesale establishment
Winery
Wireless telecommunications facility
Wireless telecommunications facility, small cells
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 308, passed 11-3-2022; Ord. 331, passed 6-6-
2024)
§ 152.142 CONDITIONAL USES IN THE INDUSTRIAL (I-1) DISTRICT.
   The following shall be conditional uses in the Industrial (I-1) District:
Adult business
Conversion of school/church
Extractive industry
Freight terminal
Incinerator
Lumberyard
Manufacturing (heavy)
Parking structure
Retail store/shop > 25,000 square feet
Salvage yard
Truck terminal
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.143 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-1) LOT REQUIREMENTS.
 
Max. building height       100 feet
Min. lot size (sq. ft.)    No minimum
Min. lot width             No minimum
Max. lot coverage (as a %) 90%
Min. front setback         No minimum
Min. side setback          No minimum
Min. rear setback          No minimum
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
TELECOMMUNICATIONS OVERLAY (TO) DISTRICT
§ 152.150 TELECOMMUNICATIONS OVERLAY (TO) DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the Telecommunications Overlay (TO) District is to ensure
that telecommunication facilities may locate within the city in a manner that
best serves local needs and the concerns of citizens.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.151 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   In addition to the uses permitted by right or as a conditional use, as
specified in the underlying districts, wireless telecommunication facilities
are permitted by right within the Telecommunications Overlay (TO) District, as
shown on the official zoning map, and shall be subject to the supplemental
provisions provided in §§
152.240 through
152.249.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 152.160 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish standards and policies for
specific uses in all districts that require particular considerations. These
regulations will supplement general development standards by establishing
uniform criteria for each use—whether a permitted use by right or a conditional
use—and are set forth to achieve compatibility with the principal uses
permitted in a zoning district. The provisions for this subchapter shall apply
in addition to any other applicable zoning regulations.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.161 ADULT BUSINESS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually
oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, moral and general
welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented
businesses within the city. The provisions of this section have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or
reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this section to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by
the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material.
   (B)   Findings and rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary
effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to
the City Council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions
incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541
U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425
(2002); City of Erie v. Pap’s A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v.
Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres,
427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991);
California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); and Fantasy Ranch, Inc. v. City of
Arlington, No. 04-11337, 2006 WL 2147559 (5th Cir. 2006); N.W. Enters, v. City
of Houston, 352 F.3d 162 (5th Cir. 2003); Baby Dolls Topless Saloons, Inc. v.
City of Dallas, 295 F.3d 471 (5th Cir. 2002); BGHA, LLC v. City of Universal
City, 210 F. Supp. 2d (W.D. Tex. 2002), ajf’d 340 F.3d 295 (5th Cir. 2003);
LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); Hang On, Inc. v.
City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); Woodall v. City of El Paso, 49
F.3d 1120 (5th Cir. 1995); J&B Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Jackson, 152 F.3d
362 (5th Cir. 1998); SDJ, Inc. v. City of Houston, 837 F.2d 1268 (5th Cir.
1988); TK’s Video, Inc. v. Denton County, 24 F.3d 705 (5th Cir. 1994); Heideman
v. South Salt Lake City, 342 F.3d 1182 (10th Cir. 2003); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc.
v. City of Jacksonville, 973 F. Supp. 1428 (M.D. Fla. 1997), ajf’d 176 F.3d
1358 (11th Cir. 1999); Ctr for Fair Public Policy v. Maricopa County, 336 F.3d
1152 (9th Cir. 2003); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane,
368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale,
Case No. 4:05-CV-166-A (N.D. Tex., May 16, 2005); Sensations, Inc. v. City of
Grand Rapids, 2006 WL 2504388 (W.D. Mich., Aug. 28, 2006); Gammoh v. City of La
Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); Ben’s Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset,
316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); And based upon reports concerning secondary
effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but
not limited to, Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Garden
Cove, California -1991; Houston, Texas - 1983; Phoenix, Arizona - 1979, 1995-
98; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Minneapolis, Minnesota - 1980; Los
Angeles, California -1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Spokane, Washington -
2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Littleton, Colorado - 2004; Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma - 1986; Dallas, Texas - 1997, 2004; Greensboro, North Carolina - 2003;
Kennedale, Texas - 2005; Effingham, Illinois - 2005; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; El
Paso, Texas -1986; New York, New York Times Square - 1994; and the Report of
the Attorney General’s Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented
Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the City Council finds:
      (1)   Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are
associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not
limited to personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of
disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug
trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter
and sexual assault and exploitation.
      (2)   Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive
land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and
should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses, to minimize the
secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary
concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area.
      (3)   Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a
harm, which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or
abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects,
which is the city’s rationale for this section, exists independent of any
comparative analysis between sexually oriented and non-sexually oriented
businesses. Additionally, the city’s interests in regulating sexually oriented
businesses extend to preventing future secondary effects of either current or
future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the city. The city finds
that the cases and documentation relied on in this section are reasonably
believed to be relevant to said secondary effects.
   (C)   No such adult establishment shall be located less than 1,000 feet from
a school zone, place of worship, library, day care center, civic building,
park, historic district, dwelling, lot with residential districting, or other
adult establishment as measured from front door to front door along the curb
line of public streets providing access.
   (D)   All doors, windows, and other apertures shall be located and covered
or screened with opaque glazing to discourage and prevent visibility or viewing
of the interior.
   (E)   No exterior signage, building element, advertisement, display, or
other promotional material shall be pornographic in nature or convey any such
idea or element to specified anatomical areas, as defined in this code.
   (F)   In the event that an activity or business which might fall under a use
category other than adult business is combined with or includes activities
which constitute an adult bookstore, adult movie theater or movie house, or
adult entertainment, as defined herein, then such activity or business shall
constitute an adult business and shall be governed by those provisions in this
code applicable to adult business uses, in addition to those provisions that
govern the combined use.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.162 AUTOMOBILE CAR WASH.
   (A)   The minimum distance between any buildings, including accessory uses,
and any residential district shall be 50 feet.
   (B)   Exterior lighting shall be shielded so that it is deflected away from
adjacent properties and from passing motorists.
   (C)   A fence with a minimum height of six feet shall be provided along the
interior side and rear property line, when adjacent to a dwelling, to protect
the dwelling from light and noise and eliminate blowing debris, and to protect
adjacent property values. The fence shall be constructed of masonry, concrete,
wood or other similar materials.
   (D)   All of the area to be utilized by the washing and drying operations,
including all ingress and egress areas, shall be paved with concrete, asphalt
or asphaltic concrete.
   (E)   Where such use is located adjacent to residentially zoned property or
property used for residential purposes, hours of operation shall be limited to
between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
   (F)   Two off-street waiting spaces for each car washing device or stall are
required, or two off-street waiting spaces for an assembly line type washing
establishment, and two parking spaces at the end of each washing bay for drying
and hand finishing vehicles.
   (G)   Audible electronic devices such as loudspeakers, automobile service
order devices, and similar instruments, on-site lighting, and drive-through
lanes shall be designed and located such that noise, exhaust fumes, and stray
light shall not unreasonably impact adjacent properties.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.163 AUTOMOBILE REPAIR/SERVICE.
   (A)   The only vehicles which may be stored outside in connection with the
business include:
      (1)   Customer vehicles awaiting service may be stored outside for a
period not to exceed two weeks and a work order or some other written proof
must be provided to show that the vehicle is actually awaiting service.
      (2)   Employees’ personal vehicles used for travel to and from work.
      (3)   A vehicle used in connection with the auto repair operation, such
as a wrecker.
   (B)   Vehicles which may not be stored outside are:
      (1)   Inoperable vehicles which are not awaiting service.
      (2)   Inoperable vehicles which are being scrapped or used for
replacement parts for another vehicle being repaired.
      (3)   Operable vehicles not awaiting service and not used in connection
with the business.
   (C)   No portion of an automotive repair or service station or any part of
their appurtenances or accessory uses shall be placed within 50 feet of any
residential dwelling.
   (D)   Audible electronic devices such as loudspeakers, automobile service
order devices, and similar instruments, on-site lighting, and drive-through
lanes shall be designed and located such that noise, exhaust fumes, and stray
light shall not unreasonably impact adjacent properties.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.164 BED AND BREAKFAST INN I, II, AND III.
   (A)   A bed and breakfast inn may or may not offer ancillary services only
to guests such as providing breakfast, private parties, and evening and lunch
meals; holding private outdoor events such as weddings, fundraising or civic
events for local clubs, and special dinners or meals; and operating gift shops.
   (B)   All private residences used as bed and breakfast inns shall be
virtually indistinguishable from surrounding residential units.
   (C)   Signs for residences used as a bed and breakfast inn are subject to
the sign regulations for signs accessory to dwellings.
   (D)   Cooking facilities within bedrooms are prohibited.
   (E)   A private residence used as a bed and breakfast inn II shall have a
minimum heated gross floor area of 2,500 square feet.
   (F)   A bed and breakfast inn I shall not employ individuals other than a
permanent resident of the private residence. A bed and breakfast inn II may
employ one individual other than a permanent resident of the private residence.
   (G)   All bed and breakfast inns shall comply with the provisions of W.Va.
Code § 29-3-16c, Safety Standards for Bed and Breakfast Establishments.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.165 CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY.
   (A)   All childcare providers, whether state or privately operated, shall
obtain a license from the West Virginia Secretary of State and the Department
of Health and Human Resources. Each facility shall also be inspected by the
Zoning Officer and Fire Marshal to ensure the safety of children and employees.
   (B)   A facility shall provide a minimum of 35 square feet of usable space
per child. Any rooms or areas that have not been approved for the use of
children shall be inaccessible. No activity space may be created in the
basement of a structure unless expressly approved by the Fire Marshal.
   (C)   A secured outdoor activity area must be provided by the facility
allowing a minimum of 75 square feet of space per child. Should the minimum
space not be available, a rotating outdoor activity schedule shall be
established to meet the minimum requirements and ensure that each child be
afforded outdoor playtime every day, weather permitting.
   (D)   The outdoor activity area noted above shall be fenced with a minimum
of six-foot high fence. All play equipment shall be located in the fenced areas
in the rear or side yard. All gates shall be self-latching.
   (E)   Parks may be used to meet outdoor activity requirements if located
immediately adjacent to the facility.
   (F)   Child day care businesses operated from a residence shall be operated
by a permanent resident. No changes to the exterior of residences may be made
for a child day care business operated from a residence except changes
necessary for safety improvements.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.166 DOG DAY CARE.
   All dog day care facilities must comply with the following criteria:
   (A)   The hours of operation shall be limited daily any time between 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
   (B)   Dogs may be groomed, trained, exercised, and socialized, but not kept
or boarded overnight, bred, sold, or let for hire.
   (C)   There shall be no more than 30 dogs on the premises at one time.
   (D)   Provide indoor and/or outdoor recreational areas for dogs. Indoor
recreational area shall be at least 100 square feet per dog, and outdoor
recreational area shall be at least 150 square feet per dog.
   (E)   Provide sight-obscuring fencing for all on-site outdoor recreation
areas. The fence shall provide full containment for the dogs and be secured at
all times. The fence structure shall be deep enough and secured to the ground
to prevent escape and high enough to prevent dogs from jumping or climbing
over. The fence shall comply with all fence provisions in this chapter.
   (F)   If there is a grooming facility on site, it must be physically
separated from primary enclosure areas and food storage.
   (G)   Feces, hair, dirt, debris, and food waste must be removed at least
daily or more often if necessary to prevent accumulation and to reduce disease
hazards, insects, pests and odors.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.167 DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY.
   The following parking standards shall apply to all drive-up windows and
drive-through uses permitted by this chapter:
   (A)   The use shall not require an additional curb-cut in the pedestrian
right-of-way;
   (B)   Public address speakers, on-site lighting, and drive-through lanes
shall be designed and located such that noise, exhaust fumes, and stray light
shall not unreasonably impact adjacent properties.
   (C)   Minimum queue spaces for drive-up windows and drive-through:
      (1)   Bank teller lane: three.
      (2)   Automated teller machine: two.
      (3)   Restaurant drive-through: four.
      (4)   Car wash stall, automatic: two.
      (5)   Car wash stall self-service: two.
      (6)   Gasoline pump island: one.
      (7)   All other retail uses: three.
   (D)   Each queue space shall be a minimum of ten feet wide by 20 feet long
in size. Each queue lane shall be clearly defined and designed so as not to
conflict or interfere with other pedestrian or vehicular traffic using the
site.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.168 EVENTS, MASS GATHERING.
   (A)   A permit is required for each mass gathering event.
   (B)   The applicant shall be the owner or co-owner of the property. An owner
or a representative of the owner shall be present on the property at all times
during the mass gathering event.
   (C)   Mass events shall occur outdoors, in temporary structures, or existing
permanent structures. New permanent structures shall not be constructed for
special events.
   (D)   Mass gathering events shall cause no alteration to land including, but
not limited to, grading, filling, or paving.
   (E)   The duration of each mass event shall not exceed three consecutive
days, provided activities shall only occur between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
11:59 p.m.
   (F)   Within any single calendar year, a parcel may host no more than four
mass events.
   (G)   A parking plan shall be submitted as part of the permit process.
Adequate on-site parking areas shall be provided to accommodate the number of
vehicles expected. Off-site parking areas are permitted if the applicant
provides written authorization from the property owner for those sites. The
applicant shall post signs safely directing people to the parking sites. There
shall be no parking on any public roads.
   (H)   Local emergency medical services (EMS) shall be notified of all mass
events. The holder of the mass event shall provide EMS with the number of
people projected to attend.
   (I)   All garbage shall be removed from site within five days.
   (J)   Trained security is required on site for all mass events.
   (K)   All lighting and sound shall be aligned so as to minimize impact on
nearby residents and shall conform to requirements of this code and other
applicable city ordinances.
   (L)   The site shall provide potable water supply and proper sanitation
facilities.
   (M)   The sale of alcohol is permitted. All sales of alcohol shall be
regulated by the West Virginia Alcohol Beverage Control Administration.
   (N)   The owner of the property shall procure a liability insurance policy.
Proof of the liability insurance in the minimum amount of $2,000,000 per
occurrence and which lists the city as co-insured on the policy shall be
submitted with the permit application.
   (O)   All mass gathering events shall contact the following agencies: the
City of Elkins Police Department, a West Virginia licensed EMS provider,
licensed garbage removal company, licensed towing company, the County Health
Department (approval or permit required), West Virginia Division of Highways
(approval or permit required), and County Homeland Security.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.169 [RESERVED].
§ 152.170 GARAGE SALES.
   (A)   No more than four garage sales, yard sales, or rummage sales are
permitted within any 12-month period for each residence.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, GARAGE SALE, YARD SALE, ESTATE SALE,
and RUMMAGE SALE shall be deemed to mean the same thing.
   (C)   Sales must be contained within the individual’s property and may not
encroach into a public right-of-way.
   (D)   Each garage sale shall not be permitted to last more than 72 hours.
   (E)   A garage sale shall not include the sale of new merchandise.
   (F)   Tents may be used during the event subject to division (C) above and
must be removed immediately following the conclusion of each event.
   (G)   All items must be removed from the exterior of the premise at the end
of the sales event.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.171 GARDEN CENTER.
   (A)   Parking and loading facilities and signage shall be screened from
adjoining residentially zoned properties.
   (B)   Display, sale, or repair of motorized nursery or garden equipment
shall not be permitted.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.172 GREENHOUSE, NONCOMMERCIAL.
   (A)   The greenhouse shall not be located in the front yard.
   (B)   Greenhouse shall not create offensive odors or dust.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.173 HOME-BASED BUSINESS (NO IMPACT).
   The business activity must satisfy the following requirements:
   (A)   The home-based business shall only employ individuals residing in the
dwelling.
   (B)   A home-based business shall not change the residential character of
the dwelling and shall not detract from the residential character of the
neighborhood.
   (C)   The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
   (D)   A home-based business shall not display or sell retail goods or
stockpile inventory of a substantial nature.
   (E)   There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking or lights, except signs, as permitted in §§
152.220 through
152.232, provided signs meet all requirements in §§
152.220 through
152.232.
   (F)   The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception, which
is detectable in the neighborhood.
   (G)   The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential
use in the neighborhood.
   (H)   The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% percent of the gross floor area.
   (I)   No traffic shall be generated by such home-based business in excess of
that normally associated with residential use.
   (J)   The business may not involve any illegal activity.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.174 HOME-BASED BUSINESS (LOW IMPACT).
   The business or commercial activity conducted as a home-based business must
satisfy the following criteria:
   (A)   Customer, client, patient, or other traffic shall be restricted to 8:
00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
   (B)   No more than 12 visits to the home-based business shall be allowed per
day, except as necessary to operate childcare facilities in accordance with the
West Virginia Code; such visits may be addressed in a conditional use permit. A
VISIT is defined as a stop at the business premises by one automobile
transporting one or more customers, clients, patients, packages/parcels, or
other business associates. A VISIT does not include the operator of the
business, members of his or her family, or the business employee.
   (C)   The business or commercial activity shall not change the residential
character of the dwelling and shall not detract from the residential character
of the neighborhood.
   (D)   The home-based business shall not employ individuals living outside
the dwelling to physically work at the dwelling, except bed and breakfast inns
may employ one nonresident employee to physically work at the bed and breakfast
inn.
   (E)   The business or commercial activity may not use any equipment or
processes, which create noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or
electronic interference, including interference with radio or television
reception, which is detectable in the surrounding neighborhood.
   (F)   The business or commercial activity may not generate any solid waste
or sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
the use of a dwelling in the neighborhood.
   (G)   The business activity may not occupy more than 25% percent of the
gross floor area of the residence.
   (H)   The business may not involve any illegal activity.
   (I)   Any outdoor display or storage of materials, goods, supplies or
equipment shall be prohibited, other than the signs.
   (J)   No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any
need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met
by off-street parking.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.175 INCINERATOR.
   (A)   The incinerator is located so as to minimize incompatibility with the
character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value of
the surrounding property.
   (B)   The incinerator shall not be located within 15 feet of any building or
structure and shall be positioned so that there is not direct exposure to
buildings, wood fences, or piled combustible materials in the event of failure
of the spark arrestor. The incinerator shall be located so that a nuisance is
not created by reason of smoke, smell, or noise.
   (C)   Each incinerator must be set back a minimum of 500 feet from each
property line not adjacent to lands used or zoned for industrial purposes. A
visual buffer must be established and maintained between the incinerator and
any existing residential, commercial, or other non-industrial land use
immediately adjacent.
   (D)   Each incinerator must be designed so that it meets and continues to
meet all applicable rules, regulations and requirements of the applicable state
and federal regulatory agencies. Each incinerator must be fully permitted by
each such agency prior to construction and/or continued operation.
   (E)   Each incinerator must be designed with adequate on-site controls and
facilities to prevent and contain fires.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.176 MEDICAL CANNABIS ORGANIZATIONS.
   The following supplemental provisions apply to all medical cannabis
organizations or as otherwise specified herein.
   (A)   No medical cannabis dispensary shall be located within 1,000 feet of
the property line of a public, private or parochial school or a daycare center.
   (B)   No more than five medical cannabis dispensaries are permitted within
the city. No medical cannabis processing facilities and no medical cannabis
growing facilities are permitted within the city.
   (C)   There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, noise, glare,
vibration, or odors into the environment from the premises of a medical
cannabis organization.
   (D)   The only medical cannabis uses permitted under this chapter are those
expressly defined and permitted herein. Medical cannabis organizations may not
be combined with other uses.
   (E)   Medical cannabis organizations shall possess all applicable state
licenses.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.177 RECEPTION FACILITY.
   (A)   No activities that involve charging admission or that are solely
performance activities are permitted as part of this use.
   (B)   The owner or his or her designated representative shall be physically
present on the property at all times during receptions.
   (C)   All outdoor receptions, temporary structures, and parking areas
associated with a reception shall be located 150 feet to any property line.
   (D)   Lighting may be used for the duration of the reception only and may
not shine or produce glare on adjacent properties.
   (E)   The owner(s) shall ensure that ingress and egress during the reception
to the venue does not cause congestion on any public road.
   (F)   The owner(s) shall be responsible for the following: (1) sanitation
(municipal waste and recycling) facilities at the reception commensurate with
the number of patrons attending and (2) sanitary sewer facilities at the
reception commensurate with the number of patrons attending.
   (G)   The operation of the use shall at all times comply with all federal,
state, and local laws and regulations.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.178 SALVAGE YARDS.
   Salvage yards shall be subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   The minimum lot area shall be one acre.
   (B)   An eight-foot tall fence shall be placed along the entire perimeter of
the property. Fencing shall be at least 90% opaque.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.179 TOURIST OR TRAILER CAMP.
   Tourist or trailer camps shall be located on at least one acre of land and
shall provide usable plots measuring no less than 1,200 square feet.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.180 URBAN AGRICULTURE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BEEKEEPING. The keeping or propagation of honeybee hives for collection
of honey or other bee products.
      COMMUNITY GARDEN. A neighborhood-based development with the primary
purpose of providing space for members of the community to grow plants for
beautification, education, recreation, community distribution, or personal use.
      COMPOSTING. Accumulating a mixture of various decaying organic
substances, such as dead leaves or manure, intended to be used for fertilizing
soil.
      FOWL. Any chicken, duck, goose, turkey, guinea fowl, or pigeon.
      HOME AGRICULTURE. The gardening or production, principally for use or
consumption of the property owner or resident, of plants or their products
including but not limited to fruits of all kinds including grapes, nuts, and
berries; vegetables; floral, ornamental, and other noncommercial greenhouse
products; and bees and apiary products.
      HYDROPONICS. The cultivation of plants in nutrient solution rather than
soil.
      LIVESTOCK. Any hog, pig, goat, cow, horse, pony, emu, alpaca, or other
hoofed animal.
   (B)   Beekeeping. Beekeeping is permitted as an accessory use to a dwelling
provided that:
      (1)   No more than three hives, each with only one swarm, are allowed on
lots of less than 10,000 square feet; and
      (2)   Hives shall not be located within 25 feet of any lot line except
when situated eight feet or more above the grade immediately adjacent to the
grade of the lot on which the hives are located or when situated less than
eight feet above the adjacent existing lot grade and behind a solid fence or
hedge six feet high parallel to any lot line within 25 feet of a hive and
extending at least 20 feet beyond the hive in both directions.
      (3)   On any lot where a hive is located, shall be posted a honeybee
caution sign in or near the apiary.
   (C)   Community gardens. The responsibility of managing, maintenance, and
operations of community garden sites shall be that of the landowner or
designated public or civic entity, nonprofit organization, or other community-
based organization. Processing and storage of plants or plant products are
prohibited on site. Garden tools and supplies may be stored within an accessory
structure.
   (D)   Composting. Composting shall take place at least 25 feet from any
principal use, other than the principal use associated with the accessory use,
except that this requirement shall not apply to composting on rooftops.
   (E)   Keeping of fowl. The keeping of fowl is permitted as an accessory use
to a dwelling, provided that the number of fowl shall not exceed six and
subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   A dwelling shall be located on the same lot as the fowl.
      (2)   Fowl shall be kept within a building, coop, or enclosure, and
within a fully enclosed and fenced rear or side yard such that fowl may not be
at large within the city. The building, coop, or enclosure in which the fowl
are kept must be at least five feet from any dwelling, other than the dwelling
associated with the accessory use. The building, coop, or enclosure shall be
durably constructed and maintained in conformance with the West Virginia State
Building Code.
      (3)   A permit is required for keeping fowl within the city. A permit may
be obtained from the City Clerk after application to the Zoning Officer and an
inspection performed by the Zoning Officer.
   (F)   Incidental sales. Any sale resulting from beekeeping, composting, home
agriculture, or keeping of fowl shall constitute a home-based business and is
subject to all applicable provisions of this code.
   (G)   Location. Beekeeping, composting, and keeping of fowl shall not take
place in the front yard of any lot. All urban agriculture uses are permitted in
side and rear yards, as well as on rooftops.
   (H)   Prohibitions. The following provisions apply to all districts:
      (1)   Livestock shall not be kept within the city.
      (2)   Roosters shall not be kept within the city.
      (3)   Slaughtering and processing fowl are prohibited within the city,
except where such activity occurs within a butcher shop.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.181 VEHICLE, BOAT, AND MARINE SALES/RENTAL AND SERVICE.
   Vehicle, boat, and marine repair, service, sales, and rental uses shall be
subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   Outdoor storage areas shall be located within the side or rear yards
and screened from adjacent properties with fencing or with a landscape buffer
area, except that new and used vehicles and boats currently being offered for
sale, rent, or lease may be located in the front yard, subject to yard,
setback, and other requirements of this code.
   (B)   Activities involving excessive noise shall be conducted entirely
within the confines of a building sufficiently sound-insulated to effectively
confine the noise.
   (C)   No vehicle, boat, or marine repair, service, sales, and rental uses
shall be located less than 100 feet from a residential district.
   (D)   Vehicle, boat, and marine sales uses shall have a minimum of 6,000
square feet of outdoor display area.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.182 VIDEO LOTTERY ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The limited video lottery establishment shall not be located within
1,000 feet of a residential zone, church or place of worship, school, park,
community or recreation facility, or other limited video lottery establishment.
      (1)   The 1,000 feet from a school, park, community or recreation
facility, or residential zone shall be measured in a straight line from the
nearest point of the wall of a limited video lottery establishment to the
nearest property line of a school, park, community or recreation facility, or
residential zone.
      (2)   The 1,000 feet from a church or place of worship shall be measured
in a straight line from the nearest point of the wall of the portion of the
building in which a limited video lottery is conducted to the nearest point of
a wall of a building in which church worship services or related activities are
conducted.
      (3)   The 1,000 feet from another limited video lottery establishment
shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the wall of the
portion of the building in which a limited video lottery is conducted to the
nearest point of a wall in which another limited video lottery may be
conducted.
   (B)   Organizations with a valid club license are limited to operating a
maximum of ten LVL machines. Licensed clubs or taverns are limited to operating
a maximum of five LVL machines.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.183 WIND ENERGY FACILITY, SMALL.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the placement,
construction, and modification of small wind energy facilities while promoting
the safe, effective, and efficient use of such facilities.
   (B)   Applicability. The requirements set forth in this section shall govern
the siting of wind energy facilities used to generate electricity or perform
work that may be connected to the utility grid pursuant to West Virginia’s net
metering laws, serve as an independent source of energy, or serve in a hybrid
system.
   (C)   Siting requirements. The requirements for siting and construction of
all small wind energy facilities regulated by this section shall include the
following:
      (1)   Small wind energy towers shall maintain a galvanized steel finish,
unless FAA standards require otherwise, or if the owner is attempting to
conform the tower to the surrounding environment and architecture, in which
case it may be painted to reduce visual obtrusiveness. A wind energy tower may
be erected, maintained, or operated on or as an attachment to a building on a
lot. A photo simulation may be required by the city.
      (2)   Wind energy facilities shall not be artificially lighted unless
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or appropriate authority.
      (3)   No tower may be used to display a sign.
      (4)   The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed height of
the wind energy facilities tower does not exceed the height recommended by the
manufacturer or distributor of the system. The tower height shall not exceed a
maximum height of 70 feet on a parcel. When situated on or attached to a
building, the total height shall not exceed 70 feet. The building itself shall
otherwise conform to the applicable height requirement under this section.
      (5)   The applicant shall provide evidence that the provider of electric
utility service to the site has been informed of the applicant’s intent to
install an interconnected, customer-owned electricity generator, unless the
applicant intends, and so states on the application, that the system will not
be connected to the electricity grid. Notification will take place by having
the electric utility provider sign the conditional use permit application, but
such signature does not construe approval for net metering by the electric
utility.
      (6)   Wind energy facilities shall adhere to noise limits as established
by city ordinances. These levels, however, may be exceeded during short-term
events such as utility outages or severe windstorms.
      (7)   The applicant will provide information demonstrating that the
system will be used primarily to reduce on-site consumption of electricity.
      (8)   The minimum distance between the ground and any protruding blade
utilized on a small wind energy facility shall be 15 feet, as measured at the
lowest point of the arc of the blades. The lowest point of the arc of the
blades shall be ten feet above the height of any structure within 75 feet of
the base. The supporting tower shall be enclosed with a six-foot tall fence or
the base of the tower shall not be climbable for a distance of ten feet.
      (9)   The applicant will provide proof of adequate liability insurance
for a small wind energy facility. Whether or not the applicant is participating
in the net metering program, the applicant will be required to meet the
insurance coverage requirements as set forth in W.Va. Admin. Code § 150-33-4
(2011).
      (10)   The small wind energy facility generators and alternators should
be constructed so as to prevent the emission of radio and television signals
and shall comply with the provisions of Section 47 of the Federal Code of
Regulations, Part 15 and subsequent revisions governing said emissions.
   (D)   Federal and state requirements.
      (1)   Compliance with the Building Code. Building permit applications for
wind energy facilities shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind
turbine structure, including tower, base, and footings. An engineering analysis
of the tower showing compliance with the Building Code and certified by a
licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted.
      (2)   Compliance with FAA regulations. Wind energy facilities must comply
with applicable FAA regulations.
      (3)   Compliance with National Electric Code. Building permit
applications for wind energy facilities shall be accompanied by a line drawing
of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination
that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electrical Code.
      (4)   Compliance with regulations governing energy net metering. Wind
energy facilities connected to the utility grid must comply with W.Va. Code §
24-2F-8 and W.Va. Admin. Code § 150-33.
      (5)   Setbacks. The wind energy facilities shall be setback a distance at
least equal to 110% of the height of the tower plus the blade length from all
adjacent property lines and a distance equal at least to 150% of the tower
height plus blade length from any dwelling inhabited by humans on neighboring
property. No portion of the wind energy facility, including guy wire anchors,
may be extended closer than ten feet to the property line.
      (6)   Removal of defective or abandoned wind energy facilities. Any wind
energy facility found to be unsafe by the Zoning Officer shall be repaired by
the owner to meet federal, state, and local safety standards or removed within
six months. Any wind energy facility that is not operated for a continuous
period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility
shall remove the turbine within 90 days of receipt of notice from the Zoning
Officer instructing the owner to remove the abandoned wind energy facility.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 152.195 PURPOSE.
   Provide for special situations that must be regulated in such a manner as to
promote orderly development and to protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the community. The following supplemental regulations have
been deemed necessary to clarify and carry out the overall intent of this
chapter.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.196 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, USES, AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   All accessory buildings, uses, and structures shall require a permit.
Accessory buildings, accessory uses, and accessory structures shall be
permitted in all districts, provided each is customarily incidental and
subordinate to a principal use. There must be a principal structure on the lot,
or an adjacent lot under the same ownership, prior to the issuance of a permit
for an accessory building or structure. Accessory buildings, uses, and
structures shall not be permitted in front yards.
   (B)   No use that is to be carried on in an accessory building or structure
shall be in violation of the permitted uses in that district.
   (C)   All permanent accessory buildings, uses, and structures shall be
setback from all lot lines three feet.
   (D)   The height of accessory buildings and structures, except agricultural
buildings and structures and those located in the Industrial District, shall
not exceed the height of a single-story principal building or structure, and,
for all principal buildings or structures greater than one story, shall not
exceed 75% of the height of the principal building or structure, except that in
all cases the height of an accessory building or structure shall not exceed 25
feet.
   (E)   In no situation shall an accessory building or structure be larger
than the principal structure.
   (F)   Except as provided elsewhere in this code, no accessory building or
structure shall be constructed and used as a dwelling. Provided, however, that
one residential unit for a caretaker may be permitted in conjunction with any
active industrial establishment.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 331, passed 6-6-2024) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.197 YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   All yards required to be provided under this code shall be open to the sky
and unobstructed by any building or structure except for accessory buildings or
structures in the rear yard, and fences, and the following which may project
into the required yards as established in this code:
   (A)   Steps and stoops not exceeding 24 square feet;
   (B)   Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and
balconies opening upon fire towers, and the ordinary projection of chimneys and
flues into the rear or side yard not exceeding three and one-half feet in width
and placed so as not to obstruct light or ventilation; and
   (C)   Sills, eaves, belt courses, cornices, and ornamental features not
exceeding two feet in width.
   (D)   For purposes of determining the required yard for townhouse
developments, setbacks shall only apply from the perimeter of the main building
to the perimeter of the parent parcel upon which the building is situated.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.198 ADDITIONAL PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Residential. Individual lots or subdivided parcels ten acres or less
in size shall have no building or buildings used for living purposes in
addition to the principal residence. Undivided land parcels of ten acres or
greater in size shall be limited to one residential building per ten-acre unit
of undivided land area. This provision shall not apply to factory-built home
rental communities.
   (B)   Nonresidential. More than one principal building may be located upon
the lot or tract of nonresidential properties, but only when such buildings
conform to all setback requirements. Additional principal buildings may include
a caretaker’s residence used in conjunction with an active industrial
establishment or a caretaker’s residence used in conjunction with a place of
worship or religious institution.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.199 ORIENTATION OF PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES.
   All principal structures shall be required to have the front door facing the
street on which the property is addressed, unless the Zoning Officer determines
that the prevailing condition of the developed lots fronting the same street
would warrant a different orientation, or another orientation is necessary for
emergency services access.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.200 SWIMMING POOLS.
   Private swimming pools are permitted accessory uses only when located in
rear yards. Swimming pools and protective barriers must adhere to setback
requirements within the zoning district where the pool is to be located.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.201 FENCES, LANDSCAPING, AND SCREENING.
   Subject to the following conditions, fences and walls may be erected, and
hedges and other plantings may be grown along the boundaries of a lot:
   (A)   Clear sight triangle. Fences, hedges, other plantings, or walls at
street corners shall not interfere with any clear sight triangle. The height of
such objects is restricted to two and one-half feet within the clear sight
triangle. No fence, hedge, other plantings, or walls shall otherwise impose a
threat to the public safety, including by obstructing the view of motorists to
oncoming traffic or pedestrians.
   (B)   Height restrictions. Fences, walls, hedges, and other plantings used
for the purpose of screening shall not exceed 42 inches in height from the
front building line extending to the front lot line, and shall not exceed six
feet in height extending behind the front building line of the main structure,
excluding porches in the rear yard.
   (C)   Fences and walls.
      (1)   Fences and walls shall be durably constructed and well maintained.
      (2)   Fences and walls that have deteriorated shall be replaced or
removed immediately.
      (3)   Fence and walls shall not be constructed out of fabric, junk, junk
vehicles, appliances, tanks, barrels, razor wire, barbed wire, or electric
fencing.
      (4)   The finished side of the fence shall be oriented towards the front
of the lot or the direction of the adjacent property owner, unless the fence is
not visible from adjoining property.
   (D)   Landscaped buffer areas.
      (1)   Five-foot landscaped buffer areas are the preferred method of
buffering. However, where a buffer strip is considered to be impracticable or
inappropriate, an opaque fence at least six feet in height, in the rear or side
yard, or four feet in height in the front yard so as to restrict a clear view
beyond said buffer may be substituted in whole or in part for a natural buffer,
provided it is approved by the Zoning Officer.
      (2)   Landscaped buffer areas shall be continually maintained by the
landowner. Any plant material that does not survive shall be replaced within
six months. All landscaping shall be kept free of refuse and debris.
      (3)   Landscaped buffer areas may be required by the Board of Zoning
Appeals as a condition of a conditional use permit.
      (4)   Landscaped buffer areas shall not be required where the lot abuts
an area of existing natural vegetation that effectively screens the lot from
casual observation to a height of at least eight feet.
      (5)   At least 50% of the screen planting specimens shall be evergreens,
distributed evenly along the length of the barrier.
      (6)   All species within the screen planting shall be indigenous or
otherwise well-suited to the city except that trees with large leaves which
could clog storm drains and trees which are brittle, disease-prone, have low,
spreading branches or shallow root systems; which drop large fruit or much sap;
or which are otherwise messy shall also be avoided.
      (7)   Hedges shall be kept trimmed so that their branches shall not
extend into the public road, or upon the lands of an adjoining owner, more than
eighteen inches over the dividing line.
      (8)   No landscaping, tree, fence, wall or similar item shall obstruct
the required clear sight triangle.
   (E)   Property adjacent to dwellings and zoned or existing single-family
residential property. Landscaped buffer areas shall be provided between any new
development adjacent to single-family residential property (existing or zoned)
or adjacent to any dwelling, which landscaping shall be at least five feet wide
and at least five feet high, subject to height limitations contained within
this section.
   (F)   Parking lot screening. The following provisions apply only to new
developments and additions or renovations to existing nonresidential or multi-
family uses where the addition or renovation equals or exceeds 150% of the
gross square feet of the principal structure; provided, that compliance with
this section shall be required only to the degree that the minimum parking
requirement can still be met.
      (1)   One interior island shall be provided for every ten spaces or more
spaces. No island is required for nine or fewer spaces. Each interior island
shall also be not less than five feet in width and extend along the entire
length of the space. The location of the interior islands should be staggered
to avoid a regimented appearance. At least one tree shall be provided within
each interior island.
      (2)   Peripheral landscaping shall be required along the side of a
parking lot, driveway, or loading area that abuts adjoining property that is
not a right-of-way. A landscaping strip at least five feet in width shall be
located between the parking area and the abutting property lines, except where
driveways or other openings may be required. Between property lines, at least
one tree for each 30 linear feet shall be planted in the landscaping strip in
addition to other planting materials.
      (3)   The owner and their agencies shall be responsible for providing,
protecting and maintaining all landscaping in healthy and growing conditions,
replacing it when necessary, and keeping it free from refuse and debris.
   (G)   Frontage landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided along all property
boundaries abutting the right-of-way of any street. A landscaping strip five
feet in width shall be located along the right-of-way except where driveway or
other openings may be required. One tree shall be planted for each 30 linear
feet of the landscaping strip in addition to other planting materials.
   (H)   Ground-mounted and monument signs. All non-temporary ground-mounted or
monument signs shall be installed with a minimum surround of three feet of
regularly maintained floral and shrubbery landscaping in every direction.
   Landscape Buffer Requirements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ead299bdbbd5d64237988ee0c60bb5e02d43e88c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2710.png]
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.202 CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE.
   In a clear sight triangle, the entire area shall remain clear of
obstructions to sight, including but not limited to fences, hedges, other
landscaping, and signs, above a plane established two and one-half feet in
elevation to a height of eight feet from grade level at the intersection of any
street, alley, or other public right-of-way centerline.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.203 LOT LINES AND IRREGULAR LOTS.
   (A)   Corner lots. Corner lots shall have no rear lot line.
   (B)   Flag lots. When the handle of a flag lot is less than the minimum
width for a lot in the zoning district in which it is located, the handle is
not to be used in delineating the minimum required lot width. The minimum lot
width shall be taken from the front building line. However, the handle shall be
used in computing the required minimum lot size, except that in no case shall
the area of the handle constitute more than 50% of the entire lot. No
structures, whether primary or accessory, shall be placed in the handle.
   (C)   Lot width. In a case where there is only one side lot line, lot width
shall be measured between such side lot line and the opposite rear lot lines or
street line.
   (D)   Irregular lots. Front setbacks for irregular lots shall be measured
from the front lot line adjacent to the street right of way with the greatest
frontage in linear feet.
   (E)   Pie-shaped lots. Setbacks on pie-shaped lots shall be measured at the
closest point between the building and the angled lot line.
   (F)   Rear lot line (irregular). In the case of a lot having no street
frontage or a lot of an odd shape, only the one lot line farthest from any
street shall be considered a rear lot line. Where there is only one lot line
other than street lot lines, it shall be considered the rear lot line.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.204 HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS.
   Spires, towers, domes, minarets, pinnacles, penthouses over elevator shafts,
ventilation shafts, chimneys, smoke stacks, and fire sprinkler tanks may be
erected to a greater height than any limit prescribed in these regulations,
provided that such structures, when above such limit in height, shall be
fireproof, and no floor or compartment thereof shall be constructed or used for
human occupancy above the top story of the building upon which such structures
are placed, and provided that penthouses, ventilation shafts, and tanks shall
be set back from the exterior walls distances equal to their respective height
above the adjacent roof.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.205 STORAGE, GENERAL.
   (A)   No lot or premise shall be used as a storage area for inoperable
automobiles, appliances, or the storage or collection of any other
miscellaneous items unless permitted in this code or by state statute. No lot
or premise shall be used as a garbage dump or a dead animal rendering plant nor
may manure, rubbish, or unauthorized miscellaneous refuse be stored in the
open.
   (B)   Hazardous materials. Any storage of hazardous material that is
ancillary to a permitted use or a conditional use shall meet the following
conditions:
      (1)   All storage shall comply with all state, federal, and local
regulations.
      (2)   Such material shall be listed and made known to the Chief of the
City of Elkins Fire Department.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.206 STORAGE OF TRAILER, CAMPING, AND RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   At no time shall trailers or camping and recreational equipment be
occupied or used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes while being
temporarily or permanently parked or stored on residential property, except as
provided in division (D) below.
   (B)   Inoperable, dismantled, or unregistered recreational vehicles are not
allowed in residential zoning districts.
   (C)   There shall be no parking of recreational vehicles over or onto a
public sidewalk.
   (D)   Guests with trailers or camping and recreational equipment may
temporarily park and occupy the trailer or camping and recreational equipment
on a residential lot provided that parking is limited to one week each calendar
month within the city per trailer or piece of camping or recreational
equipment.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.207 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   No use of land or structure in any district shall involve any element, or
cause any condition that may be dangerous, injurious, or noxious to any other
property or person. Furthermore, every use of land or structure in any district
must observe the following performance requirements:
   (A)   No activities shall be permitted that carry objectionable substances
onto neighboring properties due to erosion by wind or water.
   (B)   No activity shall cause electrical disturbances adversely affecting
radio, television, or other communication equipment in the surrounding area.
   (C)   Noise, which is determined to be objectionable because of volume or
frequency, shall be muffled or otherwise controlled, except for fire sirens and
related apparatuses used solely for public safety purposes, or noises otherwise
permitted by the city noise ordinance (§§
91.065 through
91.069).
   (D)   No gases or fumes toxic to persons or injurious to property shall be
permitted to escape beyond the building in which they occur.
   (E)   No glare shall be seen from any street or any residential area.
   (F)   No intense earth-shaking vibration shall be created or maintained by
any industry beyond the property on which it is located.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.208 LIGHTING.
   (A)   All lighting shall be erected and maintained so that light is confined
to the property and will not cast direct light or glare upon adjacent
properties or public rights of ways.
   (B)   All lighting shall be low intensity and shielded so there is no
illumination of adjoining residential properties.
   (C)   Feature lighting, such as up lighting of trees or other plant
material, seasonal lighting, and the like, shall be so arranged to reflect away
from any residential structure. Such lighting shall not create a glare on
adjacent streets or properties.
   (D)   Building, parking, and all other exterior lighting shall be shielded
and directed in a manner such that lighting does not reflect or cause glare
onto adjacent properties or interfere with street traffic. Bare, unshaded bulbs
are prohibited.
   (E)   All non-essential lighting shall be turned off after business hours,
leaving only the necessary lighting for security. Non-essential lighting
applies includes display, aesthetic, parking, and sign lighting.
   (F)   Lighting is required for all off-street parking areas and off-street
loading areas and for driveways providing ingress and egress for all non-
residential and multi-family developments.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.209 PARKING.
   (A)   Ingress and egress.
      (1)   Adequate ingress and egress to the parking facility shall be
provided by clearly defined driveways.
      (2)   In no event shall vehicles be permitted to back directly into the
public street from the off-street parking area.
      (3)   An alley shall not be considered adequate as the sole access for a
parcel of land.
   (B)   Driveways.
      (1)   Driveways should be located to minimize traffic conflicts with
traffic entering the street from either the same or the opposite side of the
street.
      (2)   For residential uses, only one driveway access per unit is
permitted. A lot with at least 100 feet of frontage along a street may be
permitted one additional driveway access.
      (3)   Non-residential properties in any zoning district with frontages of
600 feet or less on any individual street are only permitted one driveway
intersection per street.
      (4)   Non-residential properties in any zoning district with frontages
greater than 600 feet may be permitted a maximum of two driveways per street
frontage, provided that such driveways are at least 300 feet apart and that one
driveway is clearly marked for egress only and one driveway is clearly marked
for ingress only.
      (5)   Regardless of frontage, a development may be restricted to a single
driveway depending on usage and interior and exterior traffic patterns.
      (6)   All access driveways shall be designed to conform to West Virginia
DOT specifications with regard to roads.
   (C)   On any lot, no wall, fence, hedge, tree, shrub, or other obstruction
shall be allowed which dangerously obscures the view of approaching traffic
along the street, or at any intersection, including driveways.
   (D)   In a residential district, no more than 40% of the front yard may be
used for parking, including driveways. Vehicles may not be parked or stored
upon any lawn or landscaped area. All driveways and parking areas must be paved
and if the application is to extend an existing driveway or parking area, like
material must be used. Drive or parking shall be a durable and dustless surface
with defined edges. Grass, soil, sand, gravel, or other similar materials are
not durable and dustless surfaces. Recreational vehicles or trailers shall not
be parked in the front yard setback for a period longer than 72 hours.
   (E)   Off-street parking spaces, with proper and safe access from a street,
shall be provided on all non-residential lots, either within a structure or in
the open, to serve the uses upon that lot.
   (F)   Parking requirements.
      (1)   The following minimum number of off-street parking spaces per use
shall be provided for the uses indicated below as shown in
Table 152.209(F): Minimum Parking Spaces Required, except for uses operating
within the Central Business District.
      (2)   For uses not specified in this table the number of parking spaces
shall be determined by the Zoning Officer on the basis of similar requirements,
number of persons employed and number of visitors. Appeals to the determination
of parking spaces may be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (3)   All square footage is in gross floor area.
      (4)   For any nonconforming use which is hereafter damaged or partially
destroyed, and which is lawfully reconstructed, re-established, or repaired,
off-street parking and loading facilities equivalent to those maintained at the
time of such damage or partial destruction shall be restored and continued in
operation; provided, however, in no case shall it be necessary to restore or
maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this code
for equivalent new uses.
TABLE 152.209(F): MINIMUM PARKING SPACES REQUIRED   
Use Minimum Number of Parking Spaces
TABLE 152.209(F): MINIMUM PARKING SPACES REQUIRED   
Use                                    Minimum Number of Parking Spaces
Residential Uses
Single family residential              2 spaces per dwelling unit
Multi-family residential               1 per bedroom
Continuing care facility               1 space per 3 beds and 1 space for each
                                       employee
Senior independent housing             1 per bedroom unit
Bed and breakfast inn                  1 off-street space per guest room and 1
                                       space for each nonresidential employee
Educational, Institutional, Social and Fraternal Uses
Assembly (places of worship, theaters, 1 space per 4 fixed seats, 1 space per
auditoriums, etc.)                     60 square feet of the main assembly
                                       where no fixed seats are used
Community facility                     1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA and 1
                                       space per employee
Cultural service                       1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
Educational institution                2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA
Park                                   5 spaces per acre of outdoor area
School, pre-school to 12               2 spaces per classroom, 5 per classroom
                                       in high schools
School, commercial                     6 spaces per classroom
Business and Industrial
                                       Class 1 and 2: 1 space per employee and
                                       1 additional space for every 10 children
                                       enrolled.
Child day care facilities              One designated drop off/pick-up space
                                       shall be permitted.
                                       Class 3 and 4: no additional parking
                                       beyond the normal residential
                                       requirements.
                                       5 spaces for each doctor engaged at the
Clinics                                clinic plus one parking space for each
                                       employee
Commercial (retail, office)            1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of GFA
                                       1 space per guest room and 1 space for
Hotels, motels, etc.                   each 3 employees. One space per 3
                                       persons to the maximum capacity of the
                                       largest banquet or meeting room.
Industrial                             1 space per employee on largest shift
                                       plus 5 customer parking space
Restaurant (sit down)/tavern or        1 space per 100 sq. ft. of GFA plus 1
drinking establishment/night club      space per employee
Restaurant (carry out)                 1 space per 2 employees
Restaurant (fast food)                 1 space per 2.5 seats plus 1 space per 2
                                       employees
 
   (G)   Parking space dimensions.
      (1)   For angle parking, stalls shall be a minimum of nine feet in width
and 18 feet in length.
      (2)   For parallel parking, stalls shall be minimum of eight feet in
width and 20 feet in length.
      (3)   For compact space parking, stalls shall be not less than seven feet
wide and 16 feet long, reserved for the parking of only one compact automobile.
      (4)   The minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls, varying
with angle of the parking, shall be as follows in
Table 152.209(G): Parking Standards.
 
TABLE 152.209(G): PARKING STANDARDS
Angle of Parking Minimum Aisle Width (Double-Sided Minimum Aisle Width (Single-
                 Parking)                          Sided Parking)
Parallel         12'                               12'
45               12'8"                             12'8"
60               16'                               16'
75               20'                               18'
90               24'                               18'
 
   (H)   The required parking area shall be measured exclusive of interior
drives or maneuvering areas.
   (I)   Parking spaces for use by persons with disabilities shall meet
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) standards.
   (J)   Nonresidential parking may be allowed in front, side, and rear yards,
but no closer than 25 feet from a side or rear lot line or street right-of-way
line.
   (K)   All parking areas shall be designed to be accessible year-round.
   (L)   Parking spaces shall be clearly delineated by suitable markings
properly designed to avoid slip hazards, such as by adding sand to painted
markings. Short-term visitor parking spaces shall be differentiated from long-
term employee spaces by suitable markings or signage.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.210 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   In connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or
substantially altered and which requires the receipt or distribution of
materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall be provided
off-street loading berths not less than the minimum requirements specified in
this section, except in the Central Business District:
   (A)   Areas provided for the loading and unloading of delivery trucks and
other vehicles and for the servicing of shops by refuse collection, fuels, and
other service vehicles shall be arranged so that they may be used without:
      (1)   Blocking or interfering with the use of accessways, automobile
parking facilities, or pedestrian ways, or
      (2)   Backing out into a street.
   (B)   All required loading berths shall be located on the same lot as the
use to be served, and no portion of the vehicle shall project into any traffic
lane. No loading berth for vehicles of more than two-ton capacity shall be
located less than 100 feet from any residential district. No permitted or
required loading berth shall be located within 50 feet of any property line. No
loading facilities shall be constructed between the building setback line and a
street right-of-way line or within a required yard.
   (C)   All off-street loading areas shall be adequately buffered with a
landscaped buffer area from adjacent streets and properties and landscaped in
accordance with the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.211 SATELLITE SIGNAL RECEIVING STATIONS.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Satellite signal receiving stations shall be for the personal use
of residents, occupants, and their guests only.
      (2)   Satellite signal receiving stations shall contain no graphic
message or advertising other than to identify the name of the company that
provided the satellite.
      (3)   Only one satellite signal receiving station is permitted per lot,
unless there is documentation provided to the Zoning Officer from the installer
or satellite company that suggests that more than one satellite is necessary in
order to receive the signals for the use and enjoyment of the property owner.
      (4)   Satellite signal receiving stations shall comply with all other
provisions of this code not otherwise in conflict with this section pertaining
to accessory structures for the particular zoning district in which such
stations are to be installed.
      (5)   Satellite signal receiving stations shall be designed to withstand
a wind force of up to 70 miles per hour without the use of supporting guy
wires.
   (B)   Ground-mounted stations. Within all zoning districts, the following
provisions shall apply to satellite signal receiving stations:
      (1)   Ground-mounted stations shall only be mounted in the rear yard
behind the principal building or structure, shall not exceed an above grade
height of 15 feet, and shall not be located closer than five feet to any lot
line.
      (2)   If a lot or parcel cannot receive a signal for a ground station
mounted in the rear yard, the Zoning Officer may permit a ground-mounted
station in the side yard or front yard, subject to the following:
         (a)   Ground-mounted stations shall not exceed an above grade height
of five feet.
         (b)   Ground-mounted stations shall not be located closer than five
feet to a side lot line or front lot line.
         (c)   Ground-mounted stations shall be shielded or screened from view
from the front lot line with natural vegetation or fencing to provide maximum
screening or shielding without interfering with the signal.
         (d)   Ground-mounted stations shall be mounted in a concrete base in
line with grade, utilizing only metal supports of galvanized construction,
      (3)   Wiring between ground-mounted stations and any other structure
shall be placed underground.
   (C)   Roof-mounted and side-mounted stations. Within all zoning districts,
the following shall apply to roof-mounted signal receiving stations or signal
receiving stations affixed to the side of a primary or accessory structure
(“side-mounted station”):
      (1)   Roof-mounted stations shall be mounted directly on the roof of a
primary or accessory structure located in the rear yard and shall not be
mounted on appurtenances such as chimneys, towers, or spires.
      (2)   Side-mounted stations shall be mounted directly on the side of a
primary or accessory structure located in the rear yard and shall not be
mounted on appurtenances such as chimneys, towers, or spires.
      (3)   Roof-mounted stations mounted on the roof of a primary or accessory
structure shall not exceed a height of greater than five feet above the roof on
which it is mounted. The height shall be measured vertically from the point at
which such station is mounted on the roof.
      (4)   No portion of a side-mounted station mounted on the side of a
primary or accessory structure shall be lower than seven feet from the ground
on which the primary or accessory structure stands and shall not exceed a
height greater than five feet above the location at which the station is
mounted onto the side of the primary or accessory structure.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.212 TEMPORARY USES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B), only the following uses are
permitted temporarily, for up to four consecutive weeks in one calendar year:
      (1)   Seasonal sales of such items as pumpkins, Christmas trees, firework
stands, and the like in commercial districts;
      (2)   Carnival, circus, and street fairs in commercial or industrial
districts; and
      (3)   Mobile amusements and lighting equipment for promotion,
advertisement, and grand openings in commercial and industrial districts.
   (B)   Temporary permits may be issued for up to one year for nonconforming
uses incident to housing and constructing projects including such structures
and uses as storage of building materials and machinery, the processing of
building materials, and a real estate office located on the tract being offered
for sale, provided such permits are conditioned upon agreement by the owner or
operator to remove the structure or structures or use upon expiration of the
permit. Such permits may be renewed for no more than one additional year.
   (C)   A permit is required to be completed, returned to the Zoning Officer,
and approved before any temporary use may commence, in addition to any other
requirements of the city code of ordinances, including but not limited to
obtaining a business license.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 152.220 FINDINGS; PURPOSE; INTENT; INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Signs obstruct views, distract motorists, displace alternative uses
for land, and pose other problems that legitimately call for regulation. The
purpose of this subchapter is to regulate the size, color, illumination,
movement, materials, location, height, and condition of all signs placed on
property for exterior observation, thus ensuring the protection of property
values; preservation of the character of the various neighborhoods; creation of
a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community; protection against
destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas; and the safety and welfare
of pedestrians and wheeled traffic, while providing convenience to citizens and
encouraging economic development. This subchapter allows adequate communication
through signage while encouraging aesthetic quality in the design, location,
and size of signs. These regulations do not entirely eliminate all of the harms
that may be created by the installation and display of signs. Rather, they
strike an appropriate balance that preserves ample channels of communication by
means of signs while still reducing and mitigating the extent of the harms
caused by signs.
   (B)   This subchapter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the
First Amendment guarantee of free speech. If any provision of this subchapter
is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such finding shall
not affect the validity of other provisions of this subchapter that can be
given effect without the invalid provision.
   (C)   Signs not expressly permitted under this code are prohibited.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.221 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Application for permit. Except as provided in this code, a permit is
required prior to the display and erection of any sign.
      (1)   An application for a permit shall be filed with the Zoning Officer
on forms furnished by the city. The applicant shall provide sufficient
information to determine if the proposed sign is permitted under this code and
other applicable law. An application for a temporary sign shall state the dates
intended for the erection and removal of the sign. All applications shall
demonstrate that the materials used for the sign are appropriate for the
particular sign type; the submission of manufacturer’s specifications is
sufficient to demonstrate the use of appropriate materials. An application for
an electronic message display shall include the manufacturer’s statement that
the sign has been pre-programmed, to the extent possible, to conform to the
requirements of this code. Such manufacturer’s statement shall include, where
applicable, the pre-stacked sign settings related to text and graphic features,
message change features, message change time intervals, day and night lighting
requirements, and any other settings capable of limiting the electronic message
display such that the sign conforms to this code.
      (2)   The Zoning Officer shall promptly process the permit application
and approve the application, reject the application, or notify the applicant of
deficiencies in the application within 20 business days after receipt. Any
application that complies with all provisions of this code, the building code,
and other applicable laws shall be approved.
      (3)   If the application is rejected, the Zoning Officer shall provide a
list of the reasons for the rejection in writing. An application shall be
rejected for noncompliance with the terms of this code, building code, or other
applicable law.
   (B)   Permit fee. A nonrefundable fee shall accompany all permit
applications. The permit fee schedule shall be set by the city. If the sign is
part of a new construction or renovation project, the cost of the permit fee
shall be included in the total project permit fee.
   (C)   Duration and revocation of permit. If a sign is not installed within
six months following the issuance of a permit or the time period stated within
the permit, or within 30 days for a temporary permit, the permit shall be void.
The permit for a temporary sign shall state its duration, not to exceed 30 days
unless otherwise provided in this code. The Zoning Officer may revoke a permit
under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The information in the application was materially false or
misleading;
      (2)   The sign as installed does not conform to the permit application;
or
      (3)   The sign violates this code, building code, or other applicable
law.
   (D)   Appeals. Appeals from the denial or granting of a permit shall be made
to the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the process set forth in this code.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.222 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   The purpose of not requiring a permit for some signage is to exempt certain
signs that are frequently used, often by private citizens, and that typically
have less of an impact on the public safety and aesthetic concerns of the
community. Signs permitted under this section count towards the maximum sign
area and maximum number of signs allowed per use. A permit is not required for:
   (A)   Signs required by law.
   (B)   Flags up to 16 square feet.
   (C)   The changing of messages on marquees and the repair of an existing
permitted sign, except that repair of a nonconforming sign must comply with
this code.
   (D)   Temporary signs as follows, subject to sign area and height
limitations of the district in which the sign is located:
      (1)   One sign, no illumination, no more than 32 square feet in area,
located on property where a building permit is active.
      (2)   On any property for sale or rent, one sign with a total area of up
to six square feet and a maximum height of five feet.
      (3)   On dwellings, no more than four temporary signs with a total area
of no more than 12 square feet.
      (4)   Window signs, provided that the total area of window signs does not
exceed 25% of the total area of all windows on each building facade, and such
signs are removed within 30 days after being erected.
      (5)   Banners for not more than 15 days as accessory to dwellings.
   (E)   Two minor signs per use.
   (F)   Pavement markings. Any sign applied directly and entirely to and flush
with an asphalt, concrete, or similar paved surface.
   (G)   A permanent window sign, provided that the aggregate area of all
window signs on each window or door does not exceed 25% percent of the total
area of the window or door.
   (H)   A-frame signs, provided they are placed inside of business hours, do
not exceed six square feet per side, and are on-premises signs. A-frame signs
shall not block pedestrian rights-of-way.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.223 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The purpose of prohibiting the following signage is to address the city’s
substantial public safety and welfare concerns, including aesthetic concerns
and protecting property values, associated with certain types of signage. In
addition to signs prohibited elsewhere in this code or by applicable state or
federal law, the following signs are prohibited:
   (A)   General prohibitions.
      (1)   Signs that violate any state or federal law relating to outdoor
advertising or in violation of this code.
      (2)   Signs attached to natural vegetation.
      (3)   Signs simulating, or that are likely to be confused with, a traffic
control sign or any other sign displayed by a public authority.
      (4)   Vehicle or trailer signs, defined as any sign attached to or
displayed on a vehicle, if the vehicle or trailer is used primarily to display
a commercial message, and it fails to display current license plates,
inspection sticker, or municipal decal; if the vehicle is inoperable; if
evidence of paid-to-date local taxes cannot be made available; or if the sign
alters the standard design of such vehicle or trailer.
      (5)   Animated signs, except where animated sign features as part of an
electronic message display are expressly permitted.
      (6)   Flashing signs or other signs displaying flashing, scrolling, or
intermittent lights or lights of changing degrees of intensity, except where
flashing sign features as part of an electronic message display are expressly
permitted.
      (7)   Signs attached to utility poles.
   (B)   Prohibitions based on materials.
      (1)   Signs consisting of illuminated tubing or strings of lights
outlining property lines or open sales areas, rooflines, doors, windows, or
wall edges of any building, except for temporary decorations not to exceed
three months per year.
      (2)   Signs that emit smoke, flame, scent, mist, aerosol, liquid, or gas.
      (3)   Signs that emit sound.
      (4)   Neon signs, except in windows where permitted in a district.
   (C)   Prohibitions based on location.
      (1)   Off-premises signs.
      (2)   Beacons, except where light is cast onto a building located on the
same lot as the beacon.
      (3)   Signs erected on public land other than those approved by the
Zoning Officer in writing, required by law without such approval, or permitted
under West Virginia law. Any sign not so authorized is subject to immediate
removal by the city, with the costs charged to the owner or person having
control of such sign, with payment due within 30 days of notice of charges.
Removal of the sign under this provision does not preclude prosecution of the
person responsible for the sign.
      (4)   Roof signs. Signs on the roof surface or extending above the
roofline of a building or its parapet wall greater than five square feet in
area.
      (5)   Any sign located in the vision triangle formed by any two or more
intersecting streets or any street and alley.
      (6)   Window signs with an aggregate area on a window or door in excess
of 25% of the total area of the window or door or located above the first floor
unless the related use is only on the floor where the window sign is displayed.
      (7)   Signs that obstruct free ingress and egress from a door, window,
fire escape, or other exit way.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.224 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All signs must conform to federal and state law, including but not
limited to the Building Code and W. Va. Code Adm. Code § 157-6-7, Requirements
for Outdoor Advertising on the State Highway System. Where this code and
federal or state law govern signage, the strictest provisions shall apply.
   (B)   Signs erected by the city for governmental purposes are not subject to
this subchapter.
   (C)   Setback and placement. Except as otherwise expressly permitted herein,
all freestanding signs and flagpoles shall be set back from any public right-
of-way at least the height of the sign or flagpole. Electronic message displays
shall be placed perpendicular to residential structures where possible and
shall comply with Federal Communications Commission regulations, including the
avoidance of harmful interference with radio frequencies.
   (D)   Illumination. The purpose of the following provisions regulating
signage lighting is to ensure that signs are lighted in such a manner as to
maintain aesthetic consistency with signs already existing in the city and to
ensure the safety of drivers and pedestrians, while also ensuring that signs
are adequately able to convey sign messages.
      (1)   Definitions.
         CANDELA. The basic unit of measurement of light in SI (metric) units.
         CANDELA PER SQUARE METER (CD/M2). The SI (metric) unit used to
describe the luminance of a light source or of an illuminated surface that
reflects light. Also referred to as NITS.
         NIT. A photometric unit of measurement referring to luminance. One NIT
is equal to one CD/M2.
         SI (INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS). The modem metric system of
measurement, abbreviated SI for the French term “Le Systeme International
d’Unites.”
      (2)   Signs may be backlit, internally lighted, or indirectly lighted.
All external sign lighting shall have lighting fixtures or luminaires that are
fully shielded.
      (3)   Temporary signs shall not be lighted.
      (4)   Signs that are illuminated at night may not exceed a maximum
luminance level of 750 cd/m2 or nits, regardless of the method of illumination,
at least one-half hour before apparent sunset, as determined by the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), United States Department of
Commerce, for the specific geographic location and date. All illuminated signs
must comply with this maximum luminance level throughout the night, if the sign
is energized, until apparent sunrise, as determined by NOAA, at which time the
sign may resume luminance levels appropriate for daylight conditions.
      (5)   The maximum luminance during daylight conditions, between apparent
sunrise and one-half hour before apparent sunset, shall be 10,000 cd/m2 or
nits.
   (E)   Maximum height measurements. Signs with sign structures not affixed to
the ground are measured from the lowest attached component of the sign to the
highest attached component of the sign. The height of signs with sign
structures affixed to the ground is measured as the distance from the base of
the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the
sign, subject to limitations in this subchapter. Normal grade is the lower of:
      (1)   Existing grade prior to construction; or
      (2)   The newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any
filling, berming, mounding, or excavating primarily for the purpose of mounting
or elevating the sign.
   (F)   Measurement of sign area. Sign area is calculated under the following
principles:
      (1)   With signs that are regular polygons or circles, the area can be
calculated by the mathematical formula for that polygon or circle. With signs
that are not regular polygons or circles, the sign area is calculated using all
that area within a maximum of three abutting or overlapping rectangles that
enclose the sign face.
      (2)   The permitted area of a double-faced a-frame sign shall be
considered to be the area on one side only. If one face contains a larger sign
area than the other, the larger face shall be used in calculating the sign
area.
      (3)   For projecting signs, the sign area also includes the area of the
visible sides of the sign, calculated as a rectangle enclosing each entire side
view.
      (4)   Supports, uprights, or structures on which any sign is supported
shall not be included in determining the sign area unless such supports,
uprights, or structures are designed in such a way as to form an integral
background of the display; except, however, when a sign is placed on a fence,
wall, planter, or other similar structure that is designed to serve a separate
purpose other than to support the sign, the entire area of such structure shall
not be computed.
      (5)   All signs displayed, whether permanent or temporary, and regardless
of the type of sign are counted toward the maximum sign area allowed per use.
   (G)   Electronic message display (EMD) signs. Static electronic message
display signs and the static electronic message display with transition feature
signs are permitted only as monument signs, except in the instance of multi-
tenant signs at shopping centers.
   (H)   Number of signs. All signs displayed on a lot, whether permanent or
temporary, and regardless of the type of sign are counted towards the maximum
number of signs permitted per use.
   (I)   Wall signs. Wall signs shall provide as part of permit application:
      (1)   Express permission from the operator and/or owner of the building;
      (2)   The name and address of the person applying the wall sign; and
      (3)   A clear drawing of the proposed wall sign including dimensions and
location.
   (J)   The back of any permanent sign must be shielded from public view by a
building, other structure, high planting, or another sign of the same size,
where permitted, unless such back is painted a neutral color or is enclosed in
a solid metal backing that is treated or painted against corrosion.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 318, passed 8-17-2023; Ord. 322, passed 3-7-
2024) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.225 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Signs lawfully existing on the effective date of this code that do not
conform to the provisions of this code, and signs that are accessory to a
nonconforming use shall be deemed nonconforming signs and may remain except as
qualified below.
      (1)   Temporary nonconforming signs are prohibited.
      (2)   Nonconforming signs shall not be enlarged nor shall any feature of
a nonconforming sign, such as illumination or technology, be increased.
      (3)   Nonconforming signs shall not be extended, structurally
reconstructed, altered in any manner, or replaced with another nonconforming
sign nor increased in technological advancement, except as permitted by this
subchapter.
      (4)   Nonconforming signs shall not be moved for any distance on the same
lot or to any other lot unless such change in location will make the sign
conform in all respects to the provisions of this subchapter.
      (5)   A nonconforming sign that is destroyed or damaged by any casualty
to an extent not exceeding 30% of the sign’s area, as defined in §
152.224(F), may be restored within 30 days after such destruction or damage,
but shall not be enlarged, nor may the sign’s nonconformity be increased. If
such sign is so destroyed or damaged to an extent exceeding 30% of the sign’s
area, the sign shall not be reconstructed but may be replaced with a sign that
is in full accordance with this code.
      (6)   Nonconforming sign structures shall be removed if the use to which
they are accessory has not been in operation for a period of one year or more,
except as provided in §
152.226(F). Such sign structure shall be removed or made conforming by the
owner or lessee of the property. If the owner or lessee fails to remove or make
conforming the sign structure within 30 days of notice by the Zoning Officer,
the Zoning Officer may cause the sign to be made conforming or removed and the
cost of such removal or modification shall be charged to the owner, person
having control, or person receiving benefit from such sign, with payment due
within 30 days of notice of charges.
      (7)   If a nonconforming sign is altered such that the sign is conforming
or is replaced by a conforming sign, such sign shall thereafter be kept in
accordance with the provisions of this code.
   (B)   The burden of establishing nonconforming status of signs and the
physical characteristics and location of such signs shall be with the owner of
the property. Upon notice from the Zoning Officer, a property owner shall
submit verification that sign(s) were lawfully erected. Failure to provide such
verification shall cause the sign to be deemed an illegal sign.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prevent keeping a nonconforming sign in
good repair.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.226 MAINTENANCE; REMOVAL.
   (A)   All signs shall be constructed and mounted in compliance with the West
Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. All signs and components thereof
shall be maintained in good repair and in a safe, neat, and clean condition.
   (B)   Safety hazard. The Zoning Officer may cause to have removed or
repaired immediately without written notice any sign that has become insecure,
in danger of falling, or otherwise unsafe, and, as such, presents an immediate
threat to the safety of the public. If such action is necessary to render a
sign safe, the cost of such emergency removal or repair shall be charged to the
owner, person having control, or person receiving benefit from such sign, with
payment due within 30 days of notice of charges.
   (C)   Nuisance. Any sign that constitutes a nuisance shall be abated by the
owner within 30 days of notice by the Zoning Officer. At any time, the Zoning
Officer may cause the nuisance to be abated with the costs charged to the
owner, person having control, or person receiving benefit from such sign, with
payment due within 30 days of notice of charges.
   (D)   Illegal sign and disrepair. Any sign that is illegal or in disrepair
shall be made conforming, removed, or repaired within 30 days of notice from
the Zoning Officer. Signs of disrepair include chipped paint, missing or
significantly faded letters or other aspects of the sign, cracked portions of
the sign face, broken lighting, graffiti, and unleveled portions of the sign
structure or face. If an illegal sign or a sign in disrepair is not made
conforming or repaired, the Zoning Officer may cause the sign to be removed or
repaired and the cost of such removal or repair shall be charged to the owner,
person having control, or person receiving benefit from such sign, with payment
due within 30 days of notice of charges.
   (E)   Expired permit. Any sign for which a permit has expired shall be
removed within five days of the permit expiration. If the sign is not removed,
the Zoning Officer may cause the sign to be removed and the cost of such
removal shall be charged to the owner, person having control, or person
receiving benefit from such sign, with payment due within 30 days of notice of
charges.
   (F)   The owner of any commercial sign, whether conforming or nonconforming
located on commercial property where the use or business has ceased operating
shall, within 60 days of the cessation of the use or business operation, remove
temporary signs and all aspects of any permanent sign with a commercial
message. Property owners may request, in writing, a waiver of such requirement,
if the businesses are temporarily or seasonally operational, is remodeling, or
otherwise has the good will intention of resuming the use within one year of
time of cessation.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.227 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   Temporary signs pose distinct concerns with visual clutter, safety in
erection and display, and removal when the time for display has concluded.
Temporary signs also pose distinct concerns with materials quality. The
following provisions and individual zoning of temporary signs per district
serve to address these concerns:
   (A)   Temporary signs require a permit, except as provided in this
subchapter, and may be permitted up to 30 days each calendar year. No more than
four temporary commercial signs may be erected per use in one calendar year.
   (B)   Temporary signs shall be securely affixed to the ground or a building,
or a pole designated only to a temporary sign. Temporary signs shall be durably
constructed of weather resistant material.
   (C)   Person-assisted signs shall not be located more than ten feet from the
entrance to a building or within ten feet of a right-of-way.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.228 SIGNS FOR SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) AND CITY RESIDENTIAL (R-2)
DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purpose. Signage in residential districts poses a heightened risk of
visual blight and unsightly clutter, as residential neighborhoods typically
contain markedly less signage than other districts in order to maintain the
residential character of the neighborhood. At the same time, communicating from
one’s residence is a distinct and impactful form of speech that should be
protected, and nonresidential uses should be afforded adequate signage
incidental to the primary use, i.e., on-premises signs. Signs permitted in
these districts are smaller, fewer in number, and limited in sign type in order
to limit visual clutter and distraction, while affording ample speech.
      (1)   Signs permitted as accessory to dwellings.
         (a)   Permitted permanent sign use as accessory to dwellings.
Geological, minor, temporary, topiary, wall, and window signs. No more than
four permanent signs are permitted by right per dwelling.
         (b)   Permitted temporary sign use as accessory to dwellings. Banner,
minor, pennant, wall, wicket, window. No more than four temporary signs are
permitted in one calendar year per dwelling.
         (c)   No more than four flags as accessory to a dwelling, excluding
any flags that are minor signs.
      (2)   Signs permitted as accessory to non-dwellings.
         (a)   Permitted permanent sign use as accessory to non-dwellings.
Freestanding, geological, minor, monument, temporary, topiary, wall, and window
signs. Only one of each is permitted per use per frontage, except wall signs
and window signs. No more than four permanent signs are permitted by right per
use. No more than four temporary signs are permitted in one calendar year per
use.
         (b)   Permitted temporary sign use as accessory to non-dwellings. A-
frame, banner, chalkboard, minor, wall, wicket, window. No more than four
temporary signs are permitted in one calendar year per use.
         (c)   No more than four flags as accessory to a non-dwelling are
permitted.
      (3)   Off-premises signs are prohibited for both dwellings and non-
dwellings.
   (B)   Dimension specifications chart. All maximum sign area requirements
include the sum total sign area of all signs per use per frontage, unless
otherwise specified.
 
               Permitted as Permitted as      Temporary Signs as
               Accessory to Accessory to Non- Accessory to       Flags
               Dwellings    Dwellings         Dwellings and Non-
                                              Dwellings
                                              6 sq. ft.
Max. sign area 6 sq. ft.    32 sq. ft.        displayed at one   24 sq. ft. ea.
                                              time
Max. height    7 ft.        7 ft.             4 ft.              20 ft.
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 341, passed 1-23-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.229 SIGNS FOR RECREATIONAL (REC) DISTRICT.
   Signage in the Recreational (Rec) District poses a heightened risk of visual
blight and unsightly clutter, as recreational areas typically contain markedly
less signage particularly in areas where there is vast open space. As a result,
signs in the Recreational (Rec) District should be smaller, fewer in number,
and limited in sign type in order to limit visual clutter and preserve natural
open space.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.230 SIGNS FOR CENTRAL BUSINESS (CBD) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. Signage in commercial and districts is allowed to a somewhat
greater extent, while maintaining proportion to the size and scope of uses
typically present. However, even these more intensive uses in smaller
communities are limited in signage to some degree in order to maintain small-
town character and limit visual distraction by signage.
      (1)   Permitted sign use as accessory to dwellings shall be the same as
for §
152.228.
      (2)   Signs permitted as accessory to non-dwellings.
         (a)   Permitted permanent sign use as accessory to non-dwellings. A-
frame, awning, canopy, chalkboard, freestanding, geological, marquee, minor,
monument, neon, projecting, temporary, topiary, wall, and window signs. Only
one of each is permitted per use per frontage, except wall signs and window
signs. More than 200 square feet of frontage is required for a use to have more
than one pole sign. No more than six permanent signs are permitted by right per
use.
         (b)   Permitted temporary signs as accessory to non-dwellings. A-
frame, banner, chalkboard, minor, person-assisted, wall, wicket, window. No
more than six temporary signs are permitted in one calendar year per use.
         (c)   No more than three flags as accessory to a non-dwelling are
permitted.
      (3)   Off-premises signs are prohibited.
   (B)   Dimension specifications chart. All maximum sign area requirements
include the sum total sign area of all signs per use.
 
              Freestanding, Wall Signs All Other     Temporary    Flags
              Monument                 Signs         Signs
              1 sq. ft. per            0.5 sq. ft.
Max. area for 1 ft. of                 per 1 ft. of  6 sq. ft.
signs less    lineal        No maximum lineal        displayed at 60 sq. ft.
than 40 feet  frontage, not            frontage, not one time     ea.
above grade   to exceed 32             to exceed 24
              sq. ft.                  sq. ft.
Max. height
for signs
less than 40  8 ft.         No maximum 4 ft.         4 ft.        40 ft.
feet above
grade
Max. area for                                        100 sq. ft.
signs 40 feet N/A           No maximum 200 sq. ft.   displayed at 60 sq. ft.
or higher                                            one time     ea.
above grade
Max. height
for signs 40
feet or       N/A           No maximum No maximum    No maximum   No maximum
higher above
grade
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 318, passed 8-17-2023) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.231 SIGNS FOR EDUCATIONAL (E) AND COMMERCIAL (B-1) DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purpose. Signage in Educational (E) and Commercial (B-1) Districts is
allowed to a somewhat greater extent, while maintaining proportion to the size
and scope of uses typically present. However, even these more intensive uses in
smaller communities are limited in signage to some degree in order to maintain
small-town character and limit visual distraction by signage.
      (1)   Permitted sign use as accessory to dwellings shall be the same as
for §
152.228.
      (2)   Signs permitted as accessory to non-dwellings.
         (a)   Permitted permanent sign use as accessory to non-dwellings. A-
frame, awning, canopy, chalkboard, changeable copy, static electronic message
display, static electronic message display with transition feature,
freestanding, geological, marquee, minor, monument, neon, projecting,
temporary, topiary, wall, and window signs. Only one of each is permitted per
use per frontage, except wall signs and window signs. More than 200 square feet
of frontage is required for a use to have more than one pole sign. No more than
six permanent signs are permitted by right per use.
         (b)   Permitted temporary signs as accessory to non-dwellings. A-
frame, banner, chalkboard, minor, person-assisted, wall, wicket, window. No
more than six temporary signs are permitted in one calendar year per use.
         (c)   No more than three flags as accessory to a non-dwelling are
permitted.
      (3)   Off-premises signs are prohibited.
   (B)   Dimension specifications chart. All maximum sign area requirements
include the sum total sign area of all signs per use.
 
               Freestanding,
               Monument, and   All Other Signs  Temporary Signs  Flags
               Wall Signs
               1 sq. ft. per 1 0.5 sq. ft. per
               ft. of lineal   1 ft. of lineal  6 sq. ft.
Max. sign area frontage, not   frontage, not to displayed at one 60 sq. ft. ea.
               to exceed 32    exceed 24 sq.    time
               sq. ft.         ft.
Max. height    8 ft.           4 ft.            4 ft.            40 ft.
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.232 SIGNS FOR INDUSTRIAL (I-1) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. Signage in heavier commercial and industrial districts is
allowed to a greater extent, in size, number, and sign type, in order to
maintain proportion to the size and scope of uses typically present within
these districts. However, even the most intensive use districts in smaller
communities are still limited in signage to some degree in order to maintain
small-town character and limit visual distraction by signage.
      (1)   Permitted sign use as accessory to dwellings shall be the same as
for §
152.228.
      (2)   Signs permitted as accessory to non-dwellings.
         (a)   Permitted permanent sign use as accessory to non-dwellings. A-
frame, awning, canopy, chalkboard, changeable copy, freestanding, geological,
marquee, minor, monument, neon, projecting, static electronic message display,
static electronic message display with transition feature, temporary, topiary,
wall, and window signs. Only one of each is permitted per use per frontage,
except wall signs and window signs. No more than eight permanent signs are
permitted by right per use.
         (b)   Permitted temporary signs as accessory to non-dwellings. A-
frame, banner, chalkboard, changeable copy, feather, inflatable, minor,
pennant, wall, wicket, window. No more than six temporary signs are permitted
in one calendar year per use.
         (c)   No more than three flags as accessory to a non-dwelling are
permitted.
      (3)   Off-premises signs are prohibited.
   (B)   Dimension specifications chart. All maximum sign area requirements
include the sum total sign area of all signs per use.
 
               Freestanding,
               Monument, and Wall    EMDs   All Other Signs       Flags
               Signs
               0.5 sq. ft. per 1 ft.        0.5 sq. ft. per 1 ft.
Max. sign area of lineal frontage,   32 ft. of lineal frontage,   6 sq. ft. ea.
               not to exceed 64 sq.         not to exceed 32 sq.
               ft.                          ft.
               8 ft. with up to an
               additional 1 ft. per
Max. height    5 ft. of setback, not                             
               to exceed a total
               sign height of 16 ft.
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
§ 152.240 PURPOSE.
   This chapter seeks to ensure the citizens of the city have access to
wireless telecommunication technology, to protect the residents of the city
from the proliferation of freestanding towers, and to provide a process and
standards for the construction, maintenance, and modification of wireless
telecommunication facilities through the following:
   (A)   Establishing clear guidelines, standards, and time frames for the
exercise of authority for wireless telecommunications facilities through the
city’s zoning, planning, and design standards;
   (B)   Allowing competition in telecommunications service;
   (C)   Encouraging the provision of advanced telecommunications services to
the largest number of businesses, institutions, and residents of the city;
   (D)   Encouraging the location, design, and construction of wireless
telecommunication facilities that will have minimal impact on the location,
minimal visual impact on the scenic resources, and minimize the total number of
towers and tower sites throughout the city;
   (E)   Permitting reasonable access to the public rights-of-way for
telecommunications facilities on a competitively neutral basis;
   (F)   Ensuring that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or
services comply with federal, state, and local regulations;
   (G)   Encouraging the use of existing structures as an alternative to new
wireless telecommunications facility construction, including the collocation of
new and existing wireless telecommunications facilities, thus helping to
minimize adverse visual impacts on the community; and
   (H)   Protecting the scenic and visual character of the community.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.241 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Wireless telecommunications facilities may not be constructed or
modified without a zoning permit issued in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter. Modifications to existing wireless telecommunication
facilities, as of the effective date of this subchapter, are required to comply
with this subchapter.
   (B)   This chapter does not apply to the replacement of any component of a
wireless telecommunication facility where the replacement is identical to the
component being replaced or to the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless
telecommunication facility that does not involve the addition, removal, or
change of any of the externally discernable physical components of a wireless
telecommunication facility from that which was originally permitted.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.242 SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE CRITERIA.
   For the purposes of determining whether a requested modification is an
eligible facilities request for modification under this section, a proposed
facilities modification will substantially change the physical dimensions of an
eligible support structure, and therefore not be eligible for the expedited
modification process and corresponding eligible facilities application process
under this subchapter, if the requested modification meets any of the following
criteria:
   (A)   For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the
requested increases the height of the tower by more than 10% or by the height
of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing
antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support
structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than 10% or more
than ten feet, whichever is greater.
   (B)   Changes in height shall be measured from the original support
structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally,
such as on buildings’ rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height shall
be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of
originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved
prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act.
   (C)   For towers other than towers in the public right-of-way, it involves
adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the
edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower
structure at the level of appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other
eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of
the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than
six feet.
   (D)   For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more
than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved,
but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public right-of-way and
base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the
ground if there are no preexisting ground cabinets associated with the
structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than
10% larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets
associated with the structure.
   (E)   It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site.
   (F)   It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support
structure.
   (G)   It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval
of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base
station equipment; provided, however, that this limitation does not apply to
any modification that is noncompliant only in a manner that would not exceed
the thresholds identified in this section.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.243 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lighting. Lighting affixed to any wireless telecommunication
facilities shall meet, but not exceed, the minimum lighting required by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). For any application where lighting is
required, the applicant shall submit documentation from the FAA stating that
the proposed lighting meets all applicable FAA standards and regulations.
   (B)   Structural standards. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall
conform to the most current versions of the ANSI/ASSE A10.48 “Standard Criteria
for Safety Practices with the Construction, Demolition, Modification and
Maintenance of Communication Structures”; ANSI/TIA-222 Standard, “Structural
Standard for Antenna Supporting Structures, Antennas and Small Wind Turbine
Support Structures”; and ANSI/TIA-322 Standard, “Loading, Analysis and Design
Criteria Related to the Installation, Alteration and Maintenance of
Communication Structures.” Wireless telecommunication facilities shall also
meet any applicable local building code standards.
   (C)   Height restrictions. No wireless telecommunication facility shall
exceed 199 feet in height, unless the applicant sufficiently justifies that the
height of the tower will eliminate other similar towers or that the provision
of service cannot be accomplished without a tower height in excess of 199 feet.
Any applicant proposing a wireless telecommunication facility greater than 199
feet in height must provide evidence that the applicant notified the FAA of the
intent to build the facility and received a final determination of “no hazard”
from the FAA. Wireless telecommunications facilities located atop or within an
alternative support structure may extend 10% above the height of the structure
or to the maximum height permitted in the zoning district in which the
structure is located, whichever is less.
   (D)   Collocation.
      (1)   An applicant for a new wireless telecommunication facility must
demonstrate by substantial evidence that a bona fide need exists for the
construction of a new tower and that no reasonable combination of locations,
techniques, or technologies would obviate the need. The applicant for a new
facility must further demonstrate that all reasonable efforts have been made to
collocate wireless telecommunication facilities on existing towers or
alternative support structures.
      (2)   Prior to the approval of an application for a wireless
telecommunications facility, the applicant shall demonstrate commitment to
joint use as follows:
         (a)   The applicant shall submit evidence as part of the application
demonstrating that a genuine effort has been made to solicit additional users
for the proposed new wireless telecommunications facility. Evidence of this
shall include, at a minimum, copies of notices sent by registered mail, return
receipt requested, to all other providers of cellular and wireless
telecommunications services within the same county and within adjacent
counties, or a Class II legal advertisement, advising of the intent to
construct a new tower, identifying the location, inviting the joint use and
sharing of costs, and requesting a written response within 15 business days.
         (b)   As part of the application, the applicant shall attest that the
company will encourage the joint use of telecommunications towers within the
city, committing that there shall be no unreasonable act or omission that would
have the effect of excluding, obstructing, or delaying joint use of any tower
where fair and just market reasonable compensation is offered for such use.
         (c)   Wireless telecommunications facilities, other than alternative
support structures, shall be designed and built to accommodate a minimum of
three wireless telecommunications provider’s equipment. The owner of the tower,
if different than the applicant, must certify to the city that the tower is
available for use by other telecommunications service providers on a reasonable
and non-discriminatory basis.
   (E)   Concealment.
      (1)   All new or modified wireless telecommunication facilities must be
concealed in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the facilities
through careful design, siting, landscaping, screening, and innovative
camouflaging and stealth techniques, unless applicant shows substantial
evidence that to do so is impracticable.
      (2)   Concealment techniques include fake trees, parapet extensions,
silos, fake chimneys, water towers, fiberglass flagpoles, and steeples.
      (3)   A description must be included in the application of the
possibilities for concealment that have been explored, and why the proposed
option was chosen.
      (4)   Visual impact analysis of the wireless telecommunication facility
is required using existing information, predictive modeling techniques,
photographs, and simulations, to accurately and impartially communicate the
potential visual impacts from proposed project.
      (5)   If determined to be impracticable by Zoning Officer for a tower or
alternative support structure to be entirely concealed, the applicant will
describe how they will utilize materials, colors, textures, screening and
landscaping to blend facilities into the natural setting and surrounding
buildings.
      (6)   If an antenna is installed on an alternative support structure, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be a neutral
color that is identical to or closely compatible with the color of the
alternative support structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment
as visually unobtrusive as possible.
      (7)   Any equipment shelter or cabinet must be concealed from public view
or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or
placed underground.
   (F)   Replacement or modification of any previously approved concealed tower
or facility must substantially conform to previous design characteristics.
   (G)   Setback. Each tower shall have a setback of at least 110% the tower
height measured from the tower base to the nearest property line.
   (H)   Collapse zone. No habitable structure may be located within the
proposed collapse zone. The applicant shall demonstrate that the entire
collapse zone is either under lease or owned by the applicant and that no
habitable structure will be constructed in the collapse zone while die tower is
standing.
   (I)   Equipment cabinets. No equipment cabinet for a wireless
telecommunications facility shall exceed 750 square feet in area, nor 12 feet
in height. All equipment cabinets shall be located with the tower and shall be
enclosed within a minimum of a six-foot security fence and a locked gate.
   (J)   Signs. No commercial messages nor any other signs beyond that which is
required, not to exceed 12 square feet cumulatively, shall be placed on any
tower, equipment cabinet, or security fence.
   (K)   Landscaping.
      (1)   Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible. Trees existing within 100 feet of the
wireless telecommunications facility shall not be removed except as required
for tower construction, security fence construction, installation of ingress or
egress, and the installation of utilities to the facility. To the extent that
existing vegetation is the basis for a waiver of the landscaping requirement,
preservation of such vegetation shall be a condition of the permit, and if such
existing vegetation is removed or destroyed, the applicant shall meet the
landscaping specified in division (K)(2) below within six months thereafter.
      (2)   Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be landscaped within
six months after the tower and base station are erected with a visual buffer of
plant materials that effectively screens the view of the equipment cabinet from
adjacent property. The standard visual buffer shall consist of a landscaped
strip of at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the security fencing
enclosing the facilities. The visual buffer shall include vegetation of at
least eight feet tall, planted ten feet apart behind a contiguous hedge of
shrubs three feet deep. All plant materials shall be species native to West
Virginia. In the case where the tower and base station are sited on large
wooded lots, the applicant may request that the natural growth preserved around
the tower site be considered a sufficient visual barrier, without the need for
additional landscaping. Such a request shall accompany the application and
shall include photographs of the natural growth to be preserved.
   (L)   Location of towers or antenna in or near historic sites, historic
districts, and designated scenic resources. Applications for wireless
telecommunications facilities or antennas subject to this section shall also
demonstrate that the views of, and vistas from, such structures, districts, and
resources shall not be impaired or diminished by the placement of the proposed
tower or antennas. In no instance shall a wireless telecommunications facility
subject to the provisions of this division (L) exceed 199 feet in height.
   (M)   Site demarcation. The site shall be physically and visually marked in
the field, for immediate identification, with any combination of survey irons
or flags as needed during the application process or during construction.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.244 APPROVAL AUTHORITY AND PROCESS.
   Applications for wireless telecommunications facilities shall follow the
requirements of this section and written findings shall be made by the city as
to whether the proposed facility complies with the regulations outlined in this
section.
   (A)   Voluntary pre-application conference. All persons seeking approval
under this subchapter may meet with the city prior to filing an application. It
is recommended that the meeting occur no less than 30 days prior to the
anticipated filing of the application to ensure adequate consideration and
adequate time to address concerns. At this meeting, the city shall explain to
the applicant the regulations as well as application forms and submissions that
will be required under this subchapter.
   (B)   Submission materials. Where telecommunications facilities are a
permitted use, applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer, who may
confer with the Planning Commission in the application process as needed. Where
telecommunications facilities are a conditional use, applications shall be
submitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals. No application shall be deemed
complete unless it is in writing, is accompanied by the applicable fees,
includes the required submittals, and is attested to by the applicant,
certifying the truth and accuracy of the information provided in the
application.
      (1)   All applications shall include the following, in addition to the
applicable provisions below:
         (a)   The following contact information for the applicant:
            1.   Name;
            2.   Title;
            3.   Mailing address;
            4.   Phone number;
            5.   West Virginia tax number; and
            6.   Electronic mail address (optional).
         (b)   If a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent
of applicant in West Virginia and the state of incorporation of applicant.
         (c)   If applicant is an entity other than a corporation, such as a
partnership or limited liability company, the names and business addresses of
the principals.
         (d)   If the applicant is not the owner or person in control of the
structure or site, the following shall be required:
            1.   Attestation that the owner or person in control of the
structure or site has consented to the new facility, collocation, or for any
modification that require a substantial change or are otherwise not considered
an eligible facilities modification.
            2.   If the structure is in a public right-of-way, the applicant
must also attest to having authorization to install, maintain, and operate a
wireless telecommunication facility in, under, and above the public right-of-
way.
         (e)   If the applicant proposes a modification involving collocation
of transmission equipment or the replacement of transmission equipment, the
following shall be required: Complete copies of the underlying land use
approvals for siting of the tower or base station proposed to be modified,
establishing that, at the time of submittal of the application, such tower or
base station constituted an eligible support structure.
      (2)   Applications for eligible facilities requests, as defined herein
and subject to a determination under §
152.242, Substantial Change Criteria:
         (a)   Attestation that the proposed request is subject to review under
Section 6409 of the Spectrum Act as an “eligible facilities modification.”
         (b)   If the applicant proposes a modification that will result in an
increase in height of the eligible support structure, the following shall be
required: Record drawings, as-built plans, or the equivalent, showing the
height of the eligible support structure, (a) as originally constructed and
granted approval by the city or other applicable local zoning or similar
regulatory authority, or (b) as of the most recent modification that received
approval, prior to the passage of Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act of 2012,
whichever height is greater.
         (c)   If the applicant proposes an eligible facilities request for
modification to an eligible support structure, which structure, or proposed
modification of the same, is subject to pre-existing restrictions or
requirements imposed by the city ordinances, the following shall be required: A
copy of the document setting forth such preexisting restrictions or
requirements, together with a certification that the proposed facilities
modification conforms to such restrictions or requirements.
         (d)   If the applicant proposes a modification to an eligible support
structure, which structure, or proposed modification of the same, is subject to
pre-existing concealment restrictions or requirements, or was constructed with
concealment elements, the following shall be required: Applicant shall set
forth the facts and circumstances demonstrating that the proposed modification
would not defeat the existing concealment elements of the eligible support
structure. If the proposed modification will alter the exterior dimensions or
appearance of the eligible support structure, applicant shall include a
detailed visual simulation depicting how the eligible support structure will
appear after the proposed modification is complete. The visual simulation shall
depict, to scale, the eligible support structure in relation to the trees,
landscaping and other structures adjacent to, or in the immediate vicinity of,
the eligible support structure.
         (e)   If the applicant proposes a modification that will result in a
protrusion from the edge of a tower that exceeds an existing protrusion of any
transmission equipment attached to a tower or will protrude from the edge of a
non-tower eligible support structure, the following shall be required: Record
drawings and as-built plans, or the equivalent, showing, at a minimum, the edge
of the eligible support structure at the location of the proposed modification.
         (f)   If the applicant proposes a modification to an eligible support
structure that (a) will include any excavation, (b) would result in a
protrusion from the edge of a tower that exceeds an existing protrusion of any
transmission equipment attached to a tower, or (c) would protrude from the edge
of a non-tower eligible support structure, the following shall be required: A
description of the boundaries of the site and a scaled drawing based on an
accurate traverse, with angular and lineal dimensions, depicting the boundaries
of the site in relation to the tower or base station proposed to be modified
and depicting the proposed location, elevation, and dimensions of the new or
replacement transmission equipment. The city may require a survey by a land
surveyor licensed in the state of West Virginia when, in the judgment of the
approval authority, a survey is reasonably necessary to verify the boundaries
of the site to determine if the proposed facilities modification would result
in a substantial change in the physical dimensions of the eligible support
structure.
         (g)   1.   If the applicant proposes a modification to a tower, the
following shall be required: A stamped report by a State of West Virginia
registered or licensed professional engineer demonstrating that the tower with
the proposed modifications will comply with applicable structural, electrical,
and safety codes, including by way of example, but not limited to, the most
recent revision of EIA/TIA-222, published by the American National Standards
Institute (as amended), allowable wind speed for the applicable zone in which
the tower is located, and describing the general structural capacity of the
tower with the proposed modifications, including:
               A.   The number and type of antennas that can be accommodated;
               B.   The basis for the calculation of capacity; and
               C.   A written statement that the proposal complies with all
federal guidelines regarding interference and ANSI standards as adopted by the
FCC.
            2.   The city may retain the services of an independent technical
expert to review, evaluate, and provide an opinion regarding the applicant’s
demonstration of compliance.
         (h)   If the applicant proposes a modification to a base station, the
following shall also be required: A stamped report by a State of West Virginia
registered or licensed professional engineer demonstrating that the base
station, with the proposed modifications, will comply with applicable
structural, electrical, and safety codes.
         (i)   If the applicant proposes a modification requiring an alteration
to the eligible support structure, excavation, installation of new equipment
cabinets, or any other activities impacting or altering the land, existing
structures, fencing, or landscaping on the site, the following shall be
required: A detailed site plan and drawings, showing the true north point,
drawn to an appropriate decimal scale, indicating and depicting:
            1.   The location, elevation, and dimensions of the existing
eligible support structure;
            2.   The location, elevation, and dimensions of the existing
transmission equipment;
            3.   The location, elevation, and dimensions of the transmission
equipment, if any, proposed to be collocated or that will replace existing
transmission equipment;
            4.   The location, elevation, and dimensions of any proposed new
equipment cabinets and the intended use of each;
            5.   Any proposed modification to the eligible support structure;
            6.   The location of existing structures on the site, including
fencing, screening, trees, and other significant site features; and
            7.   The location of any areas where excavation is proposed,
showing the elevations, depths, and width of the proposed excavation and
materials and dimensions of the equipment to be placed in the area excavated.
         (j)   Copies of any environmental documents required by any state or
federal agency. These shall include the environmental assessment required by 47
C.F.R. Part 1 (Part 1—Practice and Procedure), § 1.1307, as amended, or, in the
event that an environmental assessment is not required, a statement that
describes the specific factors that obviate the requirement for an
environmental assessment.
      (3)   Applications for new facilities, collocations, or for any
modifications that require a substantial change or are otherwise not considered
an eligible facilities modification, as defined by this subchapter, shall
include the following in the application submittal:
         (a)   Copies of any easements necessary to access the property and
proof that the same has been recorded, or will be recorded, in the applicable
County Clerk’s office.
         (b)   Certification of the wireless telecommunication facility’s
collocation capabilities or whether the proposal is a collocation on an
existing facility and whether the applicant anticipates other lessees will be
able to utilize the facility.
         (c)   A copy of the FCC license for the facility, or a signed
statement from the owner or operator of the facility attesting that the
facility will comply with current FCC regulations.
         (d)   Evidence of compliance with applicable local, state, and federal
historic preservation laws and regulations, including a copy of a written
request for a statement of compliance sent to the necessary local, state, and
federal historic preservation authorities and said authorities’ written
responses.
         (e)   A map showing the location of all wireless telecommunications
facilities above ground level, except antennas located on roof tops, within a
three air-mile radius of the proposed facility, unless this information has
been previously made available to the city.
         (f)   A site plan is required and shall include:
            1.   Certification by a professional engineer indicating the
location, including latitude and longitude, type, and height of the proposed
facility; antenna capacity; on-site and abutting off-site land uses;
topography; setbacks; parking; fencing; landscaping; the collapse zone;
easements or other means of access; and all applicable American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) technical and structural codes.
            2.   A topographic map identifying the location of the site for the
proposed wireless telecommunications facility.
            3.   A stormwater and erosion control plan for the access road to
the site, or a written statement that there will be no changes implemented with
regards to any existing roads.
            4.   Proximity of the proposed site to flood hazard areas.
            5.   Certification by the applicant that the proposed facility
complies with all FCC standards for radio emissions.
            6.   A boundary survey completed by a land surveyor licensed by the
State of West Virginia, and which includes the access road and vicinity map.
            7.   Photo simulations of the proposed facility taken from at least
two perspectives, with emphasis placed on residential areas, public rights-of-
way, public parks, designated scenic resources, and any historic site or
district. The photos shall demonstrate whether the facility will be a stealth
tower. Each photo must be labeled with the line of sight, elevation, and date
taken.
         (g)   The applicant shall identify and demonstrate consideration of
each and every designated scenic resource or viewshed, as recognized by
federal, state, or local government in which the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility is located or visible and shall provide a scenic
assessment for the project area consisting of the following:
            1.   Elevation drawings of the proposed facility, showing height
above ground level.
            2.   A landscaping plan indicating the proposed placement of the
facility on the site.
            3.   Location of existing structures, trees, and other significant
site features.
            4.   A description and visual simulation of possible stealth tower
design.
            5.   A description of the lighting and type of lighting the
facility will implement, including, but not limited to, the color of the
lighting and whether it will be constant, flashing, or strobe.
            6.   A narrative discussing the extent to which the proposed
facility would be visible from any residential areas, height of vegetation
within 100 feet of the facility at the time of application, and the distance to
the proposed facility from a designated scenic resource’s noted viewpoints.
         (h)   A propagation map, before and after, of how the proposed
facility fits in the existing telecommunications network. The applicant must
provide written evidence of a tenant for the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility and the anticipated date that the facility will be
occupied and used by such tenant. Such evidence may include a lease or letter
of intent from the tenant. This submission requirement does not require
disclosure of confidential business information. The Zoning Officer, Planning
Commission, and Board of Zoning Appeals are hereby authorized to and may enter
into a non-disclosure agreement with the applicant provided the non-disclosure
agreement relates only to the applicant's propagation maps.
         (i)   Evidence demonstrating that an existing building, site, or
structure cannot accommodate the applicant’s proposed facility, the evidence
for which may consist of any one or more of the following:
            1.   Evidence that no existing facilities, located within the
targeted market coverage area, meet the applicant’s engineering requirements.
            2.   Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient
height and cannot be increased in height at a cost not exceeding 50% of the
cost required to construct the existing tower in present-day dollars, to meet
the applicant’s engineering requirements.
            3.   Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient
structural strength to support the applicant’s proposed antenna and related
equipment. Specifically:
               A.   Planned, necessary equipment would exceed the structural
capacity of the existing facility, considering the existing and planned use of
the existing facilities, and the existing facilities cannot be reinforced to
accommodate the new equipment.
               B.   The applicant’s proposed antenna or equipment would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or
structures, or the antenna or equipment with the existing facility would cause
interference with the applicant’s proposed antenna.
               C.   Existing or approved facilities do not have space on which
planned equipment can be placed so it can function effectively.
            4.   Evidence that the fees, costs, or contractual provisions
required by the owner of the existing facility or structure in order to share
or adapt an existing facility are unreasonable, provided the existing facility
was constructed prior to the effective date of the subchapter. Costs exceeding
the pro rata share of a new facility development are presumed to be
unreasonable.
            5.   Evidence that the applicant has made diligent good faith
efforts to negotiate collocation on an existing facility, building, or
structure, and has been denied access.
         (j)   A form of surety approved by the city to pay for the costs of
removing the facility to a depth of three feet below ground level if it is
abandoned.
         (k)   Proof of compliance with all applicable federal, state, and
local regulations, including the NEPA (National Environmental Policy Act)
Environmental Compliance Checklist and Section 106 of NHPA (National Historic
Preservation Act).
         (l)   A statement from the applicable county’s assessor indicating the
modification in real property taxation, if any, including the applicable tax
rate to be charged, the real property subject to the tax rate, and the person
or persons responsible for the payment of the real property taxes.
   (C)   Application fee and costs. An application shall include a non-
refundable payment in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city. The
application shall not be considered complete until this fee is paid.
   (D)   Notice of complete application.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application, the applicant shall be provided
with a dated receipt of submission.
      (2)   Within 30 calendar days of receipt of an applications the
application shall be reviewed to determine if the application meets the
submission requirements. Any requests for a waiver from the submission
requirements shall be reviewed prior to determining the completeness of the
application.
      (3)   If the application is not completes the applicant shall be notified
in writing, specifying the additional materials or information required to
complete the application.
      (4)   If the application is complete, the applicant shall be notified in
writing of this determination and, if the application is to be reviewed by the
Planning Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals, require the applicant to
provide a sufficient number of copies of the application for the Planning
Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (E)   Modification of application prior to approval. In the event that after
submittal of the application, or as a result of any subsequent submittals, the
applicant materially modifies the proposed facilities described in the initial
application, the application as modified will be considered a new application
subject to commencement of a new application review period and application fee;
provided that, applicant and the approval authority may, in the alternative,
enter into a mutually agreeable tolling agreement allowing the city to request
additional submittals and additional time that may be reasonably necessary for
review of the modified application.
   (F)   Approval of application. The shot clock period begins to run when the
application is filed and may be tolled only by mutual agreement or in cases
where the application is incomplete and notice is provided to the applicant
that the application is insufficient.
      (1)   Approval of eligible facilities modifications. Within 60 calendar
days of the date of receipt of an eligible facilities modification application,
a determination shall be made as to whether the proposed modification is an
eligible facilities modification, and contemporaneously a permit issued or the
application denied.
      (2)   Approval of applications involving (1) colocation or (2)
modifications that are not eligible facilities modifications. Within 90
calendar days of the date on which the city receives an application for
collocation, as defined by this subchapter, or a modification that is not an
eligible facilities requests, as defined by this subchapter, a determination
shall be made on the application, and contemporaneously a permit issued or the
application denied.
      (3)   Approval of all new towers. Within 150 calendar days of the date on
which the city receives an application for the construction of a new wireless
telecommunication facility, or any modification that is not solely for a
collocation, and that does not meet the requirements for eligible facilities
modification under this subchapter, a determination shall be made on the
application, and contemporaneously a permit issued or the application denied.
   (G)   Denial of all applications. A denial of an application shall set forth
in writing the reasons for the denial and shall be provided to the applicant
contemporaneously with the denial of the application.
   (H)   Tolling timeline for approval due to incompleteness.
      (1)   To toll the timeline due to application incompleteness, written
notice shall be provided to the applicant within 30 calendar days of receipt of
the application, clearly and specifically delineating all missing documents or
information.
      (2)   The timeline for review (when tolling ends) begins running again
when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the notice of
incompleteness.
      (3)   Following a supplemental submission, the city shall have ten
business days to notify the applicant that the supplemental submission did not
provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing
information. The timeline is tolled in the case of second or subsequent
notices, and tolling ends when the applicant makes supplemental submissions.
Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing
documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of
incompleteness.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.245 CHANGES TO APPROVED APPLICATION.
   Any changes to an approved application must be processed pursuant to §
152.244 and may be subject to the application fee, at the discretion of the
city.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.246 ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Any wireless telecommunications facility that is not in operation for
a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered an abandoned facility. If
negotiations are pending with a service provider to place equipment at the
facility, a letter of intent shall be provided to the city prior to the
expiration of the 12 months.
   (B)   The owner of an abandoned facility shall be notified in writing of an
order to remove the facility within no less than 90 calendar days of receipt of
the written notice. Failure to remove the wireless telecommunication facility
within 90 calendar days shall be grounds to remove the wireless
telecommunications facility at the owner’s expense and may use the surety to
pay this expense. If two or more users occupy a single tower or alternative
support structure, this provision shall not become effective until all users
cease using the tower or alternative support structure.
   (C)   The city requires the posting of surety before commencement of
construction of an approved wireless telecommunication facility to ensure
removal after the facility is no longer being used. The owner of the facility
may apply to the city for release of the surety only when the facility and
related equipment are removed by the owner to the satisfaction of the city.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.247 RETENTION OF EXPERT ASSISTANCE AND REIMBURSEMENT BY APPLICANT.
   (A)   The city may hire any consultant or expert necessary to assist the
city in reviewing and evaluating the application, including the construction
and modification of the site, once permitted, and any site inspections.
   (B)   An applicant shall deposit with the city funds sufficient to reimburse
the city for all reasonable costs of consultant and expert evaluation and
consultation to the city in connection with the review of any application,
including services needed during the construction and modification of the site,
once permitted. The initial deposit shall be submitted with the application.
The city shall maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. The
consultants and experts shall invoice the city for services rendered. If at any
time during the process, this escrow account has a balance of less than $8,500,
the applicant shall immediately, upon notification by the city, replenish said
escrow account so that it has a balance of at least $5,000. Such additional
escrow funds shall be deposited with the city before any further action or
consideration is taken on the application. If the amount held in escrow by the
city is more than the amount of the actual invoicing at the conclusion of the
project, the remaining balance shall be promptly refunded to the applicant.
Consultants and experts shall, upon request, provide copies of all billing to
the applicant.
   (C)   The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in the division (B)
above may vary with the scope and complexity of the project, the completeness
of the application and other information as may be needed to complete the
necessary review, analysis, and inspection of any construction or modification.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.248 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   Any application for wireless telecommunication facilities that is
proposed for the city property shall contain a provision with respect to
indemnification. Such provision will require the applicant, to the extent
permitted by law, to at all times indemnify and hold harmless the city, its
commissions, and its agents, from any and all penalties, damages, or costs,
arising out of any claims that might arise from said facility, excepting
however, any portion of such claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award
of damages as may be attributable to the negligent or intentional acts or
omissions of the city, or its commissions or agents.
   (B)   With respect to the penalties, damages, or charges referenced herein,
reasonable attorneys’ fees, consultants’ fees, and expert witness fees are
included in those costs that are recoverable by the city. Notwithstanding the
above, an indemnification provision shall not be required in those instances
where the city of Elkins itself applies for and secures a permit for wireless
telecommunication facilities.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.249 OTHER PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Compliance with this subchapter does not exempt compliance with all other
applicable federal, state, and local regulations, sections, or requirements.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
SMALL CELL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
§ 152.260 PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to the West Virginia Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act,
codified under W.Va. Code §§ 31H-1-1 et seq. as amended, this subchapter
establishes nondiscriminatory policies and procedures for the deployment of
small wireless facilities. This subchapter allows for the efficient deployment
of small wireless facilities while preserving the integrity, safe usage, and
reasonable aesthetic qualities of the city’s rights-of-way and the city as a
whole. The city seeks to establish uniform standards consistent with federal
and state law to address the placement of small wireless facilities and
associated poles to achieve the following:
   (A)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways, and other public ways and places;
   (B)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
   (C)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of facilities
lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property;
   (D)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees;
   (E)   Preserve the character of historic districts or areas; and
   (F)   Facilitate rapid deployment of small cell facilities to provide the
benefits of wireless services to the city’s residents and visitors.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.261 REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTED USE STATUS; ZONING APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   A wireless provider may collocate small wireless facilities and
install, maintain, modify, and replace the wireless provider’s own utility
poles or, with the permission of the owner, a third party’s utility pole, in,
along, across, upon, and under the right-of-way in any zone, or outside of the
right-of-way on property not zoned exclusively for single-family residential
use, as long as the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The wireless provider receives all necessary permits as required by
this subchapter;
      (2)   The wireless provider pays all necessary fees and rates as required
by this subchapter;
      (3)   The structures and facilities are installed and maintained so as
not to obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety on the right-of-way
or to obstruct the legal use of the right-of-way by the city or other
utilities;
      (4)   Each new or modified utility pole does not exceed the greater of
ten feet above the tallest existing utility pole in place as of March 5, 2019,
within 500 feet of the new pole, or fifty feet above ground level;
      (5)   New small wireless facilities may not extend more than ten feet
above an existing utility pole in place as of March 5, 2019; or if collocating
a new utility pole, above the height permitted for a new utility pole as
described in division (A)(4) of this section.
      (6)   The structures and facilities comply with the reasonable, written
design guidelines created by the city, as enumerated in §
152.262;
      (7)   If replacement of decorative poles is necessary to collocate a
small wireless facility, such replacement shall reasonably conform to the
design aesthetics of the decorative poles being replaced;
      (8)   If located in a historic district, as defined herein, the
structures and facilities follow applicable design and concealment measures to
protect the nature of the historic district;
      (9)   The area has not been designated solely for underground
communications and electrical lines, provided that:
         (a)   The city required all such lines to be placed underground by a
date certain that is at least three months prior to submission of the permit
application;
         (b)   The utility poles that the city allows to remain shall be made
available for the collocation of small wireless facilities and may be replaced
by a wireless provider to accommodate the collocation of small wireless
facilities;
         (c)   A wireless provider may install a new utility pole in the
designated area when unable to provide wireless service by collocating on a
remaining structure; and
         (d)   If the small wireless facilities are installed before the city
adopts requirements that communications and electric lines be placed
underground, the wireless provider may:
            1.   Maintain the small wireless facilities in place, subject to
any applicable pole attachment agreement with the utility pole owner; or
            2.   Replace the associated utility pole within 50 feet of the
prior location, subject to the permission of the utility pole owner; and
      (10)   The structures and facilities are compliant with any other
applicable local ordinance or state or federal law.
   (B)   Any wireless facility or utility pole that does not meet the above
requirements is not a permitted use.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.262 DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Unless such guidelines prevent a wireless provider from serving a
location in the city’s jurisdiction, the following design guidelines shall
apply to all small wireless facilities in the rights-of-way within the city’s
jurisdiction:
      (1)   Small wireless facilities shall not obstruct or hinder the usual
travel or public safety on the right-of-way or obstruct the legal use of such
right-of-way by utilities or authorities.
      (2)   Small wireless facilities shall not obstruct the safe operation of
traffic control equipment or streetlights.
      (3)   Small wireless facilities shall not interfere with driver or
pedestrian sight lines or clear zones for transportation or pedestrians.
      (4)   Small wireless facilities shall comply with all applicable federal
and state standards regarding pedestrian access and movement.
      (5)   Small wireless facilities shall comply with generally applicable
health and safety codes.
      (6)   Small wireless facilities shall be constructed in a manner to
minimize physical damage to private property.
      (7)   Small wireless facilitates shall be located in alleys to the
greatest extent feasible as determined by the city.
      (8)   Small wireless facilities that are pole-mounted on decorative poles
shall use concealed, camouflage, or stealth-style antennas in which all
equipment is contained within the pole to which the antenna is mounted. The
pole and antenna shall be painted to match the poles in the area or another
color approved by the city.
      (9)   Small wireless facilities that are building-mounted shall use
concealed, camouflage, or stealth-style antennas to blend into the structure
seamlessly by using one or more of the following methods and approved by the
city:
         (a)   Completely enclosed inside of a box that mimics the materials or
aesthetics of the building to which the small wireless facility is mounted;
         (b)   Completely concealed inside an existing portion of a building
such as the cupola or screening for mechanical equipment; or
         (c)   Completely concealed behind a parapet or other barrier so as to
not be visible from any point at ground level on the right-of-way; and
      (10)   Small wireless facilities shall not be used to display a sign.
   (B)   Unless such guidelines prevent a wireless provider from serving a
location in the city’s jurisdiction, the following design guidelines shall
apply to all antennas associated with small wireless facilities within the
city’s jurisdiction:
      (1)   An antenna shall be no more than three cubic feet in volume.
      (2)   When mounted at the top of a utility pole, the antenna shall be
aligned with the centerline of the utility pole and enclosed in a cylindrical
shroud.
      (3)   When mounted at the top of a utility pole, a pole-top extension
antenna shall be no taller than necessary for separation from other
attachments.
      (4)   When mounted on or within a decorative pole, the antenna shall
conform to the design aesthetics of that pole, including the design, style, and
color.
      (5)   When mounted on another structure, the antenna shall not impair the
function of the structure.
   (C)   Unless such guidelines prevent a wireless provider from serving a
location in the city’s jurisdiction, the following design guidelines shall
apply to all wireless equipment associated with antennas within the city’s
jurisdiction:
      (1)   Where feasible, the wireless equipment shall be located inside of
the utility pole on which the antenna is mounted.
      (2)   Where infeasible to locate the wireless equipment inside the
utility pole, the wireless equipment shall be located in a ground-mounted
cabinet and shall conform to the design aesthetics of the pole, including the
design, style, and color or a design otherwise approved by the city. The
ground-mounted cabinet shall be located within the same width of space parallel
to the right-of-way boundaries as the pole on which the antenna is mounted. The
ground-mounted cabinet shall not exceed 36 inches in height.
      (3)   When located in alleys or non-improved rights-of-way, wireless
equipment may be mounted on a utility pole, provided the wireless equipment is
not located beyond the top of the utility pole. If a wireless provider chooses
to mount the equipment on a utility pole in an alley or non-improved right-of-
way, the equipment shall be flushmounted and shall provide a minimum clearance
of eight feet above all streets, driveways, and sidewalks.
   (D)   Unless such guidelines prevent a wireless provider from serving a
location in the city’s jurisdiction, all replacement utility poles within the
city’s jurisdiction shall be:
      (1)   Installed within three feet of the location of the original pole;
and
      (2)   Of a material and dimensions that matches existing adjacent poles
or consistent with any published local standards for utility pole placements.
   (E)   Unless such guidelines prevent a wireless provider from serving a
location in the city’s jurisdiction, all new utility poles within the city’s
jurisdiction shall:
      (1)   Be aligned with the predominate pattern of existing poles where
present, or with street trees along the same side of the right-of-way;
      (2)   Not be located directly in front of storefront windows, primary
walkways, primary windows, or primary ingress/egress points to buildings;
      (3)   Be sited outside the critical root zone of existing street trees;
      (4)   Not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
      (5)   Not be located where sidewalks are narrow;
      (6)   Not block any emergency service providers or emergency service
access, including access to fire hydrants;
      (7)   Not be located upon any street or part of a street from which
utility poles have been ordered removed by the city;
      (8)   Not be located on any street or side of a street where there is
already an excess of poles; and
      (9)   Be spaced no closer than 200 feet apart.
   (F)   Unless such guidelines prevent a wireless provider from serving a
location in the city’s jurisdiction, all cables and wires associated with small
wireless facilities within the city’s jurisdiction shall:
      (1)   Be installed within the utility pole; or
      (2)   Be flush-mounted to the utility pole, and encased in cover or
conduit, where internal installation is not feasible.
   (G)   If an electric meter is required, the electric meter shall be mounted
in close proximity to the small wireless facility and have similar design
characteristics.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.263 PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every wireless provider who wishes to collocate a small wireless
facility or install or replace a utility pole in or outside of the right-of-way
or modify an existing small wireless facility or utility pole in or outside the
right-of-way must obtain a permit from the city under this subchapter.
   (B)   A wireless provider’s permit application shall include the following:
      (1)   The applicant’s name, address, phone number, email address, and a
list of all duly authorized agents acting on behalf of the applicant.
      (2)   A general description of the proposed small wireless facility and
associated pole, if applicable.
      (3)   Construction and engineering drawings and information demonstrating
compliance with state law and this subchapter, including a structural analysis
of the pole where the applicant proposes to install the small wireless
facility.
      (4)   An attestation that the small wireless facilities will be
operational for use by a wireless provider within one year after the permit
issuance date, unless the city and the applicant agree to extend the period or
delay is caused by lack of commercial power or communications transport
facilities to the site.
      (5)   An attestation that the small wireless facility will comply with
FCC regulations concerning (i) radiofrequency emissions from radio transmitters
and (ii) unacceptable interference with the public safety spectrum and CII
spectrum, including compliance with the abatement and resolution procedures for
interference with the public safety spectrum and CII spectrum established by
the FCC set forth in 47 C.F.R. §§ 22.970 through 22.973 and 47 C.F.R. §§ 90.672
through 90.675.
      (6)   Proof that the applicant maintains property insurance for its
property’s replacement cost against all risks, workers’ compensation insurance
as required by law, and commercial general liability insurance with respect to
its activities on the city’s improvements or rights-of-way of not less than
$1,000,000 of coverage for damages, including bodily injury and property
damage. The commercial general liability policy shall include the city as an
additional insured party, and the wireless provider shall provide certification
and documentation of such; except that if a wireless provider chooses to self-
insure, the wireless provider does not have to name the city as an additional
insured party, but shall provide to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate
its financial ability to self-insure the same coverage and limits required
herein.
      (7)   An attestation that the applicant will provide a bond, escrow
deposit, letter of credit, or other financial surety in an amount required by
the city to ensure removal of abandoned or unused wireless facilities or damage
to the right-of-way or the city property caused by the applicant or its agents,
as set by the city, prior to beginning any installation.
      (8)   The appropriate fees, as further explained in division (D) below.
      (9)   An attestation that the applicant will notify the city and call the
West Virginia 811 “Call Before You Dig” Hotline in order to locate all
underground utilities at least 72 hours before making any excavation.
   (C)   A wireless provider that seeks to use a city utility pole shall
provide the following additional information in its permit application:
      (1)   The additional wind load that the wireless facility adds to the
pole.
      (2)   A description of how the wireless provider will provide power to
the small wireless facility.
      (3)   A description of how the small wireless facility would attach to
the pole, including whether it would involve drilling holes into the pole or
attaching bands to the pole.
      (4)   Whether there will be additional wire in the pole.
      (5)   An attestation that the small wireless facility will meet all
clearance requirements if it is over the roadway.
      (6)   An attestation that the small wireless facility will not interfere
with any other equipment signals on city utility poles.
   (D)   Fees. A wireless provider’s permit application shall be accompanied
with the following fees:
      (1)   Two hundred dollars for the collocation of each small wireless
facility on an existing utility pole for the first five poles in the same
application, followed by $100 for each small wireless facility thereafter in
the same application.
      (2)   Two hundred and fifty dollars for the proposed installation,
modification, or replacement of a utility pole and the collocation of an
associated small wireless facility that is a permitted use.
      (3)   One thousand dollars for the proposed installation, modification,
or replacement of a utility pole and the collocation of an associated small
wireless facility that is not a permitted use.
   (E)   Exemptions. The city shall not require an additional application,
approval, or permit, or require any fees or other charges from a wireless
provider authorized to occupy the right-of-way, for the following:
      (1)   Routine maintenance;
      (2)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller; or
      (3)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement
of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on existing cables that are
strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety
codes and the pole owner’s construction standards and engineering practices.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.264 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESSING.
   (A)   All permit applications filed pursuant to this subchapter shall be
reviewed for completeness by the city. The city shall notify the applicant via
certified mail whether the application is complete within ten days of receiving
the application.
   (B)   If the application is incomplete, the city shall notify the applicant,
in writing, what specific information is missing from the application. All
deadlines required by this section are tolled from the time the city sends the
written notice of incompleteness to the time the city receives the missing
information from the applicant.
   (C)   A complete application for collocation of a small wireless facility
shall be processed within 60 days of the receipt of the complete application.
   (D)   A complete application for the installation, modification, or
replacement of a utility pole in the right-of-way shall be processed within 90
days of the receipt of the complete application.
   (E)   Within 60 days of receiving a complete application for use of a city
utility pole, the city shall provide a good faith estimate of any make-ready
work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation. If the
applicant accepts the good faith estimate, the make-ready work shall be
completed by the applicant within 60 days of acceptance. Requirements for make-
ready work are as follows:
      (1)   The city may require replacement of the city utility pole only if
it demonstrates that the collocation would make the city utility pole
structurally unsound;
      (2)   The person owning, managing, or controlling the city utility pole
may not require more make-ready work than is required to meet applicable codes
or industry standards;
      (3)   Fees for make-ready work may not include costs related to
preexisting or prior damage or noncompliance; and
      (4)   Fees for make-ready work, including any pole replacement, may not
exceed the actual costs or the amount charged to other communications service
providers for similar work and may not include any consultant fee or expense.
   (F)   Processing deadlines may also be tolled by agreement of the applicant
and the city.
   (G)   The city may deny the application if the application:
      (1)   Materially interferes with the safe operation of traffic control
equipment;
      (2)   Materially interferes with sight lines or clear zones for
transportation or pedestrians;
      (3)   Materially interferes with compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian
access or movement;
      (4)   Fails to comply with the reasonable and nondiscriminatory spacing
requirements of general application adopted by the city that concern the
location of groundmounted equipment and utility poles, as specified in §
152.262;
      (5)   Fails to comply with the reasonable and nondiscriminatory rules
approved by the city in §
152.268;
      (6)   Fails to comply with the design guidelines in §
152.262; or
      (7)   Fails to attest that a small wireless facility will comply with
relevant FCC regulations.
   (H)   If the city denies the application, it shall document the basis for
the denial, including the specific provision on which the denial was based, and
send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the city denies
the application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified within 30
days without paying an additional application fee. If the applicant cures after
30 days, the applicant shall pay an additional application fee in order for the
revised application to be considered. The city shall have 30 days to approve or
deny the revised application.
   (I)   The installation or collocation shall be completed within one year
after the permit issuance date unless the city and the applicant agree to
extend the period or a delay is caused by the lack of commercial power or
communications facilities at the site.
   (J)   Upon approval of the application and posting of the reasonable bond,
escrow deposit, letter of credit, or other financial surety required by the
city to ensure removal of abandoned or unused wireless facility or damage to
the right-of-way or city property, the applicant may undertake the installation
or collocation and operate and maintain the small wireless facilities and
associated utility poles.
   (K)   An applicant may file a consolidated application and receive a single
permit for the collocation of multiple small wireless facilities located within
the city’s jurisdiction. The denial of one or more small wireless facilities in
a consolidated application may not delay processing of any other small wireless
facilities in the same batch.
   (L)   Permits issued under this subchapter authorize the applicant to
operate and maintain the small wireless facilities and any associated utility
poles that are covered by the permit for a period of ten years.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.265 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The city may revoke an applicant’s permit at any time if the conditions of
the permit required pursuant to W.Va. Code Ch. 31H are no longer being
satisfied.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.266 RATES.
   (A)   If an applicant’s wireless facilities are located in a right-of-way,
the applicant shall pay a rate of $25 per year, per small wireless facility for
occupancy and use of the right-of-way.
   (B)   If an applicant collocates its wireless facilities on a city utility
pole, the applicant shall pay a rate of $65 per year, per city utility pole for
the occupancy and use of the city utility pole.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.267 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESSING.
   (A)   The city may prohibit or restrict the applicant from working within a
right-of-way when a road is closed, or its access is limited to the public.
   (B)   The applicant shall employ due care during the installation,
maintenance, or any other work in the right-of-way, and shall comply with all
safety and right-of-way protection requirements of applicable laws, codes,
guidelines, standards, and practices, and any additional commonly accepted
safety and public right-of-way protection standards, methods, and devices to
the extent consistent with applicable laws.
   (C)   Unless otherwise specified in the permit, the applicant shall erect a
barrier around the perimeter of any excavation and provide appropriate traffic
control devices, signs, and lights to protect, warn, and guide the public
(vehicular and pedestrian) through the work zone. The manner and use of these
devices shall be described within a traffic control plan in accordance with the
Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices. The applicant shall maintain all
barriers and other traffic control and safety devices related to an open
excavation until the excavation is restored to a safe condition or as otherwise
directed by the city.
   (D)   The applicant shall not interfere with any existing facilities or
structures in the right-of-way, and shall locate its lines and equipment in
such a manner as not to interfere with the usual traffic patterns (vehicular or
pedestrian) or with the rights or reasonable convenience of owners of property
that abuts any right-of-way.
   (E)   If the city determines that a small wireless facility or utility pole
violates the building code or otherwise creates a danger to the public’s
health, safety, and welfare, the city shall follow the processes and procedures
laid out in the West Virginia State Building Code.
   (F)   Any damage to the right-of-way directly caused by an applicant’s
activities in the right-of-way shall be repaired in order to return the right-
of-way to its functional equivalence before the damage. After the applicant
receives written notice, the city may assess a fine of $100 per day until the
repairs are completed. If the applicant fails to make the repairs required by
the city within a reasonable time after written notice, the city may complete
the repairs and charge the applicant for the reasonable, documented cost of the
repairs in addition to the $100 daily fine.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.268 ADDITIONAL LOCAL RULES.
   (A)   The city is authorized to create reasonable rules for construction and
public safety in the rights-of-way, including wiring and cabling requirements,
grounding requirements, and abandonment and removal provisions, to the extent
any additional rules are necessary.
   (B)   These rules shall be applied in a nondiscriminatory manner and shall
be posted publicly on the city’s website and shall be available to the public
in print at the City Clerk’s office. If the city determines that no additional
rules are necessary, the city’s website shall state that no additional rules
apply. The city may change the guidelines in a prospective manner for all
permit applications moving forward but shall not change requirements on any
applicant who has already applied for a permit. Each new or modified small
wireless facility or utility pole installed in the right-of-way shall comply
with the city current rules for construction and public safety as of the time
of the permit application.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
§ 152.269 INDEMNIFICATION.
   Any wireless provider who owns or operates small wireless facilities or
utility poles in the right-of-way shall indemnify, protect, defend, and hold
the city and its elected officials, officers, employees, agents, and volunteers
harmless against any and all claims; lawsuits; judgments; costs; liens; losses;
expenses; fees to include reasonable attorney fees and costs of defense;
proceedings; actions; demands; causes of action; liability and suits of any
kind and nature, including personal or bodily injury or death; or property
damage or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought, to the extent
that it is caused by the negligence of the wireless provider who owns or
operates small wireless facilities or utility poles in the right-of-way, any
agent; officer; director; representative; employee; affiliate; contractor, or
subcontractor of the wireless provider; or their respective officers, agents,
employees, directors, or representatives while installing, repairing, or
maintaining facilities in rights-of-way.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.998 INJUNCTION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or any designated
enforcement official may seek an injunction in the Circuit Court of Randolph
County, West Virginia, to restrain the owner, tenant, occupant, other persons
or persons responsible, or unit of government from violating the provision of
this code or any rule, regulation, or requirement adopted or established
hereunder.
   (b)   The Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or any designated
enforcement official may also seek a mandatory injunction in the Circuit Court
of Randolph County, West Virginia, directing the owner, tenant, occupant, other
persons or persons responsible, or unit of government to remove a structure
erected in violation of the provisions of this code or rule, regulation, or
requirement adopted or established hereunder.
   (C)   If the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or any designated
enforcement official is successful in any suit brought under this section, the
respondent shall bear the costs of the action.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this code is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished for each offense by a fine
not less than $50 nor more than $500. Each day the violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Work carried on in violation of the cancellation
of any permit issued under this code shall also be deemed a violation
punishable in the same manner.
   (B)   Any buildings erected, raised or converted, or land or premises used
in violation of any provision of this code is declared a common nuisance and
the owner of the building, land, or premises shall be liable for maintaining a
common nuisance.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022)
APPENDIX A: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
To view the Official Zoning Map in PDF, click here.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ead299bdbbd5d64237988ee0c60bb5e02d43e88c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2776.png]
 
(Ord. 8-18-2022, passed 8-18-2022)
APPENDIX B: LAND USE TABLE
P = Permitted (“By-Right”)         C = Conditional (Board of Zoning Appeals)
     Telecommunications Single      City                     Central
Uses Overlay            Family      Residential Recreational Business Commercial Educational Industrial
                        Residential                          District
P = Permitted (“By-Right”)         C = Conditional (Board of Zoning Appeals)
                   Telecommunications Single      City                     Central
Uses               Overlay            Family      Residential Recreational Business Commercial Educational Industrial
                                      Residential                          District
Adult business                                                                                             C
Amphitheater                                                  P            P                   P
Animal hospital/                                                           P        P                      P
veterinary office
Automobile car                                                                      P                      P
wash
Automobile repair/                                                                  P                      P
service
Bakery                                            C                        P        P                      P
Bank/financial                                                             P        P                      P
institution
Bed and breakfast                     C           P                        P        P
inn I
Bed and breakfast                     C           P                        P        P          P
inn II
Bed and breakfast                                                          P        P
inn III
Boat and marine                                                                     P                      P
sales/service
Brewery pub                                       C                        P        P                      P
Broadcasting
studio (radio/                                                                      P          P           P
television)
Building material                                                                   P                      P
facility
Bus/transit                                                                         P                      P
facilities
Bus/transit                           P           P           P            P        P          P           P
shelter
Butcher shop                                                               P        P                      P
Catering business                                                          P        P          P
Child day care                                    C                        P        P
facility, Class 1
Child day care                                    C                        P        P
facility, Class 2
Child day care                                    P                        P        P
facility, Class 3
Child day care                        P           P                        P        P
facility, Class 4
Clinic                                                                     P        P          P           P
Community facility                                C                        P        P
Conference center                                                          P        P
Continuing care                                                                     P
facility
Convenience store                                                          P        P                      P
Conversion of                         C           C                        C        C          C           C
school/church
Coworking space                                                            P        P
Cultural service                                                           P        P          P
Distillery                                                                 P        P                      P
Distribution                                                                        P                      P
facility
Dock                                  P           P           P            P        P          P           P
Dog day care                                                               C        P                      P
Dry cleaner                                                                         P                      P
Dwelling,                             C           P                        P
accessory
Dwelling,
conversion                                        C                        C
apartment
Dwelling, mixed                                                            P        P
use
Dwelling, multi-                                  C                        P        P
family
Dwelling, single                      P           P                        P        P          P
family
Dwelling, two-                                    P                        P        P          P
family
Educational                                                                P        P          P
institution
Emergency shelter                                 C                        C        C
Equipment rental/                                                                   P          P           P
repair
Essential
utilities and                         P           P           P            P        P          P           P
equipment
Event, mass                                       C           P            P        P          P           P
gathering
Extractive                                                                                                 C
industry
Factory-built home                                P
Factory-built home                                P
rental community
Farm/construction
equipment and                                                                       P                      P
supply sales
Farmer’s market                                             P            P        P                      P
Flea market                                                                         C
Freight terminal                                                                                           C
Funeral home/                                                                       P
mortuary
Garage, public                                                             C
Garden center                                                                       P                      P
Gas station                                                                C        C                      P
Gas station, large                                                                  C                      P
Governmental                                      C                        P        P                      P
operations
Greenhouse,                                                                         P                      P
commercial
Greenhouse,                           P           P           P            P        P          P           P
noncommercial
Group residential                     P           P           P            P        P          P           P
facility
Group residential                     P           P           P            P        P          P           P
home
Health club                                                                P        P          P
Home-based
business (low                         C           C                        P        P          P
impact)
Home-based
business                              P           P                        P        P          P           P
(no impact)
Hospital                                                                            C          C
Hotel/motel                                                                C        P          P
Incinerator                                                                                                C
Industrial park                                                                                            P
Kennel                                                                              C
Laboratory                                                                          P          P           P
Laundromat                                                                 P        P
Liquor store                                                               P        P
Lumberyard                                                                                                 C
Manufacturing                                                                                              C
(heavy)
Manufacturing                                                                       C                      P
(light)
Medical adult day                                                          C        P
care center
Medical cannabis                                                           P        P                      P
dispensary
Medical cannabis                                                                                           P
growing facility
Medical cannabis
organization,                                                              P        P
health care
Medical cannabis
processing                                                                                                 P
facility
Museum                                            C                        P        P          P
Night club                                                                 C        C
Office supply                                                              P        P
establishment
Parcel delivery                                                                     C                      P
facility
Park                                  P           P           P            P        P          P
Parking lot                                       C           C            C        C          P           P
Parking structure                                                          C        C          C           C
Personal service                                                           P        P
Pet shop                                                                   P        P
Pharmacy                                                                   P        P          P
Photographic                                                               P        P                      P
studio
Places of worship/
religious                                         C                        P        P          P           P
institution
Private club                                                               C        P
Professional                                                               P        P
services
Reception facility                    C           C           P            P        P          P           P
Recreation,                                                                P        P          P           P
commercial indoor
Recreation,                                                                P        P                      P
commercial outdoor
Recreation,                           C           C           P            P        P          P           P
municipal
Recycling facility                                                                  C                      P
Research and                                                                                               P
development
Restaurant                                                                 P        P          P           P
Retail store/shop
< 7,000 square                                                             P        P                      P
feet
Retail store/shop
7,000 to 25,000                                                            C        P                      P
square feet
Retail store/shop
> 25,000 square                                                                     C                      C
feet
Roadside vendor                                                            C        C
stand
Salvage yard                                                                                               C
School, commercial                                                         C        P                      P
School, preK-12                                   C                                 P          P
Self-storage                                                                                               P
facility
Senior independent                                C                        P        P
housing
Shopping center                                                            C        P
Solar energy                          P           P           P            P        P          P           P
facility, small
Solar energy                                                                                   P           P
facility, large
Solid waste
disposal area/                                                                                             P
facility, private
Solid waste
disposal area/                        P           P                                                        P
facility, publlic
Sports arena                                                  C            C        C          P
Studio, dancing,                                                           P        P          P
music, or art
Tattoo parlor/body                                                         P        P
piercing studio
Tavern/drinking                                                            P        P          P           P
establishment
Temporary shelter                                                                              P
Theater                                                                    P        P          P
Theater, drive-in                                                                   C
Truck terminal                                                                                             C
Vehicles sales/                                                                     P
rental and service
Video gaming or
lottery                                                                             P
establishment
Warehouse                                                                                                  P
Water treatment                                   P
plant
Wholesale                                                                                                  P
establishment
Wind energy                                                                                    P
facility, small
Winery                                                                     C        P                      P
Wireless
telecommunications P                  P           P           P            P        P          P           P
facility, small
cells
Wireless
telecommunications P                                                                           P           P
facility
 
(Ord. 301, passed 8-18-2022; Ord. 308, passed 11-3-2022; Ord. 329, passed 5-16-
2024, Ord. 331, passed 6-6-2024, Ord. 347, passed 7-24-2025)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
   
I.   AGREEMENTS
   
II.   ANNEXATIONS
   
III.   FRANCHISES
   
IV.   VACATIONS
   
V.   ZONING
   
VI.   RENAMING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
   
VII.   PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS
   
VIII.   EASEMENTS
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.   Date   Description
No.    Passed
O2002- 5-16-  Approving the execution of a loan agreement with the West Virginia Solid
05     2002   Waste Management Board.
O2002- 5-23-  Authorizing the execution of a bulk water purchase agreement with the
02     2002   Huttonville Public Service District.
0-023  11-4-  Authorizing the purchase of the Verizon microwave tower located at the top
       2004   of High Street for future use as part of the city’s infrastructure system.
       10-20- Authorizing participation in WVML municipal revenue enhancement program and
037    2005   the execution of an intergovernmental agreement for the exchange of
              information among the city, the WVML, Inc. and participating municipalities.
       12-4-  Providing for the cooperation of the city with the Randolph County
088    2008   Commission for the implementation of an E9-1-1 addressing and mapping within
              the city, in connection with the statewide addressing and mapping project.
249    2-1-   Accepting the conditions of the memorandum of understanding between the city
       2018   and the Randolph County Solid Waste Authority regarding glass recycling.
             
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
-    1-2-   Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
     1992   city, commonly known as the Law Offices of Wallace, Rose & Harris.
-    1-2-   Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
     1992   city, commonly known as The Mountain School.
-    7-21-  Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
     1994   city, commonly known as the Elkins Regional Convalescent Center, Inc.
O97- 12-4-  Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
12   1997   city, commonly known as Bridgewater Estates, situated in the Leadsville District.
O99- 2-4-   Changing the boundary of the First Ward of city to included 22.1 acres, more or
01   1999   less, annexed by a minor boundary adjustment.
0-   - -    Incorporating those certain streets within Bridgewater Estates into the city
0033 2005   limits.
O-   3-3-   Incorporating those certain lots known as the Bruce Street Extension into the city
028  2005   limits.
O-   1-19-  To incorporate and annex the Graceland Hills Subdivision into the city.
039  2006
085  - -    Annexing Colonial Estates. LLC into the city.
     2008
082  10-16- To incorporate and annex the Davis Trust Company “Beverly Pike” Branch into the
     2008   city.
            Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
            city, known as all that certain tract or parcel of land consisting of a portion of
083  10-16- a highway, right-of-way of U.S. 219 and a portion of County Route 11 (Laurel
     2008   Mountain Road) and a portion of the Old Western Maryland right-of-way that runs
            north from the existing city boundary to the end of roadway improvements on the
            north side of Corridor “H”.
            Pursuant to petition authorized by Dave Clark, Program Manager of Highland
095  - -    Community Builders, Inc., regarding a subdivision known as Highland Meadows,
     2009   developed by Highland Community Builders, Inc., to incorporate and annex such
            property into the city.
     1-7-   Entering the fact that the petition from Michael R. Price, President/CEO of Davis
091  2009   Trust Company, requesting annexation of Davis Trust Company, “Beverly Pike” Branch
            is “sufficient in every respect” pursuant to W.Va. Code § 8-6-4(g).
     1-7-   Entering the fact that the petition from Sharon L. Teter, President of Colonial
092  2009   Estates, LLC, requesting annexation of Colonial Estates, LLC is “sufficient in
            every respect” pursuant to W.Va. Code § 8-6-4(g).
            Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
            city, known as all that certain tract or parcel of land consisting of a portion of
     1-7-   highway known as County Route 21/5 (North Flood Control Road); a portion of highway
093  2009   known as County Route 21 (Georgetown Road); a portion of highway known as County
            Route 21/5 (South Flood Control Road); and a portion of highway known as County
            Route 23/1 (Haddix Road); all of that tract or parcel of land situated in
            Leadsville District.
            Pursuant to petition authorized by Randolph Allan, President of the Randolph
094  1-7-   Historical Society regarding a cemetery owned by the Randolph Historical Society,
     2009   located in the Elkins flood control area to incorporate and annex such property
            into the city.
     2-19-  Pursuant to petition authorized by Karen Jacobson, a member of Wilson Lane
096  2009   Development, LLC, regarding a subdivision known as Highland Meadows, to incorporate
            and annex such property.
            Pursuant to petition authorized by Mark Doak, President/CEO of Davis Health System,
     6-18-  on behalf of Davis Health System’s Board of Directors, regarding a certain tract of
101  2009   property owned by Health Facilities, Inc., a subsidiary of Davis Health Systems,
            and known as Davis Health System’s Direct Care Facility to incorporate and annex
            such property into the city.
102  7-16-  Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
     2009   city, known as Wilson Lane.
            Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
103  7-16-  city, known as a certain tract or parcel of land encompassing all of that tract or
     2009   parcel of land situate approximately 600 feet south of the west end of Wilson Lane
            on the east bank of the Tygart Valley River.
            Pursuant to petition authorized by Charles H. Friddle, III, Manager, Local Affairs
106  9-3-   of Allegheny Power, an Allegheny Energy Company, regarding certain real property
     2009   known as the Elkins Service Center of Allegheny Power, and annex such property into
            the city.
            Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
     9-20-  city, so as to include all of that tract or parcel of land consisting of the
107  2009   highway right-of-way of U.S. Routes 33 and 250 west from the existing city boundary
            at Goff Street to a point 200 feet west of the west end of County Route 11 in the
            community of Crystal Springs.
            Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
     1-21-  city, so as to include all of that tract or parcel of land being a strip of land
108  2010   known as Georgetown Road that begins at the existing city boundary at or near the
            Elkins Stockyard and extends northwesterly to the existing city boundary at the
            flood control.
     8-5-   Annexing 4.20 acres of property, more or less, pursuant to a petition from Mayor
115  2010   Duke Talbott, on behalf of the city, to include all of the land and appurtenances
            situated in the Beverly District.
            Annexing 39.9 acres, more or less, owned by Randolph County Board of Education,
116  8-5-   which is the location of Elkins High School, Randolph County Technical Center and
     2010   Midland Elementary School, into the city, to include all of the land and
            appurtenances situated in the Beverly District.
            Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
     9-30-  city, to include North Elementary School and connecting streets, which is all of
117  2010   that tract or parcel of land situated in the Leadsville District, consisting of
            Kennedy Street in Highland Park, a portion of Secondary Route 1/7 and two parcels
            that makeup the North School property.
            Annexing by minor boundary adjustment of a certain tract of land contiguous to the
118  9-30-  city, which is all of that tract or parcel of land situated in Leadsville District
     2010   consisting of a one block section of Harrison Avenue, all of Nathan Street, the
            Third Ward School property and a portion of a closed alley adjacent to the school.
            Pursuant to a petition authorized by Karen Jacobson, Executive Director, Randolph
     4-4-   County Housing Authority, on behalf of the Randolph County Housing Authority,
166  2013   regarding a certain tract of property owned by Randolph County Housing Authority,
            and known as the Highland Park Apartments and the Youthbuild Campus, to incorporate
            and annex such property into the city.
            Pursuant to petition authorized by Dave Clark, Executive Director, Woodlands
            Development Group, on behalf of the Woodlands Development Group, regarding a
179  4-17-  certain tract of property owned by Woodlands Development Group, and known as a
     2014   1.68-acre tract, more or less, located on Wilson Lane, adjacent to the Tygart
            Valley Limited Partnership property, to incorporate and annex such property into
            the city.
268  12-19- Annexing part of Harrison Avenue and the former Texaco Station on Harrison Avenue.
     2019
269  12-19- Annexing property located on Wilson Lane known commonly as the former Reidbord
     2019   Plant.
270  12-19- Annexing property located on Wilson Lane commonly known as Tygart Valley
     2019   Apartments.
            Annexing approximately 69.59 acres along the northeastern side of County Route 21,
297  3-17-  and to the east of County Route 21/5, and approximately 5.09 acres lying to the
     2022   north of County Route 21, and to the east of County Route 21/5, both owned by the
            RCDA.
332  6-6-   Annexing approximately 0.59 acres at the corner of Redbud Land and Wilson Lane, Tax
     2024   Map 126 Parcel 14.6, owned by Woodlands Development Group, Inc.
            Annexing two parcels, the first being a 2.775 acre tract, situated on a ridge top
     6-6-   approximately 200 feet easterly of the existing McQuain Street Water Storage Tank
333  2024   and owned by Richard R. and Judith L. Ware, and the second being a 0.363 acre
            tract, situated on a ridge top approximately 200 feet northeast of the existing
            McQuain Street Water Storage Tank and owned by Steve Kimbrew.
           
 
TABLE III: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        11-16-1995  Granting a nonexclusive franchise to Triax Cablevision
                     USA, L.P. for a term of 15 years.
                     Authorizing a franchise agreement between City Monongahela
                     Power Company (doing business as Allegheny Power) and the
089      12-18-2008  city, for the purposes of transmitting and distributing
                     electric current for light, heat and power and data and
                     video services to any point within the corporate limit,
                     for a period of 20 years.
                     Renewing a franchise agreement with Cequel III
201      10-8-2015   Communications II, LLC (doing business as Suddenlink
                     Communications), for a period of five years.
                     Approving the transfer of control of the cable television
                     franchise and cable television system now held by Cequel
202      10-8-2015   Corporation, the parent of Cequel III Communications II,
                     LLC (doing business as Suddenlink Communications) to
                     Altice N.V.
 
TABLE IV: VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.   Date   Description
No.    Passed
       9-5-   Vacating, abandoning and closing that certain alley running west of Ninth
-      1991   Street between Lots Nos. 432, 434, 438, 440 and 442 of Block 38 on the north
              and Lots Nos. 433, 435, 437, 439, 441 and 443 of Block 39 on the south.
-      11-21- Vacating an alley that runs east of Harrison Avenue between Lots 1 and 2 of
       1991   Block 4 of the B.L. Hinkle Addition.
-      11-21- Vacating a portion of Tannery Drive.
       1991
-      12-5-  Vacating, abandoning and closing Ninth Street between Harrison Avenue and
       1991   Gorman Avenue.
096-07 5-2-   Abandoning the alley dividing the property owned by Virginia Boyer.
       1996
097-05 6-5-   Approving the vacation of a portion of Coal (Cole) Avenue and Henry Avenue.
       1997
       12-18- Vacating that portion of Railroad Avenue lying north of Thirteenth Street
O97-13 1997   and adjoining property of the Woodford Oil Company and Southern States
              Elkins Cooperative, Inc.
O99-05 3-18-  Vacating a ten-foot wide alley adjoining Weese Street and running through
       1999   the Coffman Addition to the city.
O99-07 5-6-   Vacating three parcels of real estate comprising a portion of Graceland
       1999   Drive.
O99-10 9-16-  Vacating a strip of real estate comprising a portion of a 15-foot unopened
       1999   alley running from Lough Avenue to Wees Street.
O2000- 7-20-  Vacating a portion of Key Street lying southeast of Vista Avenue and
08     2000   northwest of Weese Street.
O2001- 6-21-  Vacating a 12-foot wide alley lying east of those lots comprising the O.C.
02     2001   Daniels Subdivision.
O2001- 9-10-  Vacating a 20-foot wide alley lying to the west of Lots 22 and 23 of Block 7
05     2001   of the Dowell Addition.
O02-06 8-15-  Vacating a parcel of real estate containing 0.004 acre, comprising a portion
       2002   of High Street.
0-024  1-1-   Authorizing the closure of an alley that connects Fourth Street with
       2004   Randolph Avenue as a public right-of- way.
       11-2-  Vacating, abandoning and closing that certain alley running east of Railroad
058    2006   Avenue between Block 40 and Triangle No. 7 of Block 47 as depicted on the
              original map of the city.
060    3-15-  Restricting usage of an unimproved alley right-of-way beginning parallel to
       2007   Wilson Street and connecting Worth and Glendale Avenues.
       12-15- Vacating, abandoning and closing and relinquishing certain easements and
135    2011   rights- of-way in and under the area which was formerly Ninth Street between
              Harrison Avenue and Gorman Avenue.
              Vacating, abandoning and closing that certain alley lying west of Eighth
       12-15- Street and east of Ninth Street (now abandoned) between Lots Nos. 416, 418,
136    2011   420, 422, 424, 426, 428 and 430 of Block 36 of the city on the north and Lot
              Nos. 417, 419, 421, 423, 425, 427, 429 and 431 of Block 39 of the city on
              the south.
       12-15- Vacating, abandoning and closing that certain public road or way 30 feet in
137    2011   width over, across and through the land of Davis Memorial Hospital from
              Gorman Avenue to a 20-foot alley.
              Vacating, abandoning and closing that certain part of Hemlock Avenue as
138    12-15- shown on the plat of the revised maps showing Bruce Lee Kennedy’s Addition
       2011   to the city between Sycamore Street and Spruce Avenue, as shown and
              designated as Parcel B on the plat of survey.
              Amending Ord. 096- 07, which abandoned an unused alley, that the entire
              unnamed alley dividing Lots 1082, 1083, 1084, 1085 and 1086 of Block 107
168    5-2-   from Lots 1053 and 1054 of Block 116 of the Valley Improvement Company
       2013   Addition is hereby abandoned with the exception of any rights, easements or
              privileges that the city may have to erect and/or maintain utility services
              through and over said alley.
              Vacating, abandoning and closing that certain public alleyway 15 feet in
218    9-1-   width across and through the lands of Ken M. Watring and Brenda Watring,
       2016   Elkins Metro Corporation and Speedway Super America, LLC from Wees Avenue to
              Wilmoth Avenue.
243    8-17-  Vacating, abandoning and closing a portion of that certain public right-of-
       2017   way known as Stoddard Avenue.
       6-18-  Vacating, abandoning and closing a portion of certain public rights-of-way
261    2019   known as Summit Street Extension and the alley between 194 Summit Street and
              210 Summit Street.
       11-18- Vacating, abandoning and closing a part of Wilmoth Avenue between Yokum
290    2021   Street and Main Street and part of Main Street where it intersects with
              Wilmoth Avenue.
       12-16- Vacating, abandoning and closing an unopened alley between Lot 25 Block C of
294    2021   the First Section of the Hillside Addition and Lot 26 Block D of the Second
              Section of the Hillside Addition.
295    2-17-  Vacating, abandoning and closing an unopened alley known as Coke Lane which
       2022   lies behind the Riverside Place Apartments on S. Davis Avenue.
303    9-15-  Vacating, abandoning and closing a portion of Gorman Avenue between Martin
       2022   Street and Reed Street adjacent to the Davis Medical Center.
313    4-20-  Abandoning a section of Riverbend Road to West Virginia Division of
       2023   Highways.
328    5-16-  Vacating, abandoning and closing a portion of Coke Alley between Tenth
       24     Street and Eleventh Street.
             
 
TABLE V: ZONING
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.   Date   Description
No.    Passed
              The certain parcel of land described as approximately two blocks bounded by
       4-6-   Lough Street, Yokum Street, Wilmoth Avenue, an unopened street and an unopened
-      1995   alley being parallel to and between Harrison Avenue and Yokum Street and
              extending from Lough Street to Wilmoth Avenue, be rezoned for commercial use,
              constituting a change from its prior use as a B-Residential area.
              Changing from residential use to commercial use of real estate which is bounded
              by Harrison Avenue, Robert E. Lee Avenue, Yokum Street and Wilmoth Avenue (an
O2002- 11-21- unopened street), such area being comprised of Blocks 1 and 8 of the Wees Park
07     2002   Addition to the city; approximately one-half of said area has been, prior to
              said petition, zoned for commercial use and this ordinance will not,
              consequently, affect that portion of the described real estate.
025    1-20-  Rezoning the following parcels of land within the city from their current
       2005   designation of B-Residential to Commercial:
              1. The one-half block area bounded by Second Street, John Street, First Street
            and a 20-foot alley. The alley lies between and runs parallel to John Street
              and Henry Avenue, and it connects First and Second Streets;
              2. The one-half block bounded by Scott Street, Davis Street, Cherokee Street
            and a 20-foot alley. The alley lies between and runs parallel to Davis and
              Graham Streets, and it connects Scott and Cherokee Streets; and
              3. The one block of property bounded by Davis Street, John Street, Graham
            Street and Scott Street, which is substantially occupied by the offices of WIC
              Nutrition Program.
035    9- -   Rezoning of an area on North Randolph Street for commercial use from its prior
       2005   use as a B-Residential area.
038    12-15- Rezoning of a one block area on Eleventh Street for commercial use from its
       2005   prior use as a B-Residential area.
055    9-7-   Rezoning Graceland Hills Subdivision from B-Residential to Restricted
       2006   Residential (A-Residential).
141    5-17-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 92-1 as the Law Offices of Wallace,
       2012   Ross & Harris to C-Commercial.
142    5-17-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 92-2 as The Mountain School to B-
       2012   Residential.
143    5-17-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 94-5 as the Elkins Regional
       2012   Convalescent Center to B-Residential.
144    5-17-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 97-12 as the Bridgewater Estates to
       2012   B-Residential.
145    5-17-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 082 as the Davis Trust Company
       2012   “Beverly Pike” Branch to C-Commercial.
146    5-17-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 085 as the Colonial Estates LLC to B-
       2012   Residential.
147    5-17-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 096 as a subdivision known as
       2012   Highland Meadows to B-Residential.
148    5-17-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 101 as Davis Health System’s Direct
       2012   Care Facility to C-Commercial.
149    5-17-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 106 as the Elkins Service Center of
       2012   Allegheny Power to C-Commercial.
150    5-17-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 115 as part of the H.G. Kump property
       2012   to C-Commercial.
151    5-17-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 116 as the Randolph County Board of
       2012   Education-Midland property to C-Commercial.
       5-17-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 117 as Kennedy Street in Highland
152    2012   Park, a portion of Secondary Route 1/7 and two parcels that make up the North
              School property to B-Residential.
       5-17-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 118 as a one block section of
153    2012   Harrison Avenue, all of Nathan Street, the Third Ward School property and a
              potion of a closed alley adjacent to the school to B-Residential.
156    6-21-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 083 as North Randolph Avenue to C-
       2012   Commercial.
157    6-21-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 102 as Wilson Lane to B-Residential.
       2012
158    7-5-   Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 103 as 3.67 acres/wastewater ponds to
       2012   B-Residential.
       4-17-  Zoning the annexed area described in Ord. 166 as that certain tract of property
174    2014   owned by Randolph County Housing Authority and known as the Highlands Park
              Apartments to Tract One as B-Residential and Tract Two as C-Commercial.
311    3-2-   Rezoning Map 2, Parcels 83, 84 and 85, Elkins Corp. District as Commercial and
       2023   rezoning Map 13, Parcel 10, Elkins Corp. as Central Business District.
       6-6-   Zoning the unzoned parcel on North 12th Street, identified as Elkins Corp.
330    2024   District, Tax Map 17, Parcel 258, as City Residential and Commercial as shown
              on the map attached to Ord. 330.
             
 
TABLE VI: RENAMING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.   Date   Description
No.    Passed
-      5-1-   Naming an alleyway extending from Heavner Avenue on the south to and unnamed
       1997   alley on the north to be known as Bethany Lane.
O98-04 7-16-  Assigning the name Linda Lane to a previously unnamed alley which runs from
       1998   Sayre Street (on the west) to Moore Street (on the east).
O98-08 9-3-   Assigning the name Mary’s Way to a previously unnamed alley which runs from
       1998   Second Street (on the south) to Third Street (on the north).
O98-09 11-19- Assigning the name Physicians’ Way to a previously unnamed alley which runs
       1998   from Porter Avenue (on the southeast) to Barnard Avenue (on the northwest).
O99-13 12-2-  Assigning the name Flood Control Road to a previously unnamed road which runs
       1999   from Andrews Street (on the north) to the city limits (on the south).
       1-6-   Assigning the name Slaughterhouse Hill Road to a previously unnamed road which
O99-15 2000   begins at Thorne Avenue (near Thorne Avenue’s intersection with Diamond Street)
              and runs northeasterly to the city limits.
O2000- 4-18-  Assigning the name Easy Street to a previously unnamed street being parallel to
04     1999   and between the Tygart Valley River and Cole Avenue, which runs from South
              Twelfth Street (on the north) to Fourteenth Street (on the south).
O03-   - -    Declaring a portion of old sewer plant access road a public street and naming
003    2003   that street Jones Drive.
O03-   4- -   Renaming that street currently referred to as Fifteenth Street Extension to be
001    2003   known as Tom Waller Drive.
036    9-1-   Assigning the name Martin Street to an extension of Fourth Street that will
       2005   access the property of the former railroad yard.
105    8-20-  Designating a roadway recently annexed into the city as North Randolph Avenue.
       2009
122    12-16- Officially designating Oak Crest Drive.
       2010
 
TABLE VII: PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.   Date   Description
No.    Passed
097-02 3-26-  Approving the purchase of private property described as:
       1997
            1. All of Lot 34 and the southernmost four feet off of Lot 33 in
              Block 5 of the city; and
            2. Lot 35 and the northern ten feet of Lot 36, in Block 5 of the
              city.
O99-14 12-30- Providing for the purchase of town Lots 28, 30, 31 and 32, Block 4
       1999   and parcel of real estate east of Lots 30, 31 and 32 of Block 4.
O2002- 4-4-   Authorizing the purchase of two tracts of real estate each
01     2002   containing 18 acres, more or less, situated in the Glendale
              Addition.
       4-5-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed of exchange with Dorsey
062    2007   and Charlotte Heckler, exchanging 0.01 acres adjacent to Diamond
              Street.
       5-1-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a quitclaim deed providing for
075    2008   an easement across the eastern boundary of Lots 39 and 40 of Block
              E of the Hillside Addition.
       8-21-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a deed conveying property,
078    2008   formerly used by the city as a landfill, to the Williams’ family
              heirs.
184    11-20- Authorizing the purchase of the closed Elkins National Guard
       2014   Armory.
              Authorizing and approving the conveyance of real property,
265    11-7-  fixtures and personal property and appurtenances to the Elkins
       2019   Municipal Building Commission for the Phil Gainer Community
              Center.
278    12-3-  Authorizing the public sale and transfer by deed of Lot No. 155,
       2020   Park View Addition to George Kniley.
279    12-3-  Authorizing the public sale and transfer by deed of Block 9, parts
       2020   of Lots 50-51 of the Graham and Davis Addition to Side Gillispie.
              Authorizing the public sale and transfer by deed of the parcel of
346    7-10-  1,464 square feet adjacent to the property owned by Legg
       2025   Properties, LLC, formerly the Montgomery Ward Building to
              MegaCorp.
             
 
TABLE VIII: EASEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Granting a perpetual easement to the Huttonsville Public
                     Service District, the easement being situated in Randolph
007      9-18-2003   County, specifically Leadsville District, Sheet 126,
                     Parcel 30.02 as shown on the tax maps of Randolph County,
                     and further described in Deed Book 229, Page 367.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to West Virginia Code
References to 1991 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO WEST VIRGINIA CODE
W.Va. Code Cites Code Section
W.Va. Code Cites        Code Section
Ch. 1, Art. 5B          51.46
2-2-3                   10.02
2-2-4                   10.02
2-2-5                   10.02
2-2-7                   10.02
2-2-8                   10.06
2-2-9                   10.06
2-2-10                  10.02
2-2-10(a)               10.02
2-2-10(b)               10.02
2-2-10(c)               10.02
2-2-10(d)               10.02
2-2-10(i)               10.02
2-2-10(p)               10.02
2-2-10(q)               10.02
2-2-10(r)               10.02
2-2-10(z)               10.04
2-2-12                  10.04
Ch. 3                   Charter Section 6.02, 34.16, 35.01, 35.02,  35.13,
                        35.23
3-1-2                   Charter Sections 2.02, 3.05
3-1-2a                  35.13
3-1-3                   Charter Sections 2.02, 3.05, 35.03
3-1-6                   35.05
3-1-19                  35.13
3-1-20                  35.13
3-1-21                  35.13
3-1-23                  35.05
3-1-24                  35.13
3-1-27                  35.04
3-1-28                  35.15
3-1-29                  35.01
3-1-30                  35.01, 35.15
3-1-30a3-1-29           35.15
3-1-46                  35.15
Ch. 3, Art. 3           35.20
3-3-1                   35.21
3-3-13                  35.20
3-4A-1 et seq.          35.17
3-4A-14                 35.15
3-5-7(i)                35.08
3-5-10                  35.13
3-5-11                  35.10
3-5-13a                 35.14
3-6-2(d)(2)             35.14
3-6-3                   35.13
3-6-4a                  35.11
3-6-5                   35.11
Ch. 5, Art. 1           30.03
Ch. 5, Art. 7           30.03
5-7-1 through 5-7-10    30.03
5-7-2                   30.03
5-7-2(d)                30.03
5-7-3                   30.03
5-7-5(a)(5)             30.03
5-7-5(c)                30.03
5-7-5(d)                30.03
5-7-6                   30.03
5-10-1 through 5-10-51  30.04
5-10-16                 30.04
5-16-1 et seq.          110.067
5-22-1                  30.20
5A-3-9                  30.20
Ch. 6                   Ch. 32
6-1-3                   Ch. 32
6-2-1 et seq.           30.01, 34.04
6-2-11                  30.01, 34.04
6-6-7                   Ch. 32
Ch. 6, Art. 9A          31.02
6-9A-4                  31.02
7-1-3U                  151.015
Ch. 7, Art. 10          90.30
Ch. 7, Art. 18          110.108
7-22-1 et seq.          110.108
8-1-1                   10.02
8-1-2                   10.02
8-1-3                   72.080
8-1-5a                  31.27, 33.077, 34.01, 35.01, 92.037, 110.100
Ch. 8, Art. 3, § 2     Charter Section 1.4
8-3-16                  34.16
Ch. 8, Art 5, § 19     Charter Sections 3.02, 3.05
8-5-7                   Ch. 31
8-5-8                   Ch. 31, Ch. 32
8-5-9                   Ch. 31, Ch. 32, 32.15
8-5-10                  Ch. 31, Ch. 32, 32.15, 35.22
8-5-11                  Ch. 32, 90.13
8-5-12                  30.02, Ch. 31, Ch. 32
8-5-14                  34.16
8-5-15                  35.18
8-5-17                  35.19
Ch. 8, Art. 5A          34.01
Ch. 8, Art. 6           92.055, 152.068
8-6-4(g)                TSO II
Ch. 8, Art. 6A          92.037
8-9-1                   31.02, 31.06
8-9-3                   31.01, 31.06
8-10-1                  32.15, Ch. 34, Ch. 37, 37.02
8-10-2                  Ch. 37
8-10-2(b)               37.03
8-10-2(c)               37.03
8-10-2b(c)              150.037
8-10-3                  31.01, 32.36
8-11-1 et seq.          Ch. 31, 31.20
8-11-1                  10.99, 31.03, 37.12
8-11-1a                 37.12
8-11-2                  70.35
8-11-4                  31.20
8-11-4(b)               10.01, 150.035
8-11-5                  70.35
8-12-1 et seq.          Ch. 31
8-12-2                  Ch. 70, Ch. 93
8-12-2(a)               Ch. 112
8-12-2(c)               31.03
8-12-5(1) to (5)        Ch. 93
8-12-5(2)               93.045
8-12-5(4)               Ch. 70, Ch. 72
8-12-5(10)              Ch. 50, 91.020
8-12-5(13) to (15)      Ch. 92
8-12-5(23)              Ch. 50, Ch. 91, 91.020, 91.080, Ch. 92, 92.015, Ch. 150
8-12-5(26)              Ch. 90
8-12-5(27)              90.03
8-12-5(28)              92.015, Ch. 150
8-12-5(29)              93.090
8-12-5(32)              51.30, Ch. 52
8-12-5(33)              Ch. 52
8-12-5(38)              33.015
8-12-5(39)              33.015
8-12-5(43)              Ch. 52, 91.004
8-12-5(44)              Ch. 92
8-12-5(45)              31.03
8-12-5(46)              30.01, 34.04
8-12-5(48)              31.03, Ch. 34
8-12-5(55)              10.99, 31.03
8-12-7                  30.05
8-12-10                 30.20
8-12-13 through 8-12-15 Ch. 150
8-12-13                 92.015, Ch. 150
8-12-14                 92.015, 150.020
8-12-15                 91.081, 92.015, 150.002
8-12-16                 Ch. 150, 150.177
8-12-18(b)              31.27
8-12-19                 Ch. 34, 34.03, Ch. 52, 91.004
8-13-1                  32.37
8-13-4                  Ch. 110
8-13-5                  Ch. 110, 110.055, 110.056
8-13-5a                 Ch. 36, 36.37, 110.108
8-13-6                  110.108
8-13-7                  111.002
8-13-13                 36.15, 92.070
8-13-15                 32.16, 36.36
8-13-16                 32.16
8-13-22                 32.16
8-13-25                 110.089
Ch. 8, Art. 13-c        110.111
8-13C-1 et seq.         110.100
8-13C-6                 110.110—110.11 2
8-13C-7                 110.110
8-14-1 et seq.          Ch. 34
8-14-1                  Ch. 34
8-14-3                  34.03
8-14-6 through 8-14-23  34.01
8-14-7                  34.01
8-14-15                 34.01
8-15-1                  Ch. 92, 92.035, Ch. 150
8-15-2                  92.035
8-15-3                  92.035
8-15-4 to 8-15-8        92.035
8-15-9 et seq.          92.035
8-15-11 through 8-15-27 92.037
8-15-12                 92.037
Ch. 8, Art. 16          33.078, 33.113
8-16-1                  71.20
8-16-2                  71.20
8-16-4                  33.110
8-17-1 et seq.          Ch. 52, Ch. 93, 93.025
Ch. 8, Art. 18          93.007
8-18-1 et seq.          Ch. 52, Ch. 93, 93.025
8-18-1                  Ch. 52
8-18-22                 Ch. 52
Ch. 8, Art. 21          33.060
8-21-1 to 8-21-14       33.050
8-21-10                 33.053
Ch. 8, Art. 22          34.15, 92.055
8-22-1                  30.04
8-22-16 to 8-22-28      34.15, 92.055
8-22-16                 34.15, 92.055
8-22-16(e)              34.15, 92.055
8-22-17                 34.16, 92.056
8-22-18                 34.16, 92.056
8-22-19                 34.15, 92.055
8-22-20                 34.15, 37.11
8-22-20(e)              92.055
Ch. 8, Art. 22A         34.15, 92.055
8-33-3                  33.077
8-38-1 et seq.          110.108
Ch. 8A                  152.055
Ch. 8A, Art. 2          33.035
                        
8A-2-1 et seq.          33.030
8A-2-1                  33.030
8A-2-3                  33.031
8A-2-7                  33.036
8A-2-8                  33.036
8A-2-9                  33.032
Ch. 8A, Art. 3          Charter Section 5.02
Ch. 8A, Art. 7          152.068
8A-7                    33.030
Ch. 8A, Art 8 et seq.   152.056
8A-9-1 et seq.          152.027
8-13-26                 110.089
Ch. 10, Art. 1          33.015, 33.016
10-1-2                  33.016
Ch. 10, Art. 1A         33.015
10-2-1 to 10-2-5        33.050
Ch. 11                  32.37
11-1-1                  110.101
11-3-3A                 151.001, 151.040, 151.062
11-3-6                  32.37
11-8-5                  32.37
Ch. 11, Art. 9          110.101, 110.112, 110.113
Ch. 11, Art. 10         110.101, 110.111, 110.113
11-10-5d                110.074
11-10-11                110.110
11-12-2                 110.014
11-12-4                 Ch. 110
Ch. 11, Art. 13         110.055
11-13-25                Ch. 110, 110.055
Ch. 11, Art. 14c        110.106
Ch. 11, Art. 15         110.101, 110.102, 110.106, 110.108, 110.113
11-15-1 et seq.         36.52, 110.100
11-15-3c                110.106
Ch. 11, Art. 15a        110.101, 110.103, 110.108, 110.113
11-15A-1 et seq.        110.100
Ch. 11, Art. 15b        110.101, 110.103, 110.113
11-15B-1 et seq.        110.100
11-15B-33               110.110
11-15B-34               110.105
11-15B-35               110.109
Ch. 11, Art. 16         111.020, 111.024
11-16-2                 111.001, 111.020
11-16-4                 111.022
11-16-12                111.020
11-16-13                111.020
11-16-17                111.022
11-16-18                111.050
11-16-19                111.051
15-5-20A                151.015, 151.060
Ch. 16, Art. 1          51.46
Ch. 16, Art. 13         52.25, 52.28, 52.30
16-13-1 et seq.         Ch. 52
16-13-1                 Ch. 52
16-13-16                52.08
16-13-18                52.25
16-13-18a               52.25
Ch. 16A                 152.056
Ch. 17                  70.01, 72.166
17-2A-1                 72.041
17-24A-3 et seq.        Ch. 91
Ch. 17A                 70.01
17A-1-1 et seq.         Ch. 70
17-A-1-1(ii)            73.65
Ch. 17B                 70.01
17B-1-1 et seq.         Ch. 70
17B-2-2                 72.166
Ch. 17C                 70.01
17C-1-1 et seq.         Ch. 70
17C-2-7                 Ch. 70
17C-2-8                 Ch. 70
17C-2-8(a)(1)           Ch. 72
17C-4-7                 72.206
17C-5-2(1)              72.060
17C-5-2(e)              72.060
17C-5-2(f)              72.060
17C-5-2(g)              72.060
17C-5-2(k)              72.060
17C-5-2(m)              72.060
17C-5-2a                72.061
17C-5-3                 72.062
17C-6-2                 72.006, 72.075
17C-6-3                 Ch. 70, 72.006, 72.075
17C-6-3a                72.006
17C-6-5                 72.006
17C-8-5                 Ch. 70
17C-11-2                73.20
17C-11-3                73.21
17C-11-4                73.28
17C-11-5                73.33
17C-11-6                73.23
17C-11-7                73.24
17C-12-2                72.042
17C-12-5                72.142
17C-12-6                72.003
17C-12-8                72.186
17C-13-1 et seq.        Ch. 72
17C-15-19(d)            71.51
17C-15-26               72.023, 72.144
17C-16-1 et seq.        Ch. 70
17C-16-2(a)             72.166
17C-19-2                71.08
17C-19-8                37.06
Ch. 17D                 70.01
17D-1-1 et seq.         Ch. 70
19-4-1 et seq.          110.069
19-9-1 et seq.          Ch. 90
19-16A-7(a)             151.015
19-18-1 et seq.         Ch. 90
19-20-2                 32.37, 90.26
20-1-2                  90.04
20-2-1 et seq.          90.04
20-2-5               90.04
20-3-5                  92.002
20-4-3                  72.062
Ch. 20, Art. VII        130.040
21-9-1                  151.050
21-11-3(c)              151.015
21-11-6                 151.062
21-11-7                 151.062
22-6A-12(b)             151.050
24-2F-8                 152.183
Ch. 29, Art. 3          92.036
29-3-1 et seq.          Ch. 92
29-3-1 to 29-3-30       92.015
29-3-4a                 92.015
29-3-4b                 92.015
29-3-5                  92.015
29-3-12                 150.181
29-3-16c                152.164
29-3-21a                130.005
29-3E-10                130.008
Ch. 29, Art. 3A         92.035
29-3E-2(5)              130.008
Ch. 29a                 71.50, 111.050
29A-1-1 et seq.         111.050
30-13-1 et seq.         151.015
Ch. 31H                 152.265
31H-1-1 et seq.         152.260
33-25A-1 et seq.        110.067
Ch. 54                  33.078
Ch. 56                  93.007
Ch. 59                  152.068
Ch. 59, Art. 3          Charter Section 2.12, 31.20, 33.081
Art. 59-3               93.072
59-3-1 et seq.          30.20, 31.25, 31.26, 36.16
59-3-2                  150.179
60-1-5                  111.001
60-1-7                  111.020
Ch. 60, Art. 3 et seq.  111.002
Ch. 60, Art 3A          152.056
60-3-9d                 111.002
60-6-9                  111.004
Ch. 60, Art. 7          111.002, 111.035, 111.050, 111.999
60-7-1 et seq.          110.069, 111.035, 111.050
60-7-2                  111.001
60-7-6                  111.038
60-7-7                  111.038
60-7-12                 111.035
Ch. 60, Art. 8          111.002, 111.003, 111.050
60-8-1 et seq.          111.050
Ch. 60-A                72.060
60-A-1-1 et seq.        72.060
Ch. 61                  130.040
61-2-9                  130.002
61-2-26                 130.001
Ch. 61, Art. 3          130.004, 130.057
61-3-13                 130.013
61-3-27                 90.03
61-3-30                 130.003
61-3A-1 et seq.         130.016
Ch. 61, Art. 4          130.057
Ch. 61, Art. 5          130.057
61-5-17                 130.010
Ch. 61, Art. 6          130.057
61-6-17                 130.005
Ch. 61, Art. 7          130.057
61-7-1                  10.99, 130.057
61-7-5                  30.01, 34.04
61-7-10                 130.056
61-8-15                 111.004
61-8-19                 90.03
61-8B-10                130.009
Title 110               110.115
                        
 
REFERENCES TO 1991 CODE
1991 Code 2020 Code
1991 Code 2020 Code
1-1       10.01
1-2       10.02
1-3       10.03
1-4       10.04
1-5       10.05
1-6       10.06
1-7       10.99
1-8       10.08
1-9       10.09
1-10      10.10
1-11      10.11
1-12      10.12
2-1       30.01
2-2       30.02
2-3       30.20
2-5       30.03
2-6       30.04
2-6.1     30.05
2-7       31.01
2-8       31.02
2-9       31.03
2-10      31.04
2-11      31.05
2-12      31.06
2-13      31.20
2-14      31.21
2-15      31.22
2-16      31.23
2-17      32.01
2-18      32.15
2-19      32.35
2-20      32.36
2-21      32.37
2-22      32.16
2-23      32.18
2-24      32.19
2-25      32.20
2-26      33.001
2-26.1    33.002
2-27      33.015
2-28      33.016
2-29      33.030
2-30      33.031
2-31      33.032
2-36      33.035
2-37      33.050
2-38      33.051
2-39      33.052
2-40      33.053
2-41      33.054
2-42      33.055
2-43      33.056
2-44      33.057
2-45      33.058
2-46      33.059
2-46.1    33.060
2-47      33.075
2-48      33.076
2-49      33.077
2-50      33.078
2-51      33.079
2-52      33.080
2-53      33.081
2-54      33.082
2-55      33.083
2-56      33.084
2-56a     33.095
2-56b     33.096
2-56c     33.097
2-56d     33.098
2-56e     33.099
2-57      33.110
2-58      33.111
2-59      33.112
2-60      33.113
2-61      33.114
2-62      33.115
2-63      33.116
3-1       111.001
3-2       111.002
3-2.1     111.003
3-3       111.004
3-4       111.005
3-5       111.020
3-6       111.021
3-7       111.022
3-8       111.023
3-9       111.024
3-10      111.035
3-11      111.036
3-12      111.037
3-13      111.038
3-14      111.999
3-15      111.039
5-1.1     150.002
5-2       150.001
5-3       150.020
5-4       150.021, 150.022
5-5       150.023
5-6       150.024
5-6.1     150.003
5-6.2     150.004
5-6.3     150.005
5-7       150.035
5-8       150.036, 150.999
5-28      150.110, 150.999
6-1       110.001
6-2       110.002
6-3       110.003
6-4       110.004
6-5       110.005
6-6       110.006
6-7       110.007
6-8       110.008
6-9       110.009
6-10      110.010
6-11      110.011
6-12      110.012
6-13      110.013
6-14      110.014
6-14.01   110.025
6-14.02   110.026
6-14.03   110.027
6-14.03a  110.028
6-14.04   110.029
6-14.05   110.030
6-14.06   110.031
6-14.07   110.032
6-14.08   110.033
6-14.09   110.034
6-14.10   110.035
6-14.11   110.036
6-14.12   110.037
6-14.13   110.038
6-14.14   110.039
6-14.15   110.040
6-15      110.055
6-16      110.056
6-17      110.057
6-18      110.058
6-19      110.059
6-21      110.060
6-22      110.061
6-23      110.062
6-24      110.063
6-25      110.064
6-26      110.065
6-27      110.066
6-28      110.067
6-30      110.068
6-31      110.069
6-32      110.070
6-33      110.071
6-34      110.072
6-35      110.073
6-36      110.074
6-37      110.075
6-38      110.076
6-39      110.077
6-40      110.078
6-41      110.079
6-42      110.080
6-43      110.081
6-44      110.082
6-45      110.083
6-46      110.084
6-47      110.085
6-48      110.086
6-49      110.087
6-51      110.088
6-52      110.100
6-53      110.101
6-54      110.102
6-55      110.103
6-56      110.104
6-57      110.105
6-58      110.106
6-59      110.107
6-60      110.108
6-61      110.109
6-62      110.110
6-63      110.111
6-64      110.112
6-65      110.113
6-66      110.114
6-68      110.115
6-69      110.116
7A-1      113.01
7A-2      113.02
7A-3      113.03
7A-4      113.04
7A-5      113.05
7A-6      113.06
7A-7      113.07
7A-8      113.08
7A-9      113.09
7A-10     113.10
7A-11     113.11
7A-12     113.12, 113.99
7A-13     113.13
8-5       92.001
8-6       92.002, 92.999
8-8       92.015
8-9       92.016
8-10      92.017
8-12      92.019
8-13      92.020
8-14      92.021
8-15      92.999
8-16      92.035
8-17      92.036
8-18      92.037
8-19      92.038
8-20      92.039
8-21      92.040
8-22      92.055
8-23      92.056
9-1       91.020
9-2       91.021
9-3       91.022
9-4       91.023
9-5       91.024
9-6       50.01
9-7       50.02
9-8       50.03
9-9       50.05
9-10      50.06
9-11      50.07
9-12      50.08
11-1      37.01
11-2      37.02
11-3      37.04
11-4      37.05
11-5      37.06
11-6      37.07
11-7      37.08
11-8      37.09
11-9      37.11
11-9.1    37.12
11-10     37.25
11-11     37.26, 37.99
11-12     37.27
11-13     37.28
11-14     37.29
12-1      91.001
12-2      91.002
12-3      91.003
12-4      91.004
12-5      91.005
12-6      91.006
12-7      91.007
12-8      91.080
12-9      91.081
12-10     91.082
12-11     91.083
12-12     91.084
12-13     91.085
12-14     91.086
13-1      130.001, 130.999
13-1.1    130.002
13-2      130.003
13-3      130.004
13-4      130.005
13-5      130.006
13-5.1    130.007
13-5.2    130.008, 130.999
13-5.3    130.009
13-6      130.010
13-6.1    130.011
13-7      130.012
13-7.1    130.013
13-8      130.014
13-9      130.015
13-9.1    130.016, 130.999
13-10     130.017
13-11     130.018
13-12     130.019
13-13     130.020
13-14     130.021
13-15     130.055
13-16     130.056
13-17     130.057
13-18     131.15
13-19     131.16
13-20     131.17
13-21     131.18
13-22     131.19
13-23     131.20
13-24     131.99
14-1      34.01
14-2      34.02
14-3      34.03
14-4      34.04
14-5      34.15
14-6      34.16
15-1      36.30
15-2      36.31
15-3      36.32
15-4      36.33
15-5      36.34
15-6      36.35
15-7      36.36, 36.99
15-8      36.37
16-6      52.08
16-11     52.25
16-12     52.26
16-13     52.27
16-14     52.28
16-15     52.29
16-16     52.30
18-1      93.001
18-2      93.002
18-3      93.003
18-4      93.004
18-6      93.006, 93.999
18-7      93.007, 93.999
18-8      93.008
18-9      93.009
18-10     93.090
18-11     93.010
18-12     93.011
18-12.1   93.012
18-13     93.025
18-14     93.026, 93.999
18-15     93.027
18-16     93.028
18-17     93.029
18-18     93.030
18-19     93.031
18-20     93.032
18-21     93.033
18-22     93.034
18-23     93.045
18-24     93.046
18-25     93.047
18-26     93.048
18-27     93.049
18-28     93.050
18-29     93.051
18-30     93.052
18-31     93.053
18-32     93.054
18-33     93.055
19-1      72.001
19-2      72.002
19-4      72.003
19-5      72.004
19-6      72.005
19-7      72.006
19-8      72.007
19-9      71.01
19-10     71.02
19-11     74.07, Ch. 76, Sch. I
19-12     71.03
19-13     71.04
19-14     71.05
19-15     71.06
19-16     71.07
19-17     71.08
19-18     71.09
19-19     71.20
19-20     71.21
19-21     71.22
19-22     71.23
19-23     71.24
19-24     71.25
19-25     71.26
19-26     71.27, 71.99
19-27     71.28, 71.99
19-28     71.29
19-29     71.30
19-30     71.31
19-31     71.99
19-32     73.01
19-33     73.02
19-34     73.03
19-35     73.04
19-36     73.05
19-37     73.06
19-39     73.07
19-40     73.08
19-41     73.09
19-42     73.99
19-48     73.20
19-49     73.21
19-50     73.22
19-51     73.23
19-52     73.24
19-53     73.25
19-54     73.26
19-55     73.27
19-56     73.28
19-57     73.29
19-58     73.30
19-59     73.31
19-60     73.32
19-61     73.33
19-62     72.008
19-63     72.020
19-64     72.021
19-65     72.022
19-66     72.023
19-67     72.024
19-68     72.025
19-69     72.040
19-70     72.041
19-71     72.042
19-72     72.043
19-73     72.044
19-74     72.045
19-75     72.046
19-76     72.060, 72.999
19-77     72.061
19-78     72.062, 72.999
19-79     72.075
19-80     72.076
19-81     72.077
19-82     72.078
19-83     72.079
19-84     72.080
19-85     72.081
19-86     72.095
19-87     72.096
19-88     72.097
19-89     72.098
19-90     72.099
19-91     72.100
19-92     72.101
19-93     72.102
19-94     72.103
19-95     72.104
19-95.1   72.105
19-96     72.106
19-97     72.120
19-98     72.121
19-99     72.122
19-100    72.123
19-101    72.124
19-102    72.125
19-103    72.127
19-104    72.128
19-105    72.129
19-106    72.140
19-107    72.141
19-108    72.142
19-109    72.143
19-110    72.144
19-111    74.01
19-112    74.02
19-113    74.03
19-114    74.04
19-115    74.05
19-116    74.06
19-117    74.07
19-118    73.45
19-119    73.46
19-120    73.47
19-121    73.48
19-122    73.49, 73.99
19-123    73.50
19-124    73.51
19-125    71.45
19-126    71.47
19-127    71.48
19-128    71.49
19-129    71.50, 71.99
19-130    71.51
19-131    72.155
19-132    72.156
19-133    72.157
19-134    72.158
19-135    72.159
19-136    72.160
19-137    72.161
19-138    72.162
19-139    72.163
19-140    72.164
19-141    72.165
19-141.1  72.166
19-142    70.99
19-143    70.15
19-144    70.16
19-145    70.17
19-146    70.18
19-147    70.19
19-148    70.20
19-149    70.21
19-150    70.22
19-151    70.23
19-152    70.01
19-153    72.180
19-154    72.181
19-155    72.182
19-156    72.183
19-157    72.184
19-158    72.185
19-159    72.186
19-160    72.200
19-161    72.201
19-162    72.202
19-163    72.203
19-164    72.204
19-165    72.205
19-166    72.206
19-167    72.207
19-168    72.208
19-169    72.209
20-1      51.01
20-2      51.02
20-3      51.03
20-4      51.04
20-5      51.05
20-6      51.06
20-7      51.07, 51.99
20-8      51.08
20-9      51.09, 51.99
20-10     51.10
20-11     51.11
20-12     51.12
20-13     51.13
20-14     51.14
20-15     51.15
20-16     51.16
20-17     51.17, 51.99
20-18     51.30
20-19     51.31
20-20     51.32
          
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord.   Date   Code Section
No.    Passed
98-06  - -    71.99
–    6-5-   33.031, 33.032, 33.034
       1947
–    7-1-   111.002
       1947
–    2-17-  91.023
       1949
–    7-28-  52.08
       1949
–    5-18-  93.006, 93.999
       1950
–    6-15-  50.01—50.03, 50.06—50.08
       1950
–    6-15-  91.020, 91.022—91.024
       1950
–    11-29- 30.03
       1950
–    4-16-  30.03
       1953
–    5-7-   92.055
       1953
–    10-5-  52.08
       1953
–    8-5-   52.08
       1954
–    4-5-   71.24
       1956
–    6-20-  110.001, 110.005, 110.011, 110.013
       1957
–    7-18-  52.25—52.30
       1957
–    8-1-   91.001
       1957
–    10-16- 130.001, 130.999
       1958
–    3-3-   93.007, 93.999
       1959
–    3-19-  93.007, 93.999
       1959
–    5-21-  71.03
       1959
–    3-3-   92.037
       1960
–    4-7-   150.022
       1960
–    5-5-   91.021
       1960
–    4-6-   71.24
       1961
–    6-15-  111.022
       1961
–    9-20-  Ch. 76, Sch. I
       1962
–    11-15- 92.036
       1962
–    3-7-   92.002, 92.999
       1963
–    6-6-   111.002
       1963
–    6-17-  111.002
       1965
–    7-1-   92.015
       1965
–    7-1-   150.035
       1965
–    3-17-  52.08
       1966
–    4-7-   73.20—73.33
       1966
–    10-20- 33.015
       1966
–    6-1-   111.001, 111.035—111.03 9, 111.999
       1967
–    11-2-  37.08, 37.09
       1967
             
–    2-1-   33.050—33.059
       1968
–    12-5-  50.01
       1968
–    12-5-  91.020
       1968
–    3-5-   33.110—33.116
       1970
–    4-2-   92.015
       1970
–    5-3-   36.30—36.37, 36.99
       1971
–    9-7-   93.001
       1972
–    8-16-  130.019
       1973
–    5-2-   91.005
       1974
–    9-5-   33.075—33.084
       1976
–    5-18-  93.012
       1978
–    8-18-  150.110, 150.999
       1978
–    7-5-   92.001
       1979
–    7-19-  32.19
       1979
–    7-19-  33.051, 33.060, 33.115
       1979
–    7-19-  70.01
       1979
–    7-19-  72.166, 72.180—72.186, 72.200—72.209
       1979
–    7-19-  150.110, 150.999
       1979
–    11-1-  30.20
       1979
–    3-6-   131.15—131.20, 131.99
       1980
–    5-7-   32.16
       1981
–    5-21-  110.002, 110.028, 111.038
       1981
–    5-21-  130.002, 130.013, 130.016, 130.056, 130.057, 130.999
       1981
–    6-18-  110.039
       1981
–    6-18-  111.002
       1981
–    7-16-  111.003
       1981
–    4-1-   150.002, 150.021, 150.024
       1982
             
–    9-2-   111.003
       1982
–    1-6-   37.01
       1983
–    3-17-  72.061
       1983
–    8-18-  111.002
       1983
–    9-15-  72.060—72.062, 72.999
       1983
–    1-5-   33.095—33.099
       1984
–    2-16-  110.033
       1984
–    3-15-  52.08
       1984
–    3-15-  110.040
       1984
–    7-5-   113.01—113.13, 113.99
       1984
–    7-19-  150.004
       1984
–    8-1-   113.06, 113.08
       1985
–    3-6-   70.01
       1986
–    7-3-   110.005
       1986
–    9-4-   73.01—73.09, 73.99
       1986
–    2-5-   110.039
       1987
–    8-6-   37.12
       1987
–    8-4-   150.005
       1988
–    7-6-   91.005
       1989
–    1-17-  130.070
       1991
–    5-2-   Ch. 76, Sch. I
       1991
–    5-16-  Ch. 75, Sch. I
       1991
–    5-16-  Ch. 75, Sch. I
       1991
–    8-15-  Ch. 75, Sch. II
       1991
–    9-5-   TSO IV
       1991
–    11-21- TSO IV
       1991
–    11-21- TSO IV
       1991
–    11-21- Ch. 75, Sch. III
       1991
–    11-21- Ch. 76, Sch. I
       1991
–    12-5-  TSO IV
       1991
–    1-2-   TSO II
       1992
–    1-2-   TSO II
       1992
–    1-2-   51.31
       1992
–    1-16-  30.06, 30.99
       1992
–    3-5-   50.05
       1992
–    3-5-   50.09
       1992
–    4-2-   Ch. 75, Sch. I
       1992
–    4-16-  50.10, 50.99
       1992
–    7-2-   Ch. 76, Sch. I
       1992
–    7-16-  Ch. 75, Sch. I
       1992
–    7-16-  Ch. 76, Sch. I
       1992
–    7-16-  51.31
       1992
             
–    9-17-  92.015—92.017, 92.019—92.021, 92.999
       1992
–    1-7-   Ch. 75, Sch. I
       1993
–    1-7-   Ch. 75, Sch. I
       1993
–    3-4-   93.091
       1993
–    3-18-  51.31
       1993
–    8-5-   130.071
       1993
–    9-16-  131.01, 131.99
       1993
–    10-21- Ch. 75, Sch. I
       1993
–    11-18- 114.30—114.35, 114.99
       1993
–    1-6-   Ch. 75, Sch. I
       1994
–    3-17-  110.034, 110.999
       1994
–    5-19-  111.050, 111.051, 111.999
       1994
–    7-7-   52.08
       1994
–    7-21-  TSO II
       1994
–    8-18-  73.49, 73.99
       1994
–    4-6-   TSO V
       1995
–    7-20-  Ch. 76, Sch. I
       1995
–    8-17-  Ch. 75, Sch. I
       1995
–    9-7-   71.24
       1995
–    10-19- Ch. 75, Sch. IV
       1995
–    11-16- TSO III
       1995
96-01  1-18-  71.24
       1996
096-02 3-11-  150.024
       1996
096-03 4-4-   131.35—131.37, 131.99
       1996
096-06 4-16-  71.07
       1996
096-07 5-2-   TSO IV
       1996
096-09 8-1-   Ch. 75, Sch. I
       1996
096-10 9-19-  130.040
       1996
O96-11 10-17- 130.056, 130.999
       1996
097-01 2-4-   36.50, 36.53
       1997
097-02 3-26-  TSO VII
       1997
097-03 3-26-  93.025
       1997
–    5-1-   TSO VI
       1997
097-05 6-5-   TSO IV
       1997
097-08 8-7-   72.167
       1997
O97-06 12-4-  71.46, 71.99
       1997
O97-11 12-4-  Ch. 76, Sch. I
       1997
O97-12 12-4-  TSO II
       1997
O97-13 12-18- TSO IV
       1997
O98-02 7-2-   Ch. 76, Sch. I
       1998
O98-03 7-2-   Ch. 75, Sch. III
       1998
O98-04 7-16-  TSO VI
       1998
O98-05 8-20-  Ch. 75, Sch. III
       1998
O98-08 9-3-   TSO VI
       1998
098-10 9-17-  130.012, 130.999
       1998
098-09 11-19- TSO VI
       1998
O99-01 2-4-   TSO II
       1999
O99-05 3-18-  TSO IV
       1999
O2000- 4-18-  TSO VI
04     1999
O99-07 5-6-   TSO IV
       1999
O99-09 6-17-  71.46, 71.99
       1999
O99-10 9-16-  TSO IV
       1999
O99-11 11-4-  Ch. 76, Sch. I
       1999
O99-12 11-4-  Ch. 76, Sch. I
       1999
O99-13 12-2-  TSO VI
       1999
O99-14 12-30- TSO VII
       1999
O99-15 1-6-   TSO VI
       2000
O2000- 2-17-  Ch. 76, Sch. I
02     2000
O2000- 7-20-  Ch. 76, Sch. I
07     2000
O2000- 7-20-  TSO IV
08     2000
O2000- 8-3-   Ch. 75, Sch. III
09     2000
O2000- 8-3-   Ch. 75, Sch. III
10     2000
O2000- 8-17-  Ch. 76, Sch. I
11     2000
O2000- 9-7-   Ch. 76, Sch. I
12     2000
O2000- 1-4-   Ch. 75, Sch. I
13     2001
O2001- 6-21-  TSO IV
02     2001
O2001- 6-21-  73.65, 73.99
03     2001
O2001- 9-10-  TSO IV
05     2001
O2001- 10-18- Ch. 75, Sch. III
07     2001
O2002- - -    Ch. 75, Sch. I
03     2002
O2002- - -    Ch. 75, Sch. I
04     2002
O2002- 4-4-   TSO VII
01     2002
O2002- 5-16-  TSO I
05     2002
O2002- 5-23-  TSO I
02     2002
O02-06 8-15-  TSO IV
       2002
O2002- 11-21- TSO V
07     2002
O03-   - -    TSO VI
003    2003
O03-   4- -   TSO VI
001    2003
O03-   6-17-  Ch. 76, Sch. I
004    2003
006    9-4-   93.012
       2003
005    9-18-  112.01
       2003
007    9-18-  TSO VIII
       2003
0-024  1-1-   TSO IV
       2004
O-008  1-15-  50.05
       2004
O-009  1-22-  50.11, 50.99
       2004
O-010  2-6-   71.02, Ch. 75, Sch. I, Ch. 76, Sch. I
       2004
O-011  3-18-  114.01—114.18, 114.99
       2004
O-013  3-18-  91.040—91.054, 91.999
       2004
015    5-20-  70.99
       2004
O-017  6-17-  91.025, 91.026, 91.999
       2004
018    6-17-  71.46, 71.99
       2004
019    7-15-  71.07
       2004
021    11-4-  70.99
       2004
0-023  11-4-  TSO I
       2004
0-0033 - -    TSO II
       2005
025    1-20-  TSO V
       2005
             
O-27   3-3-   51.45—51.54
       2005
O-028  3-3-   TSO II
       2005
O-034  8-4-   130.022, 130.999
       2005
035    9- -   TSO V
       2005
036    9-1-   TSO VI
       2005
037    10-20- TSO I
       2005
038    12-15- TSO V
       2005
O-039  1-19-  TSO II
       2006
O-040  1-19-  Ch. 75, Sch. I
       2006
022    2-6-   52.08
       2006
O-041  5-18-  150.035
       2006
O-042  6-1-   110.042
       2006
O-44   6-1-   37.30
       2006
045    6-1-   110.041
       2006
046    6-15-  32.17
       2006
049    7-6-   92.071
       2006
O-53   7-20-  72.126, 72.999, 130.023, 130.024, 130.999
       2006
054    9-7-   110.042
       2006
055    9-7-   TSO V
       2006
057    10-19- 52.08
       2006
058    11-2-  TSO IV
       2006
060    3-15-  TSO IV
       2007
061    3-15-  130.056, 130.999
       2007
062    4-5-   TSO VII
       2007
063    9-6-   51.31
       2007
066    9-20-  36.15—36.18
       2007
064    10-18- 36.50, 36.53
       2007
065    10-18- 36.01
       2007
068    11-1-  92.004, 92.999
       2007
081    - -    Ch. 75, Sch. III
       2008
084    - -    92.041, 92.999
       2008
085    - -    TSO II
       2008
087    - -    Ch. 76, Sch. I
       2008
070    1-3-   110.055—110.08 8
       2008
074    4-3-   37.31
       2008
075    5-1-   TSO VII
       2008
076    7-3-   93.092—93.102
       2008
078    8-21-  TSO VII
       2008
079    8-21-  Ch. 75, Sch. III
       2008
082    10-16- TSO II
       2008
083    10-16- TSO II
       2008
088    12-4-  TSO I
       2008
089    12-18- TSO III
       2008
095    - -    TSO II
       2009
097    - -    150.125—150.13 8, 150.999
       2009
100    - -    150.195—150.19 8
       2009
091    1-7-   TSO II
       2009
092    1-7-   TSO II
       2009
093    1-7-   TSO II
       2009
094    1-7-   TSO II
       2009
096    2-19-  TSO II
       2009
098    5-7-   130.025, 130.999
       2009
101    6-18-  TSO II
       2009
102    7-16-  TSO II
       2009
103    7-16-  TSO II
       2009
105    8-20-  TSO VI
       2009
106    9-3-   TSO II
       2009
107    9-20-  TSO II
       2009
108    1-21-  TSO II
       2010
             
110    4-1-   92.015—92.017, 92.019—92.021, 92.999
       2010
111    4-1-   51.09, 51.99
       2010
113    6-3-   50.05
       2010
115    8-5-   TSO II
       2010
116    8-5-   TSO II
       2010
119    8-19-  51.31
       2010
117    9-30-  TSO II
       2010
118    9-30-  TSO II
       2010
120    10-21- 72.126, 72.999
       2010
122    12-16- TSO VI
       2010
126    6-17-  32.15
       2011
131    9-1-   150.150—150.16 0
       2011
132    11-3-  51.31
       2011
133    11-17- 31.05
       2011
134    12-1-  150.036, 150.999
       2011
135    12-15- TSO IV
       2011
136    12-15- TSO IV
       2011
137    12-15- TSO IV
       2011
138    12-15- TSO IV
       2011
140    1-19-  150.035
       2012
141    5-17-  TSO V
       2012
142    5-17-  TSO V
       2012
143    5-17-  TSO V
       2012
144    5-17-  TSO V
       2012
145    5-17-  TSO V
       2012
146    5-17-  TSO V
       2012
147    5-17-  TSO V
       2012
148    5-17-  TSO V
       2012
149    5-17-  TSO V
       2012
150    5-17-  TSO V
       2012
151    5-17-  TSO V
       2012
152    5-17-  TSO V
       2012
153    5-17-  TSO V
       2012
154    6-21-  51.31
       2012
155    6-21-  52.08
       2012
156    6-21-  TSO V
       2012
157    6-21-  TSO V
       2012
158    7-5-   TSO V
       2012
159    9-20-  150.024
       2012
160    11-5-  92.041, 92.999
       2012
165    3-21-  30.02
       2013
166    4-4-   TSO II
       2013
167    4-4-   31.06
       2013
168    5-2-   TSO IV
       2013
169    7-18-  50.05
       2013
171    10-17- 150.125—150.13 8, 150.999
       2013
175    3-20-  30.20
       2014
176    3-6-   50.04
       2014
177    3-6-   91.026
       2014
175    3-20-  30.20
       2014
174    4-17-  TSO V
       2014
179    4-17-  TSO II
       2014
178    6-19-  92.070—92.078, 92.080, 92.081, 92.999
       2014
181    8-21-  150.035
       2014
180    9-4-   36.50—36.62, 36.99
       2014
184    11-20- TSO VII
       2014
185    11-20- 93.070—93.076
       2014
188    2-5-   30.02
       2015
189    3-19-  150.035
       2015
190    3-19-  71.06
       2015
191    3-19-  92.055
       2015
192    3-19-  34.15
       2015
193    5-7-   Ch. 75, Sch. II
       2015
             
195    7-2-   92.071—92.079, 92.999
       2015
196    7-2-   150.035
       2015
197    7-2-   51.31
       2015
199    9-3-   Ch. 75, Sch. III
       2015
200    9-24-  50.05
       2015
201    10-8-  TSO III
       2015
202    10-8-  TSO III
       2015
203    10-8-  92.071, 92.073
       2015
205    1-7-   34.04
       2016
208    3-17-  92.071, 92.080
       2016
206    4-7-   112.01
       2016
207    4-7-   34.04
       2016
209    5-5-   Ch. 75, Sch. I
       2016
210    5-19-  91.065—91.069, 91.999
       2016
212    6-16-  110.042
       2016
213    6-16-  150.150—150.16 0, 150.999
       2016
214    6-30-  130.008, 130.999
       2016
215    7-21-  150.035
       2016
216    8-4-   150.037, 150.038
       2016
217    8-4-   91.066
       2016
218    9-1-   TSO IV
       2016
221    9-15-  110.042
       2016
222    9-15-  91.026
       2016
219    11-3-  130.999, 131.99
       2016
223    11-3-  130.085, 130.086, 130.999
       2016
220    12-15- 110.089
       2016
226    12-15- 110.074
       2016
227    12-15- 130.087, 130.999
       2016
228    12-15- 111.080—111.08 4
       2016
229    2-16-  30.05
       2017
230    3-2-   31.24—31.27
       2017
231    3-2-   34.01
       2017
232    3-2-   92.037
       2017
233    3-2-   33.077
       2017
234    3-2-   35.01
       2017
235    4-6-   93.092—93.102
       2017
236    5-18-  110.055—110.08 8
       2017
237    5-18-  Ch. 75, Sch. I
       2017
238    6-1-   37.03
       2017
239    6-1-   33.030—33.036
       2017
241    6-15-  34.04
       2017
242    8-3-   130.056, 130.999
       2017
243    8-17-  TSO IV
       2017
245    9-7-   111.065, 111.066
       2017
244    9-21-  37.10
       2017
247    12-7-  36.51, 36.53
       2017
248    12-7-  110.100—110.11 6
       2017
249    2-1-   TSO I
       2018
250    2-1-   31.28
       2018
251    2-1-   34.01
       2018
252    3-1-   130.100, 130.101, 130.999
       2018
253    5-3-   70.35—70.41
       2018
254    6-7-   150.175—150.18 3
       2018
257    11-1-  52.08
       2018
258    2-7-   31.07
       2019
259    4-4-2- 150.035
       19
260    5-2-   34.04
       2019
261    6-18-  TSO IV
       2019
262    8-15-  52.01—52.07, 52.99
       2019
264    9-19-  112.35—112.43, 112.99
       2019
265    11-7-  TSO VII
       2019
266    11-21- 52.08
       2019
267    11-7-  112.36, 112.39
       2019
268    12-19- TSO II
       2019
269    12-19- TSO II
       2019
270    12-19- TSO II
       2019
271    3-4-   150.035
       2020
272    8-6-   37.32
       2020
274    8-20-  Adopting Ordinance
       2020
275    8-20-  150.035
       2020
276    11-19- Charter
       2020
278    12-3-  TSO VII
       2020
279    12-3-  TSO VII
       2020
       3-4-   151.001—151.00 4, 151.015, 151.020—151.02 4, 151.030—151.03 3, 151.040—151.04 4,
280    2021   151.050, 151.060—151.06 8, 151.080—151.08 2, 151.090, 151.091, 151.100, 151.101,
              151.999
281    3-17-  33.125—33.133
       2021
284    7-1-   93.093, 93.100, 93.101, 93.103
       2021
285    7-1-   93.073
       2021
286    7-1-   130.085, 130.086, 130.999
       2021
287    7-1-   Adopting Ordinance
       2021
288    9-2-   Ch. 75, Sch. III
       2021
289    9-16-  111.080, 111.081, 111.083, 111.084
       2021
290    11-18- TSO IV
       2021
292    12-2-  71.99
       2021
294    12-16- TSO IV
       2021
295    2-17-  TSO IV
       2022
296    3-3-   92.002
       2022
297    3-17-  TSO II
       2022
298    5-5-   71.52, 71.53
       2022
299    7-28-  150.035
       2022
300    7-28-  93.115—93.121, 93.999
       2022
              110.041, 150.085—150.089, 150.999, 152.001—152.009, 152.020—152.029, 152.040—152.044,
       8-18-  152.055, 152.056, 152.065—152.069, 152.080—152.083, 152.090—152.093, 152.100—152.103,
301    2022   152.110—152.113, 152.120—152.123, 152.130—152.133, 152.140—152.143, 152.150, 152.151,
              152.160—152.168, 152.170—152.183, 152.195—152.212, 152.220—152.232, 152.240—152.249,
              152.260—152.269, 152.998, 152.999, Ch. 152, App. A, B
302    9-15-  51.31, 51.32
       2022
303    9-15-  TSO IV
       2022
304    9-15-  37.13
       2022
305    9-15-  37.10
       2022
306    9-15-  92.037
       2022
308    11-3-  152.056, 152.081, 152.091, 152.101, 152.111, 152.121, 152.131, 152.141, Ch. 152, App.
       2022   B
310    1-19-  35.01—35.24
       2023
311    3-2-   TSO V
       2023
312    4-20-  52.08
       2023
313    4-20-  TSO IV
       2023
314    5-4-   52.01—52.08, 52.25—52.30, 52.99
       2023
316    7-6-   90.01—90.11, 90.30, 90.40, 90.41, 90.99
       2023
317    12-7-  152.068
       2023
318    8-17-  152.224, 152.230
       2023
319    1-18-  30.20
       2024
322    3-7-   152.056, 152.224
       2024
324    3-21-  31.02
       2024
325    3-21-  152.025
       2024
326    3-21-  33.036
       2024
328    5-16-  TSO IV
       2024
329    5-16-  152.056, 152.092, 152.11, 152.121, 152.131, Ch. 152, App. B
       2024
330    6-6-   TSO V
       2024
331    6-6-   152.056, 152.141, 152.196, Ch. 152, App. B
       2024
332    6-6-   TSO II
       2024
333    6-6-   TSO II
       2024
334    6-24-  33.128
       2024
337    8-1-   Charter 2.02
       2024
339    11-21- 32.02
       2024
340    1-23-  71.46, 93.004
       2025
341    1-23-  152.228
       2025
342    1-23-  35.06
       2025
343    1-23-  151.015, 151.062
       2025
344    6-26-  110.057, 110.058, 110.069A, 110.072
       2025
345    6-26-  50.05
       2025
346    7-10-  TSO VII
       2025
347    7-24-  152.092, Ch. 152, App. B
       2025
348    10-16- 30.07
       2025
349    1-8-   Ch. 75, Sch. III
       2026
             
 
