MARLINTON, WEST VIRGINIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. passed 7-7-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE _____
   Councilmember  /s/  introduced the following Ordinance and moved for its
adoption, which motion was seconded by Councilmember  /s/ . The Ordinance being
in the following words and figures:
“AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF
MARLINTON, WEST VIRGINIA, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING,
CODIFYING, AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING ORDINANCES OF THE
TOWN OF MARLINTON, WEST VIRGINIA.”
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the Town of
Marlinton, West Virginia, are inadequately arranged and classified and are
insufficient in form and substance for the complete preservation of the public
peace, health, safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the
proper conduct of its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, pursuant to the laws of the State of West Virginia, the Town of
Marlinton is empowered and authorized to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
   WHEREAS, the Town Council of the Town of Marlinton, West Virginia, has
authorized a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances
of the Town of Marlinton, West Virginia, of a general and permanent nature and
publication of such ordinances in book form; and
   WHEREAS, pursuant to the authority granted by W. Va. Code §§ 8-11-1, et
seq., the council of the TOWN OF MARLINTON desires to adopt an ordinance
enacting a code of ordinances for the Town of Marlinton, West Virginia,
revising, amending, restating, codifying, and compiling certain existing
ordinances of the Town of Marlinton, West Virginia
   NOW, THEREFORE, THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF MARLINTON, WEST VIRGINIA
HEREBY ORDAINS:
   1.   The general ordinances of the Town of Marlinton, West Virginia, as
revised, amended, restated, codified, and complied in book form are hereby
adopted as and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the Town of
Marlinton, West Virginia.”
   2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in No. 1 above shall consist of the
following Titles:
      TITLE I:   GENERAL PROVISIONS
            10.   General Provisions
      TITLE III:   ADMINISTRATION
            30.   Governing Body
            31.   Town Officials
            32.   Police Department
            33.   Town Organizations
            34.   Municipal Court
            35.   Town Employees
            36.   Elections
            37.   Finance and Taxation
      TITLE V:   PUBLIC WORKS
            50.   Utility Commissions
            51.   Rates and Charges
            52.   Grease Traps
            53.   Sewers
      TITLE VII:   TRAFFIC CODE
            70.   General Provisions
            71.   Traffic Control, Instruction, Devices and Signals
            72.   Traffic Regulations
            73.   Equipment and Loads
            74.   Licensing
            75.   Recreational Vehicles
            76.   Pedestrians
            77.   Parking
      TITLE IX:   GENERAL REGULATIONS
            90.   Animals and Fowl
            91.   Fire Protection
            92.   Health and Sanitation
            93.   Heliport
            94.   Trees
            95.   Streets and Driveways
            96.   Pioneer Days
            97.   Town Cemetery
      TITLE XI:   BUSINESS REGULATIONS
            110.   Licenses and Business Taxes
            111.   Miscellaneous Business Activities
            112.   Alcoholic Beverages
            113.   Retail Establishments
            114.   Outdoor Entertainment
      TITLE XIII:   GENERAL OFFENSES
            130.   General Provisions
            131.   Offenses Against Public Peace
            132.   Offenses Against Persons
            133.   Offenses Against Morals
            134.   Offenses Against Justice and Administration
            135.   Offenses Against Property
            136.   Weapons
      TITLE XV:   LAND USAGE
            150.   Building Regulations
            151.   Comprehensive Plan
            152.   Floodplain Regulations
   3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in
such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
   4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and
approval by the Town Council of the Town of Marlinton, West Virginia, and the
Town Clerk is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
   5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect upon enactment and shall be
presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all
provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein contained and of the
date of passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded, and
approved and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law
have been given.
   This Ordinance shall become effective 3-7, 2023.
   I, the undersigned Recorder of the Town of Marlinton, State of West
Virginia, do hereby certify that the foregoing amendment to an Ordinance was
duly passed and adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Marlinton, and that
the proposed Ordinance was read by title at not less than three (3) meetings of
the Town Council with at least one (1) week intervening between each meeting,
and that the Ordinance is now in full force and effect.
                     1-9-23
                     Passed First Reading
                     2-6-2023
                     Passed Second Reading
                     3-6-2023
                     Passed Third Reading
TOWN OFFICIALS
Mayor
Samuel Mark Felton, Jr.
Recorder
Mary Kay Clendenen
Financial Director
Teresa Barlow
Council Members
Olivia Dean
Thomas Miller
Scott Gibb
Joseph Smith
Tina Barkley
 
CHARTER
   At a Circuit Court continued and held for the County of Pocahontas, at the
Court-house thereof, on the 4th day of April, 1900.
   In the Matter of the Incorporation of the Town of Marlinton. It appearing to
the Court that Uriah Bird and 36 other citizens of the town of Marlinton, in
this County, applicants for a certificate of incorporation for said town have
complied with all the requirements of the Code of West Virginia, in reference
to the incorporation of towns and villages, it is ordered that the clerk of
this Court issue a certificate of incorporation to said town of Marlinton as
provided by Chapter 47 of the Code of West Virginia, and it is further ordered
that J. A. Sharp, F. P. Anderson and W. B. King, be and are hereby appointed
Commissioners to hold the first election of officers to be held in the said
town of Marlinton, and the clerk of this Court is directed to record said
certificate of incorporation in the following words, to-wit: Beginning at a
white oak and maple on the east bank of Greenbrier river, 26 feet from low
water mark, corner to the Pocahontas Development Company’s land and with the
line of the same; S. 76 E. 699 feet to 2 small white walnuts; E. 49 1/4 E. 1569
feet to a pin oak and chestnut sapling on top of a ridge, (corner to the Susan
McGlaughlin Tract); S. 48 1/2 E. 681 feet to a chestnut oak and double chestnut
on top of said ridge; N. 78 E. 1148 feet to a hemlock and dead white oak on a
ridge; N. 87 E. 454 feet to a dead white oak on a ridge, witnessed by a pin oak
and white oak; N. 30 E. 1016 feet to 2 white oaks above the creek; S. 26 E. 165
feet to a point on the North West side of the creek; S. 89 1/4 N. 1621 feet
crossing Knapps Creek and the Huntersville road to a plug by a stake, (marked
81 x 10) witnessed by a pin oak; N. 83 1/4 E. 2220 feet, at 1910 passes plug by
a stake marked (40 x 60) by a road, witnessed by a chestnut to a set stone on
the side of the mountain; N. 5"94' E. 1161 feet to a set stone on the side of
the mountain, witnessed by a pin oak, white oak, and two small maples; N. 63 1/
2 W. 5100 feet passes a plug by a stake by a run (No. 61 x 20) at 852 feet
passes another plug (63), 1782 feet crosses a branch of Marlin run at 3630 feet
crosses the West branch of Marlin run to a plug on top of the river ridge by a
stake; No. 49 x 90 witnessed by a black pine, marked “XX” bearing S. 67 E. 12
feet; N. 1/2 E. 1820 feet to a point on a hill side; N. 53 3/4 W. 19 poles to
low water mark, on the South east side of Greenbrier river, thence down the
said river with its meanderings, measured along the South-east margin of said
river with low water mark 3263 feet to a point at low water mark on said
Southeast side of said river 237 feet above the upper edge of the abutment of
the bridge on the east side of the river, thence crossing the river; N. 49 1/
2 W. 370 feet to a stake on the west bank of the river corner to lot No. 15 in
the partition of the lands of James H. Price, deceased, 17 feet from low water
mark, thence with the lines of lots 15 and 13, crossing the road; N. 46 1/2 W.
363 feet to a stake on a hill side witnessed by 2 small sugars and a hickory,
thence S. 55 1/2 W. 1039 1/2 feet with a line of lot No. 21 to a stake on the
point of a ridge witnessed by a small pine and small pin oak; S. 29 1/2 W. 610
1/2 feet, crossing a road and run to a stone on a point, witnessed by a walnut
bearing S. 40 1/2 E. 13 feet, thence the same course continued 665 feet,
crossing the Kee run to a bunch of withhazels at the Northern edge of a large
flat rock on the Southern bank of said run; S. 36 E. 810 feet crosses the
turnpike road, at 192 feet passes a phono pole in the lower bank of road, at
353 foot passes a marked forked locust, at 550 feet passes two sycamores on the
bank of the river, crossing the river to low water mark on the east side of the
river, thence down the east margin of the river with low water mark, 800 feet
to center of the mouth of Knapp’s creek; thence down the river with low water
mark 3104 feet to opposite the beginning thence S. 76 E. 25 feet to the
beginning, containing by calculation 807 acres; Have been given in due form of
law in favor of the incorporation of the town of Marlinton, in the County of
Pocahontas, bounded as herein set forth. And it appearing to the satisfaction
of the Court that all the provisions of chapter 47 of the Code of West Virginia
have been complied with by the applicants for said incorporation, the said town
is duly authorized within the corporate limits aforesaid to exercise all the
corporate powers conferred by the said chapter from and after the date of this
certificate.
   J. H. Patterson, Clerk.
   State of Vest Virginia,
Pocahontas County, to-wit:
   I, J. H. Patterson, clerk of the Circuit Court of said County, do certify
that the foregoing transcript is a true copy from the records of my said
office. Given under my hand and the official seal of said Court, this the 10th
day of April, 1900.
   J. H. Patterson, Clerk.
SEAL
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   How code designated and cited
   
10.02   Definitions and rules of construction
   
10.03   Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances
   
10.04   Catchlines and headings of portions of code
   
10.05   Severability of parts of this code, and of codes and other regulations
adopted by reference
   
10.06   Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances contained in this title and the following titles, chapters
and sections shall constitute and be designated the “Code of the Town of
Marlinton, West Virginia”, and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be
cited as the “Marlinton Town Code”, “town code” or “code of ordinances”.
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Council to adopt a comprehensive code of ordinances, see W. Va.
Code § 8-11-4(b)
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this code and of all other ordinances and resolutions
of the Council, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be
observed, unless it shall be expressly provided otherwise by any section,
ordinance or resolution, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
   AUTHORITY OF OFFICERS. Whenever authority is conferred on or an act is
required to be performed by a town officer, such authority may be exercised or
performed, at the instance of such officer, by a deputy, agent or subordinate,
unless such authority cannot lawfully be deputed.
   CHARTER; THE TOWN CHARTER. The Charter of the Town of Marlinton, West
Virginia, as amended and currently in effect.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME; REASONABLE TIME. The time within which an act is to be
done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last; or,
if the last day be Sunday or a holiday, it shall also be excluded; but this
provision shall not be deemed to change any rule of law applicable to bills of
exchange or negotiable instruments; provided, that if time is expressed in
hours, the whole of any Sunday or holiday shall be excluded, unless the clear
intent of the Council is to the contrary. In all cases where provision is made
for an act to be done or notice to be given within a REASONABLE TIME, it shall
be construed to mean only such time as may be necessary, under the
circumstances then and there existing, for the prompt performance of such act
or the giving of such notice.
   COUNCIL; THE COUNCIL. The Council of the Town fo Marlinton, West Virginia.
   COUNTY. The County of Pocahontas, West Virginia.
   GENDER. A word importing the masculine gender only may be construed to
include the feminine and neuter as well as the masculine.
   GENERAL RULE. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions shall
be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Council
may be fully carried out. Words and phrases shall be taken in their usual
sense, but technical words having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law
shall be understood according to their technical import.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more persons
or officers shall be construed as giving such JOINT AUTHORITY to a majority of
such persons or officers, and not to any lesser number.
   MONTH; YEAR; FISCAL YEAR. The word MONTH shall mean a calendar month; the
word YEAR shall mean a calendar year; the word YEAR alone shall be equivalent
to the expression YEAR OF OUR LORD. The FISCAL YEAR for the town and all bodies
or officers collecting or disbursing funds shall begin on July 1 and expire
with the expiration of the next following June 30.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Town of Marlinton, West Virginia.
   NUMBER. A word importing the singular number only may be applied to several
persons or things, as well as to one person or thing; a word importing the
plural number only may be applied to one person or thing as well as to several.
   OATH; SWORN. A solemn affirmation shall be the equivalent to an oath in all
cases, unless otherwise expressly provided, and the word OATH shall be deemed
to include an affirmation and the word SWEAR or SWORN to be complied with if
the person referred to makes solemn affirmation.
   OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS AND THE LIKE. Officers, departments, boards,
commissions and employees referred to in this code shall mean officers,
departments, boards, commissions and employees of the Town of Marlinton, unless
the content clearly indicates otherwise.
   OWNER. As applied to any property, any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the
whole or of a part of such property.
   PERSON. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, society, club or any
other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual, unless restricted
within the context.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Goods, chattels, real and personal, money, credits,
investments and the evidence thereof.
   PRECEDING; FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PREMISES. When used as applicable to real property, shall include land and
buildings.
   PROPERTY. Real, personal and mixed property.
   REAL PROPERTY; REAL ESTATE; LAND; LANDS. Lands, buildings, tenements and
hereditaments and all rights thereto and interests therein, except chattel
interests.
   SHALL; MAY. The word SHALL is mandatory; the word MAY is permissive.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb line or, where there is
no curb, the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians. If there is no public area between the
lateral lines of the roadway and the abutting property line, then that area
immediately abutting the street line shall be considered SIDEWALK AREA.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK. A mark made by a signer or subscriber who
cannot write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by
a witness who shall write his or her own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s
name.
   STATE. The State of West Virginia.
   STATE CODE REFERENCES. References to the West Virginia Code shall be to the
Official Code of West Virginia, 1931, as amended and currently in effect.
   STREET. Alley, avenue, boulevard, highway, road, lane, viaduct, bridge and
approaches thereto, and all other public thoroughfares in the town, and the
entire width thereof between abutting property lines; also a sidewalk or
footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the intent of the Council.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, any person holding a
written or oral lease to or who occupies the whole or part of such building or
land, either alone or with others.
   TENSES. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; the future
includes the present.
   TOWN. The Town of Marlinton, West Virginia.
   TOWN CODE; THIS CODE. The Code of the Town of Marlinton, West Virginia, as
amended and currently in effect.
   WRITING. Includes any form of recorded message comprehensible by ordinary
visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or
authorized by this code or other ordinance or resolution of the town, it shall
be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided
otherwise.
(1991 Code, § 1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Acts by agent or deputy, see W. Va. Code § 2-2-5
   Computation of time, see W. Va. Code § 2-2-1(d)
   Construction of statutes, see W. Va. Code §§ 2-2-10, 2-2-10(a), 2-2-10(b),
2-2-10(d)
   Corresponding state law relating to construction of statutes, see W. Va.
Code § 2-2-10(c)
   Definition of “personal property” relating to construction of statutes, see
W. Va. Code § 2-2-10(q)
   Definition of “property” relating to the construction of statutes, see W.
Va. Code § 2-2-10(r)
   Definition of “real property” relating to the construction of statutes, see
W. Va. Code § 2-2-10(p)
   Definition of “writing” relating to the construction of statutes, see W. Va.
Code § 2-2-10(c)
   Definitions of “person” relating to the construction of statutes, see W. Va.
Code § 2-2-10(i)
   Definitions of words and phrases in the Municipal Code of West Virginia, see
W. Va. Code §§ 8-1-1, 8-1-2
   Month; year; fiscal year, see W. Va. Code § 2-2-4
   Oath; sworn, see W. Va. Code § 2-2-7
§ 10.03 PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions appearing in this code, insofar as they are substantially the
same as those of ordinances in effect immediately preceding the effective date
of this code and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof
and not as new enactments.
§ 10.04 CATCHLINES AND HEADINGS OF PORTIONS OF CODE.
   The chapter, subchapter, division and section headings of this code are
intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents thereof and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles thereof, nor as any part thereof; nor, unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such chapters,
subchapters, divisions or sections, including the headings or catchlines, are
amended or reenacted.
Statutory reference:
   Construction of statutes, see W. Va. Code §§ 2-2-10(z), 2-2-12
§ 10.05 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF THIS CODE, AND OF CODES AND OTHER REGULATIONS
ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections,
divisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code and of each
of the technical codes and other regulations herein adopted by reference are
severable, and that if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, division or
section of this code or of any such technical code or other regulations shall
be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall
not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs,
divisions and sections thereof, since they would have been enacted by the
Council without the incorporation therein of any such unconstitutional or
invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, division or section.
§ 10.06 EFFECT OF REPEAL OR EXPIRATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The repeal of an ordinance or its expiration, by virtue of any
provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense
committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced
before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.
   (B)   When any ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed,
the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that
effect.
Statutory reference:
   Effect of repeal or expiration of statutes, see W. Va. Code § 2-2-8
   Repeal of an act repealing a statute, see W. Va. Code § 2-2-9
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Wherever in this code or in any ordinance or resolution of the Council or in
any rule, regulation, notice or order promulgated by any officer or agency of
the town under authority duly vested in him, her or it, any act is prohibited
or is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or the doing of
any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or
an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided for the
violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this code or of any
such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation, notice or order shall be punished
by a reasonable fine set by the town judge, not exceeding the amount allowed by
West Virginia Code or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days or by
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation of this code or of any
such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation, notice or order shall continue,
except where otherwise provided, a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 3-3-2025)
Statutory reference:
   State law as to penalties authorized to be imposed, subject to certain
limitations, for violations of municipal ordinances and means available to
municipalities for the recovery thereof, see W. Va. Code §§ 8-11-1, 8-12-5(58)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GOVERNING BODY
      
31.   TOWN OFFICIALS
      
32.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
33.   TOWN ORGANIZATIONS
      
34.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
35.   TOWN EMPLOYEES
      
36.   ELECTIONS
      
37.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: GOVERNING BODY
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Definitions
   
30.02   Generally
Meetings
   
30.15   Time and place of regular meetings
   
30.16   Order of business
   
30.17   General rules of order
   
30.18   Sunshine law
Council
   
30.30   As governing body
   
30.31   Council’s compensation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTORNEY. The individual called attorney and charged from time to time with
the legal dealings of the town.
   GOVERNING BODY. The Mayor, Council and Recorder together charged with the
responsibility of enacting ordinances and determining the public policy of this
municipality.
   MAYOR. The individual called Mayor and who is the principal or chief
executive officer or chief administrator of the town.
   RECORDER. The individual called recorder and charged with the responsibility
of keeping the journal of the proceedings of the governing body of the town and
all other town records.
   TOWN. A term of art, notwithstanding any state or federal law to the
contrary, mean, include and be limited to the Class IV Town of Marlinton, as
classified in W. Va. Code § 8-1-3, heretofore incorporated as a municipal
corporation under the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 1-101)
§ 30.02 GENERALLY.
   In addition to the powers and authority granted by the United States
Constitution, the Constitution of the state and other general law not in
conflict therewith, the governing body of the town shall have plenary power and
authority therein by ordinance or resolution, as the case may require, and by
appropriate action thereon to provide for the following municipal services and
works for the public convenience; protection of the public health, public
safety and the protection of the public morals; maintenance of aesthetic and
cultural qualities of the town and its inhabitants; and power necessary to
carry out all enumerated or specific powers.
(Prior Code, § 1-101)
MEETINGS
§ 30.15 TIME AND PLACE OF REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The governing body shall hold regular monthly meetings at 7:30 p.m., on the
first Monday of each month at the municipal building.
(Prior Code, § 1-102)
§ 30.16 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   At each meeting of the governing body the following regular order of
business shall be observed unless dispensed with by a majority vote of the
members present:
   (A)   Call to order by Mayor;
   (B)   Roll call by the Recorder;
   (C)   Reading of minutes of the previous meeting by the Recorder and
approval of corrections;
   (D)   Grievance of citizens;
   (E)   Communications from the Mayor;
   (F)   Reports from committees, members of the governing body and other
officers;
   (G)   Old business;
   (H)   New business; and
   (I)   Adjournment.
(Prior Code, § 1-103)
§ 30.17 GENERAL RULES OF ORDER.
   The rules of order and parliamentary procedure contained in Robert’s Rules
of Order, Revised shall govern the transaction of business by and before the
governing body and its meeting in all cases to which they are applicable and in
which they are not inconsistent with provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 1-104)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal Code of West Virginia, see W. Va. Code Chapter 8
§ 30.18 SUNSHINE LAW.
   Pursuant to W. Va. Code § 6-9A-3, the town does hereby adopt the following
rules to make available, in advance, the time and place of all regularly
scheduled meetings of the Council, and the time and place and purpose of all
special meetings of the Council to the public and news media.
   (A)   A notice shall be posted by the Recorder at the front door of the Town
Hall stating the time and place fixed and entered of record by Council for the
holding of regularly scheduled meetings. If a particular regularly scheduled
meeting is cancelled, a notice of such cancellation shall be posted at the
front door of the Town Hall.
   (B)   (1)   A notice shall be posted by the Recorder at the front door of
the Town Hall at least two days before a special meeting is to be held.
      (2)   If the special meeting is cancelled a notice of such cancellation
shall be posted on the front door of the Town Hall.
(Prior Code, § 1-105)
COUNCIL
§ 30.30 AS GOVERNING BODY.
   The Council of the town, comprised of five elected members shall together
with the Mayor and Recorder, act as the governing body of the town and shall
enact ordinances, pass the resolutions, determine the public policy of said
town, and generally to exercise all powers as outlined in this Title III of
this code of ordinances, as it shall from time to time deem necessary.
(Prior Code, § 1-1A01)
§ 30.31 COUNCIL’S COMPENSATION.
   The five elected members of Council and their successors in office shall
receive such compensation as determined by resolution of the governing body
from time to time as deemed appropriate by the governing body, however, the
same shall be neither increased nor decreased during their term of office.
(Prior Code, § 1-1A02)
CHAPTER 31: TOWN OFFICIALS
Section
Mayor
   
31.01   Generally supervises town’s affairs
   
31.02   Executes town’s contracts
   
31.03   Mayor’s compensation
   
31.04   Mayor to be bonded
R\ecorder
   
31.15   To be bonded
   
31.16   Duties and powers
   
31.17   Recorder’s compensation
Town Attorney
   
31.30   Authority and duties
MAYOR
§ 31.01 GENERALLY SUPERVISES TOWN’S AFFAIRS.
   The Mayor shall be recognized as the chief executive officer and head of
government of the town. The Mayor shall exercise all powers and perform all
duties vested in or imposed by the Charter, ordinance, general law or rule
necessarily implied therefrom in order to carry out the functions of the
office.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 8-10-1
§ 31.02 EXECUTES TOWN’S CONTRACTS.
   The Mayor shall execute all contracts and deeds authorized by the governing
body.
(Prior Code, § 1-202)
§ 31.03 MAYOR’S COMPENSATION.
   The duly elected Mayor and his or her successors in office shall receive
such compensation as determined by resolution of the governing body from time
to time as deemed appropriate by the governing body, however, the same shall be
neither increased or decreased during his or her term of office.
(Prior Code, § 1-203)
§ 31.04 MAYOR TO BE BONDED.
   The Mayor shall be bonded in an amount set by Council from time to time,
with surety acceptable to the governing body, before assuming the duties of his
or her said office.
(Prior Code, § 1-204)
RECORDER
§ 31.15 TO BE BONDED.
   The Recorder shall be bonded in an amount set by Council from time to time,
with surety acceptable to the governing body, before assuming the duties of
this office.
(Prior Code, § 1-301)
§ 31.16 DUTIES AND POWERS.
   The Town Recorder shall:
   (A)   Be the chief custodian of all municipal documents and records of the
town, except as otherwise specified in this code;
   (B)   Act as the certifying officer of the town with respect to all official
documents requiring such certification and shall be the custodian of the
corporate seal of the town;
   (C)   Establish and maintain an orderly system for filing and archiving town
records in secure containers; prepare town letters, correspondence, and other
official documents of the town;
   (D)   Give notice of and attend all meetings of Council, keep the journal of
its proceedings, authenticate by signature and record in full in a book kept
for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions of the Council, prepare and keep
up to date an index of all such ordinances and resolutions, and keep all such
records available for public inspection;
   (E)   Make and certify copies of any ordinance, resolution or order of
Council;
   (F)   Prepare and cause to be served all notices required to be given to any
person, firm or corporation, and after the proper service and return of any
notice, to file and preserve the same;
   (G)   Perform such other duties as may be required by this code, by general
law, or by town ordinance or lawful order of the Mayor.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 8-10-3
§ 31.17 RECORDER’S COMPENSATION.
   The duly elected Recorder and his or her successors in office shall receive
such compensation as determined by resolution of the governing body from time
to time as deemed appropriate by the governing body, however, the same shall be
neither increased nor decreased during his or her term of office.
(Prior Code, § 1-304)
TOWN ATTORNEY
§ 31.30 AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.
   The Town Attorney shall be the legal advisor and counselor of the town and
for all officers of the town. He or she shall represent the town in all courts
and all proceedings in which the town, or any town officer or employee in his
or her official capacity, is a party, and he or she shall perform all such
duties incidental to his or her office as may be required of him or her by the
Town Council and Mayor. He or she shall also act as the parliamentarian for the
governing body. The Town Attorney shall receive such regular compensation, and
such fees for special services, as may be agreed upon by the Town Council and
the Town Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 1-801)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 8-10-1a
CHAPTER 32: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
Police Department; Generally
   
32.01   Chief of Police
   
32.02   Police officers subject to Chief’s orders
   
32.03   Police officers to preserve law and order and the like
   
32.04   Police officers to wear uniforms and be armed
   
32.05   When police officers to make arrests
   
32.06   Police officers may require assistance in making arrests
   
32.07   Disposition of persons arrested
   
32.08   Police Department records
Police Compensation in Training
   
32.20   Title
   
32.21   Written agreement
 
   
32.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Mayor over police officers, see W. Va. Code § 8-10-1
   Authority to establish, equip and maintain a Police Department, see W. Va.
Code § 8-14-1
   Execution of warrants and service of process by police officers anywhere in
the county, see W. Va. Code § 8-10-1
   Extraterritorial jurisdiction of town for police purposes, see W. Va. Code
§§ 8-12-5(43), 8-12-19
   Municipal Police Departments generally, see W. Va. Code §§ 8-14-1 et seq.
POLICE DEPARTMENT; GENERALLY
§ 32.01 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The office of the Chief of Police is hereby established. The Chief of Police
shall be the commanding officer of the Police Department and the Chief of
Police will be under the general direction of the Mayor. The Chief of Police
shall be responsible to the Mayor and to the Town Council for the general
administration of his or her Department.
(Prior Code, § 1-401)
§ 32.02 POLICE OFFICERS SUBJECT TO CHIEF’S ORDERS.
   All police officers shall obey and comply with such orders and
administrative rules and regulations as the Police Chief may officially issue.
(Prior Code, § 1-402)
§ 32.03 POLICE OFFICERS TO PRESERVE LAW AND ORDER AND THE LIKE.
   Police officers shall preserve law and order within the town. They shall
patrol the town and shall assist the municipal court during the trial of cases.
Police officers shall also promptly serve any legal process issued by the
municipal court.
(Prior Code, § 1-403)
§ 32.04 POLICE OFFICERS TO WEAR UNIFORMS AND BE ARMED.
   All police officers shall wear such uniform and badge as the governing body
shall authorize and shall carry a service pistol and billy club at all times on
duty unless otherwise expressly directed by the Chief for a special assignment.
(Prior Code, § 1-404)
§ 32.05 WHEN POLICE OFFICERS TO MAKE ARRESTS.
   Unless otherwise authorized or directed in this code or other applicable
law, an arrest of the person shall be made by a police officer in the following
cases:
   (A)   Whenever he or she is in possession of a warrant for the arrest of the
person;
   (B)   Whenever an offense is committed or a breach of the peace is
threatened in the officer’s presence by the person; and
   (C)   Whenever a felony has in fact been committed and the officer has
reasonable cause to believe the person has committed it.
(Prior Code, § 1-405)
§ 32.06 POLICE OFFICERS MAY REQUIRE ASSISTANCE IN MAKING ARRESTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully refuse to aid a police
officer in making a lawful arrest when such person’s assistance is requested by
the police officer and is reasonably necessary to effect the arrest.
(Prior Code, § 1-406) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.07 DISPOSITION OF PERSONS ARRESTED.
   Unless otherwise authorized by law, when any person is arrested for any
offense other than one involving drunkenness shall be brought before the
municipal court for immediate trial or allowed to post bond. When the arrested
person is drunk or when the municipal judge is not immediately available or the
alleged offender is not able to post the required bond, he or she shall be
confined.
(Prior Code, § 1-407)
§ 32.08 POLICE DEPARTMENT RECORDS.
   The Police Department shall keep a comprehensive and detailed daily record
in permanent form, showing:
   (1)   All known or reported offenses and/or crimes committed within the
corporate limits;
   (2)   All arrests made by police officers; and
   (3)   All police investigations made, funerals convoyed, fire calls answered
and other miscellaneous activities of the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 1-408)
POLICE COMPENSATION IN TRAINING
§ 32.20 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Ordinance Authorizing and Requiring
the Execution of an Agreement to Reimburse the Town of Marlinton for
Compensation Paid to Certain Employees of the Town upon such Employees’
Voluntary Termination of Employment”.
(Prior Code, § 1-1101) (Ord. passed 5-6-1985)
§ 32.21 WRITTEN AGREEMENT.
   Pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code § 30-29-8, as amended, that on and
after the effective date of this subchapter, all law enforcement officers
shall, before attending a law enforcement officers’ training academy, be
required to enter into a written agreement with the town, which agreement shall
require and specify that if such employee should voluntarily discontinue
employment with the town within one year following completion of such training
curriculum, such employee shall be obligated to pay to the town the pro rata
portion of the sum of such compensation which is equal to that part of such
year which the employee has chosen not to remain in the employ of the town.
(Prior Code, § 1-1102) (Ord. passed 5-6-1985)
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   A violation of any section of §§
32.01 through
32.08 shall be punishable by a fine in an amount set by Council from time to
time for each separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 1-409)
CHAPTER 33: TOWN ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Commissions
Municipal Building Commission
   
33.15   Creation
   
33.16   Membership; terms; compensation
   
33.17   Powers and authority
   
33.18   Limitation on acquisition/indebtedness
   
33.19   Financial obligation
Planning Commission
   
33.30   Authorization
   
33.31   Membership
   
33.32   Meetings
   
33.33   Quorum
   
33.34   Officers
   
33.35   Governing body’s duties
   
33.36   Planning Commission’s powers and duties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 COMMISSIONS.
   The municipality will readily perceive the necessity for the formulation of
certain commissions to better oversee the development of specific areas under
town supervision for example, a municipal park commission, a Planning
Commission, a utility commission or a human relations commission, among others.
MUNICIPAL BUILDING COMMISSION
§ 33.15 CREATION.
   There is hereby created, pursuant to W. Va. Code Chapter 8, Article 3 (W.
Va. Code §§ 8-33-1 et seq.), a municipal building commission to be known as the
Marlinton Building Commission, which shall be a public corporation having
perpetual existence and, except as hereinafter expressly limited, shall have
all of the power and authority provided in W. Va. Code Chapter 8, Article 33
(W. Va. Code §§ 8-33-1 et seq.), for such a commission.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to create, see W. Va. Code §§ 8-33-1 et seq.
§ 33.16 MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   All property, powers and duties and the management and control of the
Municipal Building Commission shall be vested in a board consisting of
representatives, to be known as Commissioners, appointed by the Town Council.
Such board shall consist of not less than three nor more than five members,
each to be appointed for a term of five years except for the initial
appointments, which shall be made as follows:
      (1)   The first Commissioner appointed shall serve a term of one year
from the date this section becomes law:
      (2)   The second Commissioner appointed shall serve a term of two years
from the date this section becomes law;
      (3)   The third Commissioner appointed shall serve a term of three years
from the date this section becomes law;
      (4)   The fourth Commissioner appointed shall serve a term of four years
from the date this section becomes law; and
      (5)   The fifth Commissioner appointed shall serve a term of five years
from the date this section becomes law.
   (B)   As the term of each such initial appointee expires, the successor to
fill the vacancy created by such expired term shall be appointed for a term of
five years. If any Commissioner appointed under this section fails or refuses
to qualify within 20 days of appointment or if the position of any Commissioner
becomes vacant for any reason prior to the expiration of his or her term of
office, a successor shall be appointed by the Town Council to complete the
unexpired portion of such term.
   (C)   No more than two-thirds of the total number of Commissioners actually
appointed shall be from the same political party; and no member of the board of
commissioners shall hold any office (other than the office of notary public) or
employment under the United States, the state, any county or political
subdivision, or any political party. Each Commissioner at the time of his or
her appointment shall be a resident of the town. No Commissioner shall receive
any compensation for his or her services as such, but each member shall be
reimbursed by the Commission for any reasonable and necessary expenses actually
incurred in the discharge of his or her duties as a member of the board.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 33.17 POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   Subject to the procedures and limitations set forth in this section, the
Municipal Building Commission shall have plenary power and authority to:
   (A)   Sue and be sued;
   (B)   Contract and be contracted with;
   (C)   Adopt, use and alter a common seal;
   (D)   Make and adopt all necessary, appropriate and lawful bylaws and rules
and regulations pertaining to its affairs;
   (E)   Elect such officers, appoint such committees and agents, and employ
and fix the compensation of such employees and contractors as may be necessary
for the conduct of the affairs and operations of the Commission;
   (F)   Acquire, purchase, own and hold any property, real or personal, and
acquire, construct, equip, maintain and operate public buildings, structures,
projects and appurtenant facilities, of any type for which the Town Council is
permitted by law to expend public funds;
   (G)   Apply for, receive and use grants-in-aid, donations and contributions
from any source, including, but not limited to, the United States or any of its
departments or agencies, and accept and use bequests, devises, gifts and
donations from any source whatsoever;
   (H)   Sell, encumber or dispose of any property, real or personal;
   (I)   Issue negotiable bonds, notes, debentures or other evidences of
indebtedness and provide for the rights of the holders; incur any proper
indebtedness; and issue any obligations and give any security which it may deem
necessary or advisable in connection with exercising powers as provided in this
section;
   (J)   Raise funds by the issuance of revenue bonds in the manner provided by
the applicable provisions of W. Va. Code Chapter 8, Article 16 (W. Va. Code §§
8-16-1 et seq.), without regard, to the extent provided in W. Va. Code § 8-33-
5, to the limitations specified in W. Va. Code § 8-33-5, it being hereby
expressly provided that for the purpose of the issuance and sale of revenue
bonds, such Commission is a governing body as that term is used in W. Va. Code
§ 8-33-5 only;
   (K)   Exercise the power of eminent domain in the manner provided in W. Va.
Code Chapter 54 (W. Va. Code §§ 54-1-1 et seq.) for business corporations, for
the purposes set forth in division (F) above, which purposes are declared to be
public purposes for which private property may be taken or damaged;
   (L)   Lease its property or any part of its property, for public purposes,
to such persons and upon such terms as the Commission deems proper; but when
any municipality or county commission is a lessee under any such lease, such
lease must contain a provision granting to such municipality or county
commission the option to terminate such lease during any fiscal year covered by
the lease; and
   (M)   Do all things reasonable and necessary to carry out the powers
specified in this section.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 33.18 LIMITATION ON ACQUISITION/INDEBTEDNESS.
   The Municipal Building Commission shall not incur any indebtedness or
acquire any property, real or personal, without the prior written consent of
the Town Council.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 33.19 FINANCIAL OBLIGATION.
   No indebtedness of any nature of the Municipal Building Commission shall
constitute an indebtedness of the town or a charge against any property of the
town. No indebtedness or obligation incurred by the Commission shall give any
right against any member of the governing body of the town or against any
member of the board or the Commission. The rights of creditors of the
Commission shall be solely against the Commission as a corporate body and shall
be satisfied only out of property held in its corporate capacity.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 33.30 AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be known as the “Town of Marlinton Planning
Commission Ordinance”, the purpose of which is to promote the orderly
development of its jurisdiction.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the
governing body and have certain regulatory powers over land planning. The
Planning Commission and the Town Council are authorized to carry out the
objectives and overall purposes of W. Va. Code Chapter 8A, Articles 1 though 3.
(Ord. 12-7, passed 11-4-2013)
§ 33.31 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Town Planning Commission shall consist of five members.
   (B)   The members of the Planning Commission must be:
      (1)   Residents of the town; and
      (2)   Qualified by knowledge and experience in matters pertaining to the
development of the municipality.
   (C)   At least three-fifths of all of the members must have been residents
of the municipality for at least three years prior to appointment.
   (D)   The members of the Planning Commission must fairly represent different
areas of interest, knowledge and expertise, including, but not limited to,
business, industry, labor, government and other relevant disciplines. One
member must be a member of the municipal governing body or a designee and one
member must be a member of the administrative department of the municipality or
a designee. The term of membership for these two members is the same as their
term of office.
   (E)   The town finds that there are persons willing to serve on the Planning
Commission who may also own interests in businesses that regularly conduct
business in front of or with the Planning Commission staff. Such persons may
have experience and expertise which would be valuable assets to the Planning
Commission. For those reasons, notwithstanding any other provisions in the West
Virginia Code to the contrary, any person employed by, owning an interest in or
otherwise associated with a business that regularly conducts business in front
of or with Planning Commission staff may also serve as a member of the Planning
Commission and shall not be disqualified from serving as a member because of a
conflict of interest as defined in W. Va. Code § 61-10-15 and shall not be
subject to prosecution under provisions of that chapter when the violation is
created solely as a result of his or her relationship with the business. This
member must recuse himself or herself from any vote, discussion, participation
or other activity regarding the conflicting issue.
   (F)   The town finds that there are persons willing to serve on the Planning
Commission who may also own interests in businesses who regularly conduct
business in front of or with the Planning Commission staff. Such persons may
have experience and expertise which would be valuable assets to the Planning
Commission. For those reasons, notwithstanding any other provisions in the West
Virginia Code to the contrary, any person employed by, owning an interest in or
otherwise associated with a business that regularly conducts business in front
of or with the Planning Commission staff may also serve as a member of the
Planning Commission and shall not be in violation of W. Va. Code 6B-2-5(g) if
the member recuses himself or herself from any vote, discussion, participation
or other activity regarding the conflicting issue; provided, that such members
do not constitute a majority of the members of the Planning Commission at the
same time.
   (G)   The remaining members of the Planning Commission first selected shall
serve respectively for terms of one year, two years and three years.
Thereafter, members shall serve three-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled for
an unexpired term and made in the same manner as the original selections were
made.
   (H)   The members of the Planning Commission shall serve without
compensation, but shall be reimbursed for all reasonable and necessary expenses
actually incurred in the performance of their official duties.
   (I)   Nominations for the Planning Commission membership shall be made by
the administrative authority (Mayor) and confirmed by the governing body (Town
Council).
   (J)   An individual may serve as a member of the Municipal Planning
Commission, a county planning commission, a multicounty planning commission, a
regional planning commission or a joint planning commission, at the same time.
   (K)   The governing body of the town may remove a member of the Planning
Commission for inactivity, neglect of duty or malfeasance. The member to be
removed, must be provided with a written statement of the reasons for removal
and an opportunity to be heard on the matter.
(Ord. 12-7, passed 11-4-2013)
§ 33.32 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall meet at least quarterly and may meet
more frequently at the request of the President or by two or more members.
   (B)   Notice for a special meeting must be in writing, include the date,
time and place of the special meeting, and be sent to all members at least two
days before the special meeting.
   (C)   Written notice of a special meeting is not required if the date, time
and place of the special meeting were set in a regular meeting.
(Ord. 12-7, passed 11-4-2013)
§ 33.33 QUORUM.
   The Planning Commission must have a quorum to conduct a meeting. A majority
of the members (five) of the Planning Commission is a quorum. No action of the
Planning Commission is official unless authorized by a majority of the members
present at a regular or properly called special meeting.
(Ord. 12-7, passed 11-4-2013)
§ 33.34 OFFICERS.
   At its first regular meeting each year, the Planning Commission shall elect
from its members a President and Vice President. The Vice President shall have
the power and authority to act as President of the Planning Commission during
the absence or disability of the President.
(Ord. 12-7, passed 11-4-2013)
§ 33.35 GOVERNING BODY’S DUTIES.
   (A)   The town shall provide the Planning Commission with:
      (1)   Suitable space for the holding of meetings and the preservation of
plans, maps, documents and accounts; and
      (2)   Appropriate money to defray the reasonable expenses of the Planning
Commission.
   (B)   The Planning Commission is authorized to accept gifts, funds and
monetary donations which will be deposited with the town in a special
nonreverting Planning Commission Fund to be available for expenditures by the
Planning Commission for the purpose designated by the donor. Donations of real
property may also be accepted.
(Ord. 12-7, passed 11-4-2013)
§ 33.36 PLANNING COMMISSION’S POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Town Planning Commission has the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Exercise general supervision for the administration of the affairs of
the Commission;
   (B)   Prescribe rules and regulations pertaining to administration,
investigations and hearings; provided, that the rules and regulation are
adopted by the governing body;
   (C)   Supervise the fiscal affairs and responsibilities of the Commission;
   (D)   With the consent from the governing body, hire employees necessary to
carry out the duties and responsibilities of the Planning Commission; provided,
that the governing body sets the salaries;
   (E)   Keep an accurate and complete record of all Planning Commission
proceedings;
   (F)   Record and file all bonds and contracts;
   (G)   Take responsibility for the custody and preservation of all papers and
documents of the Planning Commission;
   (H)   Make recommendations to governing body concerning planning;
   (I)   Formulate a long term comprehensive plan and present the plan to the
governing body for approval. For the purpose and guidelines of a comprehensive
plan, see W. Va. Code Chapter 8A, Article 3;
   (J)   Make an annual report to the governing body concerning the operation
of the Planning Commission and the status of planning within its jurisdiction;
   (K)   Prepare, publish and distribute reports, recommend ordinances and
other material relating to the activities authorized under this subchapter;
   (L)   Adopt a seal, and certify all official acts;
   (M)   Invoke any legal, equitable or special remedy for the enforcement of
the provisions of this subchapter or any ordinance, rule and regulation or any
action taken thereunder;
   (N)   Prepare and submit an annual budget to the governing body;
   (O)   If necessary, establish advisory committees;
   (P)   Delegate limited powers to a committee composed of one or more members
of the Commission; and
   (Q)   Contract for special or temporary services and professional counsel
with the approval of the governing body. Upon request, the County Prosecuting
Attorney, the County Surveyor or any other county employee may render
assistance and service to a Planning Commission without compensation.
(Ord. 12-7, passed 11-4-2013)
CHAPTER 34: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
   
34.01   Municipal court
   
34.02   Municipal judge
   
34.03   Maintenance of docket
   
34.04   Issuance of arrest warrants
   
34.05   Issuance of summonses
   
34.06   Issuance of subpoenas
   
34.07   Trial and disposition of cases
   
34.08   Appearance bonds authorized
   
34.09   Imposition and remission of fines and costs
   
34.10   Appeals
   
34.11   Bond amounts, conditions and forms
   
34.12   Disposition and report of fines and costs
   
34.13   Disturbance of proceedings
 
   
34.99   Penalty
§ 34.01 MUNICIPAL COURT.
   There is hereby established a court which shall be called the municipal
court. The municipal judge shall preside over said court.
(Prior Code, § 1-501)
§ 34.02 MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
   The governing body shall appoint a qualified person to the office of the
municipal judge. The municipal judge and municipal court shall have
jurisdiction, exercise the powers and perform the duties specified for
municipal courts and municipal judges respectively, in W. Va. Code § 8-10-2, as
amended.
(Prior Code, § 1-502)
§ 34.03 MAINTENANCE OF DOCKET.
   The municipal judge shall keep a complete docket of all matters coming
before him or her in his or her judicial capacity. The docket shall include for
each defendant such information as his or her name, warrant and/or summons
numbers, alleged offense, disposition, fines and costs imposed and whether
collected, whether committed to jail, and all other information that may be
relevant.
(Prior Code, § 1-503)
§ 34.04 ISSUANCE OF ARREST WARRANTS.
   In addition to the municipal judge, the Mayor and the Recorder shall have
the authority as herein set forth to issue warrants for all offenses committed
against this code and its amendments hereinafter adopted.
(Prior Code, § 1-504)
§ 34.05 ISSUANCE OF SUMMONSES.
   When a complaint of an alleged ordinance violation is made to the municipal
judge or such other official as specified in §
34.04, the judge or official may in his or her discretion, in lieu of issuing
an arrest warrant, issue a summons, ordering the alleged offender to personally
appear before the municipal court at a time specified therein to answer to the
charges against him or her. The summons shall contain a brief description of
the offense charged but need not set out verbatim the provisions of the
ordinance alleged to have been violated. Upon failure of any person to appear
before the municipal court as commanded in summons lawfully served on him or
her, the cause may be proceeded with ex parte, and the judgement of the court
shall be valid and binding subject to the defendant’s right of appeal.
(Prior Code, § 1-505)
§ 34.06 ISSUANCE OF SUBPOENAS.
   The municipal judge or those officials as specified in §
34.04, may subpoena as witnesses all persons whose testimony he or she believes
will be relevant and material to matters coming before the court, and it shall
be unlawful for any person lawfully served with such a subpoena to fail or
neglect to comply therewith.
(Prior Code, § 1-506) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.07 TRIAL AND DISPOSITION OF CASES.
   Every person charged with violating a municipal ordinance shall be entitled
to an immediate trial and disposition of his or her case, provided the
municipal court is in session or the municipal judge is reasonably available.
However, the provisions of this section shall not apply when the alleged
offender by reason of drunkenness or other incapacity, is not in a proper
condition or is not able to appear before the Court.
(Prior Code, § 1-507)
§ 34.08 APPEARANCE BONDS AUTHORIZED.
   When the municipal judge is not available or when an alleged offender
requests and has reasonable grounds for a delay in the trial of this case, he
or she may, in lieu of remaining in jail pending disposition of his or her
case, be allowed to post an appearance bond with the municipal judge or, in the
absence of the judge, with the proper official, provided such alleged offender
is not drunk or otherwise in need of protective custody.
(Prior Code, § 1-508)
§ 34.09 IMPOSITION AND REMISSION OF FINES AND COSTS.
   All fines and costs shall be imposed and recorded by the municipal judge on
the municipal court docket in open court. After any fine and costs have been so
imposed, the municipal judge shall have no power to remit or release the same
or any part thereof except when necessary to correct an error.
(Prior Code, § 1-509)
§ 34.10 APPEALS.
   Any defendant who is dissatisfied with any judgment of the municipal court
against him or her, within the ten days next after such judgment is rendered,
Sundays and legal holidays excepted, may appeal to the next term of the circuit
court upon posting an appeal bond as set forth in §
34.11.
(Prior Code, § 1-510)
Statutory reference:
   Appeals from judgment of a municipal judge, see W. Va. Code § 8-34-1
§ 34.11 BOND AMOUNTS, CONDITIONS AND FORMS.
   An appearance bond in any case before the municipal court shall be in such
amount as the municipal judge shall prescribe and shall be conditioned that the
defendant shall appear for trial before the municipal court at the stated time
and place. An appeal bond in any case shall be in the sum as determined by the
municipal judge, and shall be conditioned that if the Circuit Court shall find
against the appellant the fine and all costs of the trial and appeal shall be
promptly paid by the defendant and/or his or her sureties. An appearance or
appeal bond in any case may be made in the form of a cash deposit or by any
corporate surety company authorized to do business in the state or by two
private persons who individually own real property located within the county.
No other type bond shall be acceptable.
(Prior Code, § 1-511)
§ 34.12 DISPOSITION AND REPORT OF FINES AND COSTS.
   All funds coming into the hands of municipal judge in the form of fines,
costs and forfeitures shall be recorded by him or her and paid over weekly to
the municipality. At the end of each month, he or she shall submit to the
governing body a report accounting for the collection or non-collection of all
fines and costs imposed by his or her court during the current month and to
date for current fiscal year.
(Prior Code, § 1-512)
§ 34.13 DISTURBANCE OF PROCEEDINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to create any disturbance of any trial
before the municipal court by making loud or unusual noises, by using
indecorous, profane or blasphemous language, or by any distracting conduct
whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 1-513) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine in
an amount set by Council from time to time for each separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 1-514)
CHAPTER 35: TOWN EMPLOYEES
Section
Social Security for Officers and Employees
   
35.01   Policy and purpose as to coverage
   
35.02   Necessary agreements to be executed
   
35.03   Withholdings from salaries and wages
   
35.04   Appropriations for employer’s contributions
   
35.05   Records and reports to be made
Vacations and Sick Leave
   
35.20   Applicability of subchapter
   
35.21   Vacation leave
   
35.22   Sick leave
   
35.23   Emergency leave of absence
   
35.24   Holidays
Restrictions on Personnel
   
35.35   Business dealings
   
35.36   Acceptance of gratuities
   
35.37   Outside employment
   
35.38   Political activity
   
35.39   Use of town time, facilities and the like
   
35.40   Use of position
   
35.41   Strikes and unions
 
   
35.99   Penalty
SOCIAL SECURITY FOR OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 35.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE AS TO COVERAGE.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of this town to provide
for all eligible employees and officials of the town, whether employed in
connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the
system of federal old age and survivors insurance. In pursuance of said policy,
and for that purpose, the town shall take such action as may be required by
applicable state and federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1-601)
§ 35.02 NECESSARY AGREEMENTS TO BE EXECUTED.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all the necessary
agreements and amendments thereto with the state executive director of old age
insurance, as agent or agency, to secure coverage of employees and officials as
provided in §
35.01.
(Prior Code, § 1-602)
§ 35.03 WITHHOLDINGS FROM SALARIES AND WAGES.
   Withholdings from the salaries or wages of employees and officials for the
purposes provided in §
35.01 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may
be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be
paid over to the state or federal agency designated by said laws or
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1-603)
§ 35.04 APPROPRIATIONS FOR EMPLOYER’S CONTRIBUTIONS.
   There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times
as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and
shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by said laws or
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1-604)
§ 35.05 RECORDS AND REPORTS TO BE MADE.
   The town shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by
applicable state and federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1-605)
VACATIONS AND SICK LEAVE
§ 35.20 APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter shall apply to all full-time (those working 40 hours per
week) town officers and employees except those operating under the jurisdiction
of a school, utility or other separate board or commission.
(Prior Code, § 1-701)
§ 35.21 VACATION LEAVE.
   (A)   All officers and employees shall be given vacation leave, with pay,
for each full calendar year of employment after one full year of employment and
shall receive ten working days of same. Such vacation leave shall be taken at a
time approved by the Mayor or such other officer as he or she may designate.
Such officer or employee shall provide to the Mayor or his or her designate
written notice of his or her intent to take said vacation leave at least ten
days prior to the first day of his or her anticipated vacation.
   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee accumulate vacation leave in
excess of ten days with losing same.
(Prior Code, § 1-702)
§ 35.22 SICK LEAVE.
   All officers and employees shall be given credit of one and one-fourth
working days of sick leave with pay for each full calendar month employment.
Sick leave shall be taken only when approved by the Mayor or such other officer
as he or she may designate. Sick leave, up to the number of days accrued, shall
be approved for all officers and employees whose absence from duty is due to
illness, bodily injury, exposure to contagious disease or death in the
immediate family of the officer or employee. However, the Mayor may, in his or
her discretion, require doctor’s certificates or other satisfactory evidence
that absences are properly chargeable as sick leave. The maximum credit for
accrued sick leave under the provisions of this section shall be 18 working
days. However any officer or employee who misses work on sick leave on either a
Friday or Monday or on the day next preceding or next succeeding a holiday or
vacation leave or emergency leave shall be required to present unto the Mayor
or his or her designate a written physician’s certification.
(Prior Code, § 1-703)
§ 35.23 EMERGENCY LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
   In addition to all vacation and sick leave heretofore provided for all
officers and employees shall be granted an emergency leave of absence of up to
one week without pay or excuse therefore. Such officer or employee shall give,
if possible, to the Mayor or his or her appropriate designate 48 hours’ notice
of his or her intention to take said leave of absence.
(Prior Code, § 1-704)
§ 35.24 HOLIDAYS.
   All officers and employees shall be given one day off on the day recognized
by the state for the following holidays: New Years Day; Memorial; Independence;
Labor; Thanksgiving; and Christmas. No other holidays shall be recognized
except by proclamation of the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 1-705)
RESTRICTIONS ON PERSONNEL
§ 35.35 BUSINESS DEALINGS.
   Except for the receipt of such compensation as may be lawfully provided for
the performance of his or her town duties, it shall be unlawful for any town
officer or employee to be privately interested in, or to profit, directly or
indirectly, from business dealings with the town.
(Prior Code, § 1-901)
§ 35.36 ACCEPTANCE OF GRATUITIES.
   No town officer or employee shall accept any money or other consideration or
favor from anyone other than the town for the performance of an act which he or
she would be required or expected to perform in the regular course of his or
her duties; nor shall any officer or employee accept, directly or indirectly,
any gift, gratuity or favor of any kind which might reasonably be interpreted
as an attempt to influence his or her actions with respect to town business.
(Prior Code, § 1-902)
§ 35.37 OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
   No full-time officer or employee of the town shall accept any outside
employment without written authorization. The Mayor shall not grant such
authorization if the work is likely to interfere with the satisfactory
performance of the officer’s or employee’s duties, or is incompatible with his
or her town employment, or is likely to cast discredit upon or create
embarrassment for the town.
(Prior Code, § 1-903)
§ 35.38 POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
   Town officers and employees may individually exercise their right to vote
and privately express their political views as citizens. No town officer or
employee shall solicit political campaign contributions or engage in or
actively participate in any political campaign. These restrictions shall not
apply to elective officials.
(Prior Code, § 1-904)
§ 35.39 USE OF TOWN TIME, FACILITIES AND THE LIKE.
   No town officer or employee shall use or authorize the use of town time,
facilities, equipment or supplies, unless the town is paid at such rates as are
normally charged by private sources for comparable services.
(Prior Code, § 1-905)
§ 35.40 USE OF POSITION.
   No town officer or employee shall make or attempt to make private purchases,
for cash or otherwise, in the name of the town, nor shall he or she otherwise
use or attempt to use his or her position to secure unwarranted privileges or
exemptions for himself, herself or others.
(Prior Code, § 1-906)
§ 35.41 STRIKES AND UNIONS.
   No town officer or employee shall participate in any strike against the town
nor shall he or she join, be a member of, or solicit any other town officer or
employee to join any labor union which authorizes the use of strikes by
government employees.
(Prior Code, § 1-907)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   A violation of §§
35.35 through
35.41 shall be punishable by a fine in an amount set by Council from time to
time for each separate violation or punishable by dismissal by governing body.
(Prior Code, § 1-908)
CHAPTER 36: ELECTIONS
Section
   
36.01   The general election year
   
36.02   Officials to be elected and term of office
   
36.03   Eligibility to hold office
   
36.04   Filing fee
   
36.05   Declaration by candidates
   
36.06   Preparation of the master ballot
   
36.07   Withdrawing name from ballot
   
36.08   Printing of the ballots
   
36.09   Polling place
   
36.10   Duties of incumbent official
   
36.11   The election
   
36.12   Voter registration
   
36.13   Rules of the polling place
   
36.14   Poll clerks
   
36.15   Procedures at the polling place
   
36.16   Absentee ballots
   
36.17   Canvass recount
   
36.18   Vacating and refilling vacant seat
§ 36.01 THE GENERAL ELECTION YEAR.
   The election year shall occur every four years beginning in 2015. Thus
elections will be held in 2015, 2019, 2023 and so on.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 8-5-5
§ 36.02 OFFICIALS TO BE ELECTED AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   During the election there shall be elected one Mayor, one Recorder and
five Council members.
   (B)   They shall serve a four-year term starting July 1 of the year of the
election and terminate June 30 four years hence.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 8-5-9
§ 36.03 ELIGIBILITY TO HOLD OFFICE.
   Unless otherwise provided by Charter provision or ordinance, the Mayor,
Recorder and Council members must be residents of the Town of Marlinton, must
be qualified voters entitled to vote for members of its governing body.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 8-5-7
§ 36.04 FILING FEE.
   The filing fee shall be 3% of the gross annual salary for the office being
filed.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
§ 36.05 DECLARATION BY CANDIDATES.
   Any persons desiring to run for any office may submit their names to the
Town Recorder no sooner than the second Monday in January and no later than 4:
00 p.m. on the first Monday following the first Saturday of February of the
year of the election. This desire must be expressed in writing, and before a
third party as a witness.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 3-5-7
§ 36.06 PREPARATION OF THE MASTER BALLOT.
   Shall be done per applicable state code.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
§ 36.07 WITHDRAWING NAME FROM BALLOT.
   Shall be done per applicable state code.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 3-5-11
§ 36.08 PRINTING OF THE BALLOTS.
   Shall be done per applicable state code.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 3-1-21a
§ 36.09 POLLING PLACE.
   The Municipal Building at 709 Second Avenue, Marlinton, West Virginia, shall
be the only poll in the Town of Marlinton for town elections. For town
elections, the town shall be a single precinct, that being all of the property
within the town boundary as defined in the office of the Clerk of Pocahontas
County.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
§ 36.10 DUTIES OF INCUMBENT OFFICIAL.
   To select the place for the poll, to the equipment to operate the poll
properly, to select of poll clerks, master poll sheet and preparation of blank
master ballot sheet shall be provided by the town officials. Also address
envelopes for absentee ballots.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
§ 36.11 THE ELECTION.
   The public election will be held on the second Tuesday of June of the year
of the election. The polls will be opened at 6:30 a.m. and close at 7:30 p.m.
prevailing time. Any person who is about to enter the polling place or who is
in the polling place may vote after the polls close.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
§ 36.12 VOTER REGISTRATION.
   The registration of voters of the town shall be integrated with the system
of permanent registration of voters established by W. Va. Code §§ 3-2-1 et seq.
No voter, even if otherwise qualified, shall be permitted to vote an
unchallenged ballot at any election within the municipality unless he or she is
duly registered under the provisions of state law. The registration record
shall remain in the possession of the Clerk of the County Commission, except
for use in municipal elections.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 8-5-13
§ 36.13 RULES OF THE POLLING PLACE.
   A canvass recount shall be done per applicable state code.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
§ 36.14 POLL CLERKS.
   A canvass recount shall be done per applicable state code.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
§ 36.15 PROCEDURES AT THE POLLING PLACE.
   A canvass recount shall be done per applicable state code.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
§ 36.16 ABSENTEE BALLOTS.
   A canvass recount shall be done per applicable state code.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code §§ 3-3-2 and 3-3-5
§ 36.17 CANVASS RECOUNT.
   A canvass recount shall be done per applicable state code.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
§ 36.18 VACATING AND REFILLING VACANT SEAT.
   A canvass recount shall be done per applicable state code.
   (A)   Being a member of the Town Council does not preclude a person from
being appointed to a higher position in the Town Council. The candidate may
vote. In the case of a tie vote, the outcome shall be determined lot such as
drawing names from a “hat”.
   (B)   Officials so selected will be sworn in as soon as possible and take
office forthwith to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term only.
(Ord. passed 11-4-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 8-10-3
CHAPTER 37: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
37.01   Fund balance policy
   
37.02   Purchasing without competitive bidding
Hotel Occupancy Tax
   
37.15   General
   
37.16   Administration
   
37.17   Compliance
   
37.18   Enforcement
   
37.19   Refunds
Municipal Sales and Use Taxes
   
37.30   Town Council findings
   
37.31   Definitions
   
37.32   Imposition of municipal sales and service tax
   
37.33   Imposition of municipal use tax
   
37.34   Calculation of tax on fractional parts of dollar
   
37.35   State and local tax bases
   
37.36   Exceptions
   
37.37   Credit against municipal use tax
   
37.38   Tax cumulative
   
37.39   Local rate and boundary database; changes
   
37.40   State level administration
   
37.41   Administrative procedures
   
37.42   Automatic updating
   
37.43   Deposit of taxes collected in General Revenue Fund
 
   
37.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.01 FUND BALANCE POLICY.
   (A)   Fund balance measures the net financial resources available to finance
expenditures of future periods.
   (B)   Currently fund balance is classified as “reserved” or “unreserved”.
GASB 54 changes how fund balance is reported. The hierarchy of five possible
GASB 54 classifications is as follows:
      (1)   Non-spendable fund balance includes amounts not in spendable form,
such as inventory, or amounts required to be maintained intact legally or
contractually;
      (2)   Restricted fund balance includes amounts constrained for a specific
purpose by external parties, Constitution provision or enabling legislation;
      (3)   Committed fund balance includes amounts constrained for a specific
purpose pursuant to constraints imposed by formal action of Town Council. It
would require action by the same group to remove or change the constraints
placed on the resources;
      (4)   Assigned fund balance includes General Fund amounts constrained by
the town intended to be used for specific purposed; but are neither restricted
nor committed; and
      (5)   Unassigned fund balance is the residual classification for the
General Fund.
   (C)   In circumstances where an expenditure is to be made for a purpose for
which amounts are available in multiple fund balance classifications, the order
in which resources will be expended is as follows: restricted fund balance;
followed by committed fund balance; assigned fund balance; and lastly
unassigned fund balance.
(Res. passed 3-21-2012)
§ 37.02 PURCHASING WITHOUT COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
   The town may purchase materials, supplies and equipment, and contract for
construction, maintenance and improvement of facilities without competitive
bidding for any purchase not exceeding the sum of $25,000.
(Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
§ 37.15 GENERAL.
   In order to regulate and enforce such tax, the Town Council does hereby
promulgate these rules, regulations and administrative procedures for the
assessment, collection and refund of the hotel occupancy tax.
   (A)   The provisions of W. Va. Code §§ 7-18-1 through 7-18-15 are hereby
adopted in toto as if set out herein verbatim.
   (B)   All words used herein shall have the meaning therefore as set out in
W. Va. Code §§ 7-18-3 and 7-18-15 and where no definition is set out, such word
shall have its ordinary and common meaning.
   (C)   Any and all persons, firms and corporations who offer to the public
for consideration sleeping accommodations within the corporate limits of the
town are subject to the hotel occupancy tax.
   (D)   The hotel occupancy tax is due and payable on a monthly basis and a
hotel occupancy tax return must be filed on a monthly basis on or before the
fifteenth day of the month reporting and tendering the hotel occupancy tax
collected for the preceding month by all persons subject to the tax.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2018)
§ 37.16 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be the town’s agent for the administration and
collection of the hotel occupancy tax.
   (B)   The Mayor shall promulgate and issue all return forms and refund forms
and shall submit any and all forms to the Town Council for approval.
   (C)   All return forms and payments for hotel occupancy tax shall be filed
with and received by the Mayor.
   (D)   The town shall retain copies of all returns and refund forms filed for
hotel occupancy tax for a period of three years.
   (E)   The Mayor shall handle the collection, payout and refund of hotel
occupancy tax.
   (F)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to enter into any cooperative
agreements with the Sheriff of Pocahontas County for the assessment collection
and refund of hotel occupancy tax within the town.
   (G)   In addition to the collection of all hotel occupancy tax due to the
town, the Mayor is hereby authorized and shall collect all fines, fees,
penalties and interest set forth in this order and due upon all hotel occupancy
tax returns and payments and shall have the authority to initiate civil suits,
initiate criminal investigations and to compromise, where appropriate, hotel
occupancy tax amounts due and payable. In the discharge of these duties the
Mayor is hereby authorized to investigate compliance with this order; conduct
surveys and questionnaires relating to liability under this order and
compliance herewith; and to conduct random examinations and audits to ensure
compliance with this order.
   (H)   The Mayor shall, in January of each year following adoption of this
order, publish in the Pocahontas Times a notice advising as to the hotel
occupancy tax and the application and compliance requirements of this order.
Specifically, such notice shall inform all persons that the hotel occupancy tax
applies to, “any person who offers to the public for consideration sleeping
accommodations which includes, but is not limited to, boarding houses, hotels,
motels, inns, courts, condominiums, lodges, cabins, tourist homes and private
homes providing three or more rooms or private homes providing less than three
rooms for more than ten days in a calendar year, within the town.” Such notice
shall include a statement as to the civil and criminal liability for failure or
refusal to comply with this order to collect, report and pay over hotel
occupancy tax due the town. The Mayor shall submit such notice to the Town
Council for approval. The Mayor may, after consultation and approval of the
Town Council declare an “amnesty” period for persons required to comply with
this order and had heretofore failed to do so whereby such persons may, without
exposure to prosecution, properly register with the Mayor and to pay any and
all amounts due the town.
   (I)   The Mayor shall create and maintain a registry that shall contain all
necessary information regarding all persons and entities within the town
subject to hotel occupancy tax and this order. The Mayor may purchase and
utilize such software as is available to enable the Mayor to access and monitor
rental sites on the internet to ensure compliance with this order. The Mayor is
hereby authorized to create and promulgate such documents and forms needful and
necessary for the enforcement of this order and shall submit such documents and
forms to the Town Council for approval.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2018)
§ 37.17 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   All persons (as defined by W. Va. Code § 7-18-3) who offer to the
public, sleeping accommodations for consideration within the town and not
specifically excluded under W. Va. Code § 7-18-15, are subject to compliance
with this order and liable for the hotel occupancy tax of the town.
   (B)   The hotel occupancy tax shall be paid monthly to the town. The hotel
occupancy tax shall be paid by the consumer on room occupancy only and
collected by the person offering the sleeping accommodations and shall be set
out separately on all documents and records of the transaction.
   (C)   All persons subject to this order shall pay all hotel occupancy tax
due to the town and shall be personally liable for failure or refusal to do so.
   (D)   All persons subject to this order shall maintain complete and accurate
records of all hotel occupancy tax transactions and the same shall be made
available to the Mayor upon request at all reasonable times.
   (E)   All persons subject to this order shall file, with the town, on the
form prescribed by the Mayor, a return on or before the fifteenth day of each
month for the preceding month, setting out all hotel occupancy transactions for
that month. Any person who shall fail to file on or before the fifteenth day of
the succeeding month, a return for any month wherein hotel occupancy tax was
accrued or paid in addition to the tax owed and any additions thereto, shall be
subject to a late filing fine of $15 per month until such return is properly
filed with the town. From and after the filing of a return by any person
subject to hotel occupancy tax for the first time, such person shall thereafter
file a return for each and every month whether hotel occupancy tax is due or
not until such time as such person is no longer subject to hotel occupancy tax.
   (F)   All persons subject to this order and therefore required to file a
monthly hotel occupancy tax return shall also pay over to the town all hotel
occupancy tax collected by such persons on or before the fifteenth day of each
month for the preceding month. Any person who shall fail to pay over to the
town all hotel occupancy tax due on or before the fifteenth day of the
succeeding month shall, in addition to the tax owed and any additions thereto,
shall be subject to a late payment fine of $15.
   (G)   In addition to the foregoing fines for late filing and late payment of
hotel occupancy tax, there is hereby imposed a delinquency penalty of 5% on all
hotel occupancy tax due for the delinquent period as well as an additional 1%
delinquency penalty per month thereafter until paid.
   (H)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to prepare and issue such notices of
noncompliance or delinquency that the Mayor deems to be in the best interest of
the town but the Mayor is not required to issue any such notices.
   (I)   The Mayor shall on a regular basis but no less than one time a year
present a report to the Town Council as to the status of the hotel occupancy
tax for the town. Such report shall contain a statement as to collections of
hotel occupancy tax, fines, penalties, enforcement efforts, criminal
prosecutions and such other information deemed appropriate by the Mayor or
requested by the Town Council.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2018)
§ 37.18 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Mayor shall have the power and authority to direct all persons
subject to this order to produce to the town all books and records regarding
sleeping accommodations offered to the public for consideration and/or all
books and records of hotel occupancy tax. All persons subject to hotel
occupancy tax in the town shall maintain such books and records required by
this order for a period of three years.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to conduct at town expense a
preliminary review or limited routine audit of the books and records of any
person who offers sleeping accommodations to the public for consideration and/
or of all persons subject to this order. In the event the Mayor shall determine
that a full and complete audit of such books and records is warranted, the
Mayor is hereby authorized to contract with the State Auditor or other auditing
service to conduct such audit(s). In the event any such audit shall disclose a
violation of the hotel occupancy tax statute or this order, all costs
associated with such audit, including the cost of the audit itself shall be
assessed against the person or entity so audited and shall be paid, in full, by
the fifteenth day of the month following the month within which an invoice for
such costs are provided to such person or entity by the Mayor. Any person or
entity who shall fail to pay such costs on or before the fifteenth day of the
month following the month wherein the person or entity is provided an invoice
therefore by the town, shall be subject to a fine of $500 which shall be in
addition to all other amounts due under this order.
   (C)   The failure or refusal of any person subject to the hotel occupancy
tax to produce all records for examination when demanded by the Mayor or for
audit purposes shall subject such person to a noncompliance fine of $100 per
day, until full compliance. The Mayor shall prepare and provide to the person a
letter setting out all items needful and necessary for examination or audit and
set out therein a date and time certain for such examination and/or audit. The
items requested in such letter and the date set forth in such letter shall
establish the basis for any fine.
   (D)   All persons subject to hotel occupancy tax and this order shall bear
the legal responsibility to properly and timely register as such with the town;
to properly and timely file with the town the monthly return established by the
Mayor; and, to properly and timely remit all hotel occupancy tax due to the
town as required herein. In the event the Mayor shall determine by
investigation any willful violation of the hotel occupancy statute or this
order the Mayor shall forthwith provide such information and investigation to
the prosecuting attorney for prosecution of such person under W. Va. Code § 7-
18-15. Such prosecution shall be in addition to any and all fines and monetary
penalties set out in this order.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2018)
§ 37.19 REFUNDS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall create and establish forms for refunds allowable under
the hotel occupancy tax statute and shall make such forms available to the
public.
   (B)   The Mayor shall establish a procedure for refunds allowable under the
hotel occupancy tax statute and shall inform the public of such procedure upon
request.
   (C)   The Mayor shall conduct a proper accounting upon any request for
refund and maintain a ledger which memorializes all payments made and refunds
requested and granted under the hotel occupancy tax statute.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2018)
MUNICIPAL SALES AND USE TAXES
§ 37.30 TOWN COUNCIL FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Municipal Home Rule Board, on July 17, 2024, approved the amended
home rule plan submitted by the town, thereby allowing the town to adopt a
municipal sales and service tax and a municipal use tax pursuant to W. Va. Code
§ 8-1-5a without the limiting restrictions in W. Va. Code §§ 8-13C-1 et seq. In
accordance with its amended home rule plan, the Town Council hereby finds and
declares that the adoption by this town for its municipal sales and service tax
and its municipal use tax provisions of the West Virginia Code, as amended,
relating to imposition, administration, collection and enforcement of the state
consumers sales and service tax codified in W. Va. Code §§ 11-15-1 et seq., the
state use tax codified in W. Va. Code §§ 11-15A-1 et seq. and the Streamlined
Sales and Use Tax Act codified in W. Va. Code §§ 11-15B-1 et seq. will:
      (1)   Simplify collection of the town’s sales and use taxes;
      (2)   Simplify preparation of municipal sales and use tax returns by
taxpayers; and
      (3)   Improve enforcement of the town’s sales and use taxes.
   (B)   The Town Council does, therefore, declare that this subchapter be
construed so as to accomplish the foregoing purposes.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024)
§ 37.31 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Terms used in this subchapter or in the administration, collection and
enforcement of the taxes imposed by this subchapter and not otherwise defined
in this subchapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in W. Va. Code
Chapter 11, Articles 9, 10, 15, 15A and 15B, as amended.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BUSINESS. Includes all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in
by any person with the object of gain or economic benefit, direct or indirect,
and all activities of the state and its political subdivisions, which involve
sales of tangible personal property or the rendering of services when those
service activities compete with or may compete with the activities of other
persons.
      CODE OF WEST VIRGINIA or W. VA. CODE. The West Virginia Code, as amended
from time to time by the West Virginia Legislature.
      MUNICIPALITY or THIS MUNICIPALITY. The Municipality of Marlinton, West
Virginia.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership or any other legal entity,
including this state or its political subdivisions or an agency of either, or
the guardian, trustee, committee, executor or administrator of any person.
      PURCHASE. Any transfer, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in
any manner or by any means whatsoever, for a consideration.
      PURCHASE PRICE. The measure subject to the taxes imposed by this
subchapter and has the same meaning as SALES PRICE.
      PURCHASER. A person who purchases tangible personal property, custom
software or a service taxed by this subchapter.
      SALE, SALES or SELLING. Have the meaning ascribed to those terms in W.
Va. Code Chapter 11, Article 15B.
      SALES AND USE TAXES. The taxes imposed by §§
37.32 and
37.33.
      SALES PRICE. Has the meaning ascribed to that term in W. Va. Code Chapter
11, Article 15B.
      SALES TAX. The tax levied by § 37.32.
      SERVICE or SELECTED SERVICE. Have the meaning ascribed to those terms in
W. Va. Code Chapter 11, Article 15B.
      STATE SALES TAX. The tax levied by W. Va. Code Chapter 11, Article 15.
      STATE USE TAX. The tax levied by W. Va. Code Chapter 11, Article 15A, as
amended.
      TAX. The taxes imposed by this subchapter and includes additions to tax,
interest and penalties levied under W. Va. Code, Chapter 11, Article 10, as
amended.
      TAX COMMISSIONER. The chief executive office of the Tax Division of the
State Department of Revenue, as provided in W. Va. Code § 11-1-1.
      THIS STATE. The State of West Virginia.
      TOWN or THIS TOWN. The Town of Marlinton, West Virginia.
      ULTIMATE CONSUMER or CONSUMER. A person who uses or consumes services,
tangible personal property or custom software.
      USE.
         (a)   For purposes of the tax imposed by §
37.33, means and includes:
            1.   The exercise by any person of any right or power over tangible
personal property or custom software incident to the ownership, possession or
enjoyment of the property, or by any transaction in which possession of or the
exercise of any right or power over tangible personal property, custom software
or the result of a taxable service is acquired for a consideration, including
any lease, rental or conditional sale of tangible personal property or custom
software; or
            2.   The use or enjoyment in this state of the result of a taxable
service. As used in this definition, ENJOYMENT includes a purchaser’s right to
direct the disposition of the property or the use of the taxable service,
whether or not the purchaser has possession of the property.
         (b)   The term USE does not include the keeping, retaining or
exercising any right or power over tangible personal property, custom software
or the result of a taxable service for the purpose of subsequently transporting
it outside the town for use thereafter solely outside this town.
      USE TAX. The tax imposed by §
37.33.
      VENDOR. Any person engaged in this town in furnishing services taxed by
this subchapter or making sales of tangible personal property or custom
software. VENDOR and SELLER are used interchangeably in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024)
§ 37.32 IMPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL SALES AND SERVICE TAX.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property or custom software
and for the privilege of furnishing certain selected services, a vendor doing
business in this town shall collect from the purchaser the taxes imposed by
this section and pay the amount of taxes collected to the Tax Commissioner at
the same time and in the same manner as the consumers sales and service tax
imposed by W. Va. Code Chapter 11, Article 15, as amended, are paid to the Tax
Commissioner. The rate of tax shall be 1% of the sales price, as defined in §
37.31, of the tangible personal property, custom software or taxable service
purchased or leased.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024) Penalty, see § 37.99
§ 37.33 IMPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL USE TAX.
   An excise tax is hereby levied and imposed on the use in this town of
tangible personal property, custom software and the results of taxable
services, to be collected and paid to the Tax Commissioner as agent for the
town in the same manner that state use tax is collected under W. Va. Code
Chapter 11, Articles 15A and 15B, as amended, and remitted to the Tax
Commissioner. The rate of tax shall be 1% of the purchase price, as defined in
§
37.31, of the tangible personal property, custom software or taxable service
used within the town.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024) Penalty, see § 37.99
§ 37.34 CALCULATION OF TAX ON FRACTIONAL PARTS OF DOLLAR.
   The tax computation under §§
37.32 and
37.33 shall be carried to the third decimal place and the tax rounded up to the
next whole cent whenever the third decimal place is greater than four and
rounded down to the lower whole cent whenever the third decimal place is four
or less. The vendor may elect to compute the tax due on a transaction on a per
item basis or on an invoice basis, provided the method used is consistently
used during the reporting period but the method used shall be the same as that
used for purposes of computing the state sales or use tax.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024)
§ 37.35 STATE AND LOCAL TAX BASES.
   The taxable base of the taxes imposed by §§
37.32 and
37.33 shall be identical to the sales and use tax base of this state, except as
provided in §
37.36, unless otherwise prohibited by federal law, as required by W. Va. Code §
11-15B-34.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024)
§ 37.36 EXCEPTIONS.
   The taxes imposed by this subchapter do not apply to:
   (A)   The sale or use of motor fuel as defined in W. Va. Code Chapter 11,
Article 14C, as amended;
   (B)   The sale or use of motor vehicles upon which the tax imposed by W. Va.
Code § 11-15-3c is paid;
   (C)   The purchase or use of any tangible personal property, custom software
or service that the town is prohibited from taxing under the laws of this state
or of the United States;
   (D)   The sales tax imposed by §
37.32 does not apply to any transaction that is exempt from the tax imposed by
W. Va. Code Chapter 11, Article 15; and
   (E)   The use tax imposed by §
37.33 does not apply to any purchase upon which the sales tax imposed by §
37.32 has been paid.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024)
§ 37.37 CREDIT AGAINST MUNICIPAL USE TAX.
   (A)   A person is entitled to a credit against the use tax imposed by §
37.33 on the use of a particular item of tangible personal property, custom
software or results of a taxable service equal to the amount, if any, of sales
tax lawfully paid to another municipality for the acquisition of that property,
custom software or service; provided, that the amount of credit allowed may not
exceed the amount of use tax imposed by §
37.33 on the use of the tangible personal property, custom software or results
of the taxable service in this town.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MUNICIPALITY. Includes municipalities of this state or of any other state
of the United States.
      SALES TAX. Includes a sales tax or compensating use tax imposed on the
sale or use of tangible personal property, custom software or the results of a
taxable service by the municipality in which the sale occurred.
   (C)   No credit is allowed under this section for payment of any sales or
use taxes imposed by this state or any other state. For purposes of this
division (C), STATE includes the 50 states of the United States and the
District of Columbia but does not include any of the several territories
organized by Congress.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024) Penalty, see § 37.99
§ 37.38 TAX CUMULATIVE.
   The taxes imposed by this subchapter are in addition to other taxes imposed
on the sale or use of tangible personal property, custom software or taxable
services, including, but not limited to, the state consumers sales and service
tax imposed by W. Va. Code Chapter 11, Article 15; the state use tax imposed by
W. Va. Code Chapter 11, Article 15A; the public utility tax imposed by this
town pursuant to W. Va. Code § 8-13-5a; the amusement tax imposed by this town
pursuant to W. Va. Code § 8-13-6; the tax on sales of alcoholic liquors and
wine imposed by this town pursuant to W. Va. Code § 8-13-7; the hotel occupancy
tax imposed by town pursuant to W. Va. Code Chapter 7, Article 18; and the
special district excise taxes imposed by a county pursuant to W. Va. Code §§ 7-
22-1 et seq. or a municipality pursuant to W. Va. Code §§ 8-38-1 et seq.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024)
§ 37.39 LOCAL RATE AND BOUNDARY DATABASE; CHANGES.
   (A)   The Tax Commissioner is required by W. Va. Code § 11-15B-35 to
maintain a database for all jurisdictions levying a sales or use tax in this
state. The Town Treasurer shall furnish the Tax Commissioner with information
the Tax Commissioner requires for that database that will allow the Tax
Commissioner to maintain a database that assigns each five-digit and nine-digit
zip code within the town to the proper rate of tax. If any nine-digit zip code
area includes area outside this town, the single state and local rate assigned
to that area in the Tax Commissioner’s database will be the lowest rate
applicable to that area; provided, that when sales occur at and are sourced to
a physical location of the seller located in the town in that nine-digit zip
code area, the seller shall collect the tax imposed by §
37.32.
   (B)   Whenever boundaries of the town change, whether by annexation or de-
annexation, the Town Treasurer shall promptly notify the Tax Commissioner in
writing of the change in boundaries; provide the Tax Commissioner with the
nine-digit zip code or codes for the area annexed or de-annexed; and any other
information the Tax Commissioner may require to maintain the database. An
ordinance annexing property into the town, or an ordinance removing property
from the corporate limits of the town, may not take effect any sooner than the
first day of a calendar quarter that begins 60 days after the town provides
written notice to the Tax Commission of a change in the municipal boundaries.
   (C)   The nine-digit database shall be maintained by the town until such
time as the Tax Commissioner allows use of a different system to determine
whether a location is within or outside the corporate limits of the town.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024)
§ 37.40 STATE LEVEL ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Tax Commissioner is responsible for administering, collecting and
enforcing the taxes imposed by this subchapter as provided in W. Va. Code §§ 8-
13C-6 and 11-15B-33. The town may enter into a written agreement with the Tax
Commissioner that will allow employees of the town auditing a vendor whose
primary business location is in the town for compliance with the town’s
business and occupation tax to also audit that business location for compliance
with the sales and use tax laws of this state and this town and obligate the
town to share that information with the Tax Commissioner.
   (B)   The Tax Commissioner may retain from collections of the taxes imposed
by this subchapter the fee allowed by W. Va. Code § 11-10-11c or by any other
state law or legislative rule.
   (C)   The Tax Commissioner shall deposit all the proceeds from collection of
the taxes imposed by this subchapter, minus any fee for collecting, enforcing
and administering taxes retained under this section, in the subaccount for this
town established in “Municipal Sales and Services Tax and Use Tax Fund,” an
interest bearing account created in the State Treasury pursuant to W. Va. Code
§ 8-13C-7. All monies collected and deposited in the subaccount for the town
shall be remitted at least quarterly by the State Treasurer to the Town
Treasurer, as provided in W. Va. Code § 8-13C-7.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024)
§ 37.41 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   Each and every provision of the State Tax Procedure and Administration Act
set forth in W. Va. Code Chapter 11, Article 10 applies to the administration,
collection and enforcement of the sales and use taxes imposed pursuant to this
subchapter, except as otherwise expressly provided in W. Va. Code Chapter 8,
Article 13C, with like effect as if that Act were applicable only to the taxes
imposed by this subchapter and were set forth in extenso in this subchapter, as
provided in W. Va. Code § 8-13C-6.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024)
§ 37.42 AUTOMATIC UPDATING.
   Any amendments to W. Va. Code Chapter 11, Articles 9, 10, 15, 15A and 15B
shall automatically apply to the municipal sales and use tax imposed, pursuant
to this subchapter, to the extent they are applicable to the taxes imposed by
this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024)
§ 37.43 DEPOSIT OF TAXES COLLECTED IN GENERAL REVENUE FUND.
   When the Town Treasurer receives periodic distributions of municipal sales
and use taxes from the State Treasurer, the Town Treasurer shall promptly
deposit the amount received in the General Revenue Fund or account of the town.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024)
§ 37.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Each and every provision of the West Virginia Tax Crimes and Penalties
Act set forth in W. Va. Code Chapter 11, Article 9 applies to the
administration, collection and enforcement of the municipal sales and use taxes
imposed pursuant to §§
37.30 through
37.43 with like effect as if that Act were applicable only to the taxes imposed
pursuant to §§
37.30 through
37.43 and were set forth in extenso in §§
37.30 through
37.43, as provided in W. Va. Code § 8-13C-6; provided, that the criminal
penalties imposed upon conviction for a criminal violation of §§
37.30 through
37.43 may not exceed the maximum penalties allowed by law for a similar
violation of the ordinances of this town.
(Ord. passed 12-30-2024)
 
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITY COMMISSIONS
      
51.   RATES AND CHARGES
      
52.   GREASE TRAPS
      
53.   SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: UTILITY COMMISSIONS
Section
Water Commission
   
50.01   Created; composition; appointment; terms of office; compensation of
members; filling vacancies
   
50.02   Purpose
   
50.03   Offices; rules; meetings; records
   
50.04   Powers and authority generally; budget; annual report
   
50.05   Duties
Sewerworks Commission
   
50.20   Created; composition; appointment; terms of office; compensation of
members; filling vacancies
   
50.21   Purpose
   
50.22   Offices; rules; meetings; records
   
50.23   Powers and authority generally; budget; annual report
   
50.24   Duties
WATER COMMISSION
§ 50.01 CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERMS OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION OF
MEMBERS; FILLING VACANCIES.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Town of Marlinton Water Commission,
hereinafter called the Commission. The Commission shall be a public corporate
body, with perpetual existence and a common zeal. It shall be known as the Town
of Marlinton Water Commission.
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of not less than three nor more than five
members, a majority of whom shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. Each member shall be a resident and freeholder of the town. Each
member shall be appointed by the Town Council and shall serve at the will and
pleasure of the Town Council. Membership on the Town Council shall not preclude
membership on the Commission. However, if the Commission consists of three or
four members then only one member may be a member of Council. If the Commission
consists of five members, then two of such members may also be members of
Council. The term of the Commission membership of any such member of the
Council so appointed shall continue during his or her term as a member of
Council and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. The terms of
other appointed members shall be for six years and until their successors shall
be appointed and shall qualify. The first Commission membership shall be
appointed as follows: one for a term of six years; one for a term of four
years; and all others for a term of two years. Such terms shall begin upon the
date of appointment and taking the oath of office.
   (C)   The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their
services but shall be entitled to reimbursement for all reasonable and
necessary expenses actually incurred in the performance of their duties. They
shall not be personally interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract
entered into by the Commission, or hold any remunerative position in connection
with the establishment, construction, improvement, extension, development,
maintenance or operation of any of the property under their control as members
of said Commission.
   (D)   When a vacancy occurs on the Commission by reason of death,
resignation, change of qualifications, or due to any other cause, the remaining
members of the Commission shall appoint such successor for the remainder of the
term so filled.
(Prior Code, § 1-10A01) (Ord. passed 9-9-1981)
§ 50.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Commission shall be to acquire, construct, establish,
extend, equip, repair, maintain and operate, or lease to others for operation,
a waterworks system, or construct, maintain and operate additions, betterment
and improvements to the existing waterworks system within the corporate limits
and within the area extending 20 miles beyond the corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 1-10A02) (Ord. passed 9-9-1981)
§ 50.03 OFFICES; RULES; MEETINGS; RECORDS.
   (A)   After appointment the members of the Commission shall qualify by
taking and filing with the Recorder the oath for public offices of the town and
they shall not be permitted to serve until they shall so qualify.
   (B)   At the first meeting of the Commission after the first members shall
be appointed and thereafter at the first meeting of each year, the members of
the Commission shall organize by electing one of their members President and
another Vice President, and by electing a Secretary who need not be a member of
the Commission. The Commission shall meet on the first Monday of every month at
7:00 p.m. in the municipal building. The Secretary shall keep an accurate
record of all the fiscal affairs of the Commission, and shall keep a minute
book in which he or she shall record the proceedings and transactions of each
meeting of the Commission. The Secretary shall be paid such compensation for
his or her services as the Commission shall fix from year to year. The Recorder
of the town shall be ex officio Treasurer of the Commission and he or she shall
take such oath and enter such bond as the Commission shall determine.
   (C)   The President shall chair all meetings and in the event of the absence
of the President, the Vice President shall so preside.
   (D)   The Commission is hereby empowered and authorized to promulgate and
amend from time to time such rules and regulations as may be necessary,
appropriate, convenient or incidental hereto to provide for penalties for the
violation thereof. The Town Attorney shall be the official counsel for said
Commission and shall advise it on all legal matters.
(Prior Code, § 1-10A03) (Ord. passed 9-9-1981)
§ 50.04 POWERS AND AUTHORITY GENERALLY; BUDGET; ANNUAL REPORT.
   (A)   The Commission shall have plenary power and authority to take all
steps and proceedings, and to make and enter into all contracts or agreements
necessary, appropriate, useful, convenient or incidental to the performance of
its duties and the execution of its powers and authority hereunder; provided,
that any contract or agreement relating to the financing, or the construction,
reconstruction, establishment, acquisition, improvement, renovation, extension,
enlargement, increase of equipment of any such works, and any trust indenture
with respect thereto shall be approved by the Town Council.
   (B)   The Commission may employ engineers, architects, inspectors,
superintendents, managers, collectors, attorneys, accountants, and such other
employees as in its judgment may be necessary in the execution of its powers
and duties, and may fix their compensation, all of whom shall do such work as
the Commission shall direct. The Commission shall have the power to purchase,
hold, sell and convey real or personal property, receive any gift, grant,
donation, bequest or devise; sue and be sued; contract and be contracted with;
and do any and all things and acts which may be necessary, appropriate
convenient or incidental to carry out and effectuate the purposes of the
Commission. The Commission is hereby granted the power and authority to acquire
in its name or in the name of the town by purchase, lease or by exercise of the
power of eminent domain or otherwise such land or lands as it shall determine
to be needful and necessary. However, no contract or agreement with any
contractor or contractors for labor or materials or both, exceeding in amount
the sum set by Council from time to time shall be made without advertising for
bids, which bids shall be publicly opened and an award made to the closest
responsible bidder, with power in the Commission to reject any and all bids.
   (C)   The Commission shall make requests of the Town Council for an annual
budget at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the fiscal year and shall be
charged with the maintenance of same. And, further, the Commission shall make
an annual report to the Town Council at the time of the submission of its
budget request for the next fiscal year. The Commission shall make such other
reports as from time to time it deems appropriate or the same be requested by
the Town Council.
   (D)   The Commission shall set up and maintain a proper system of accounts
in accordance with the requirements of the Public Service Commission, showing
the amount of revenues received from such waterworks system and the application
of the same. At least once each year the Commission shall cause such accounts
to be properly audited and a report of such audit shall be open to the public
for inspection at all reasonable times.
(Prior Code, § 1-10A04) (Ord. passed 9-9-1981)
§ 50.05 DUTIES.
   The Commission shall be charged with the duty of operating and maintaining
the Marlinton Waterworks system and to do all things needful and necessary to
its ends, to receive all monies and property of said system, establish rates
and provide for the payment of bonds or other indentures of said system and to
generally supervise the operation of same.
(Prior Code, § 1-10A05) (Ord. passed 9-9-1981)
SEWERWORKS COMMISSION
§ 50.20 CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERMS OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION OF
MEMBERS; FILLING VACANCIES.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Town of Marlinton Sewerworks Commission,
hereinafter called the Commission. The Commission shall be a public corporate
body, with perpetual existence and a common zeal. It shall be known as the Town
of Marlinton Sewerworks Commission.
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of not less than three nor more than five
members, a majority of whom shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. Each member shall be a resident and freeholder of the town. Each
member shall be appointed by the Town Council and shall serve at the will and
pleasure of the Town Council. Membership on the Town Council shall not preclude
membership on the Commission. However, if the Commission consists of three or
four members then only one member may be a member of Council. If the Commission
consists of five members, then two of such members may also be members of
Council. The term of the Commission membership of any such member of the
Council so appointed shall continue during his or her term as a member of
Council and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. The terms of
other appointed members shall be for six years and until their successors shall
be appointed and shall qualify. The first Commission membership shall be
appointed as follows: one for a term of six years; one for a term of four
years; and all others for a term of two years. Such terms shall begin upon the
date of appointment and taking the oath of office.
   (C)   The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their
services but shall be entitled to reimbursement for all reasonable and
necessary expenses actually incurred in the performance of their duties. They
shall not be personally interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract
entered into by the Commission, or hold any remunerative position in connection
with the establishment, construction, improvement, extension, development,
maintenance or operation of any of the property under their control as members
of said Commission.
   (D)   When a vacancy occurs on the Commission by reason of death,
resignation, change of qualifications, or due to any other cause, the remaining
members of the Commission shall appoint such successor for the remainder of the
term so filled.
(Prior Code, § 1-10B01) (Ord. passed 9-9-1981)
§ 50.21 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Commission shall be to acquire, construct, establish,
extend, equip, repair, maintain and operate, or lease to others for operation,
a sewerworks system, or construct, maintain and operate additions, betterment
and improvements to the existing sewerworks system within the corporate limits
and within the area extending 20 miles beyond the corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 1-10B02) (Ord. passed 9-9-1981)
§ 50.22 OFFICES; RULES; MEETINGS; RECORDS.
   (A)   After appointment the members of the Commission shall qualify by
taking and filing with the Recorder the oath for public offices of the town and
they shall not be permitted to serve until they shall so qualify.
   (B)   At the first meeting of the Commission after the first members shall
be appointed and thereafter at the first meeting of each year, the members of
the Commission shall organize by electing one of their members President and
another Vice President, and by electing a Secretary who need not be a member of
the Commission. The Commission shall meet on the first Monday of every month at
7:00 p.m. in the Municipal Building. The Secretary shall keep an accurate
record of all the fiscal affairs of the Commission, and shall keep a minute
book in which he or she shall record the proceedings and transactions of each
meeting of the Commission. The Secretary shall be paid such compensation for
his or her services as the Commission shall fix from year to year. The Recorder
of the town shall be ex officio Treasurer of the Commission and he or she shall
take such oath and enter such bond as the Commission shall determine.
   (C)   The President shall chair all meetings and in the event of the absence
of the President, the Vice President shall so preside.
   (D)   The Commission is hereby empowered and authorized to promulgate and
amend from time to time such rules and regulations as may be necessary,
appropriate, convenient or incidental hereto to provide for penalties for the
violation thereof. The Town Attorney shall be the official counsel for said
Commission and shall advise it on all legal matters.
(Prior Code, § 1-10B03) (Ord. passed 9-9-1981)
§ 50.23 POWERS AND AUTHORITY GENERALLY; BUDGET; ANNUAL REPORT.
   (A)   The Commission shall have plenary power and authority to take all
steps and proceedings, and to make and enter into all contracts or agreements
necessary, appropriate, useful, convenient or incidental to the performance of
its duties and the execution of its powers and authority hereunder; provided,
that any contract or agreement relating to the financing, of the construction,
reconstruction, establishment, acquisition, improvement, renovation, extension,
enlargement, increase of equipment of any such works, and any trust indenture
with respect thereto shall be approved by the Town Council.
   (B)   The Commission may employ engineers, architects, inspectors,
superintendents, managers, collectors, attorneys, accountants, and such other
employees as in its judgment may be necessary in the execution of its powers
and duties, and may fix their compensation, all of whom shall do such work as
the Commission shall direct. The Commission shall have the power to purchase,
hold, sell and convey real or personal property, receive any gift, grant,
donation, bequest or devise; sue and be sued; contract and be contracted with;
and do any and all things and acts which may be necessary, appropriate
convenient or incidental to carry out and effectuate the purposes of the
Commission. The Commission is hereby granted the power and authority to acquire
in its name or in the name of the town by purchase, lease, or by exercise of
the power of eminent domain or otherwise such land or lands as it shall
determine to be needful and necessary. However, no contract or agreement with
any contractor or contractors for labor or materials or both, exceeding in
amount the sum set by Council from time to time shall be made without
advertising for bids, which bids shall be publicly opened and an award made to
the closest responsible bidder, with power in the Commission to reject any and
all bids.
   (C)   The Commission shall make requests of the Town Council for an annual
budget at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the fiscal year and shall be
charged with the maintenance of same. And, further, the Commission shall make
an annual report to the Town Council at the time of the submission of its
budget request for the next fiscal year. The Commission shall make such other
reports as from time to time it deems appropriate or the same be requested by
the Town Council.
   (D)   The Commission shall set up and maintain a proper system of accounts
in accordance with the requirements of the Public Service Commission, showing
the amount of revenues received from such sewerworks system and the application
of the same. At least once each year the Commission shall cause such accounts
to be properly audited and a report of such audit shall be open to the public
for inspection at all reasonable times.
(Prior Code, § 1-10B04) (Ord. passed 9-9-1981)
§ 50.24 DUTIES.
   The Commission shall be charged with the duty of operating and maintaining
the Marlinton Sewerworks system and to do all things needful and necessary to
its ends, to receive all monies and property of said system, establish rates
and provide for the payment of bonds or other indentures of said system and to
generally supervise the operation of same.
(Prior Code, § 1-10B05) (Ord. passed 9-9-1981)
CHAPTER 51: RATES AND CHARGES
Section
Sewage System
   
51.01   Schedule of rates, charges and penalties
   
51.16   Uniform policy on leaks on customer’s side of meter
Water System
   
51.15   Schedule of rates and charges
Utility Excise Tax
   
51.30   Utility tax adopted
   
51.31   Definitions
   
51.32   Imposition and levying of tax; amount of tax
   
51.33   Collection; payment; accounting
Deferred Payment and Extension of Time Policy
   
51.45   Options for delinquent accounts
   
51.46   Extension of time agreement
   
51.47   Deferred payment agreement
SEWAGE SYSTEM
§ 51.01 SCHEDULE OF RATES, CHARGES AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   The following rates, charges and fees to be charged for providing
sewer services to customers of the municipally operated sewer public utility of
the town be and hereby are adopted to become effective for all service rendered
on and after 45 days from the date of adoption of this section.
      (1)   Applicability. Applicable within entire territory served.
      (2)   Availability. Available for general domestic, commercial,
industrial and public authority service.
      (3)   Metered rates (based on water usage).
 
First    2,000 gallons per month $12.63 per 1,000 gallons
All over 2,000 gallons per month $12.63 per 1,000 gallons
 
      (4)   Minimum charge – per month (based on 2,000 gallons). No bill will
be rendered for less than the following amount: $25.26 per month.
      (5)   Unmetered charge (based on 4,500 gallons per month). No bill will
be rendered for less than the following amount: $56.84 per month.
      (6)   Service connection charge. The following charges are to be made
whenever the Utility installs a new tap to serve an applicant.
         (a)   A tap fee of $175 will be charged to new customers applying for
service before construction is completed adjacent to the customer’s premises in
connection with a certificate proceeding before the Commission. This pre-
construction tap fee will be invalid after the completion of construction
adjacent to the applicant’s premises that is associated with a certificate
proceeding.
         (b)   A tap fee of $600, or the actual cost of the connection (solely
determined by the Utility), whichever is greater, will be charged for each new
connection to the sewer system.
      (7)   Delayed payment penalty. The above tariff is net. On all current
usage billings not paid within 20 days, 10% will be added to the net amount
unpaid. This delayed penalty is not interest and is only to be collected once
for each bill where it is appropriate.
      (8)   Disconnect for non-payment/reconnect fees/administrative fees.
         (a)   If any bill is not paid within 30 days from the date of the
bill, water service to the customer will be disconnected and will not be
restored until all past due bills have been paid in full together with all
penalty charges, plus a disconnection charge of $25, subject to applicable
rules of the Public Service Commission of West Virginia.
         (b)   There shall be a $25 reconnection charge paid prior to
restoration of water service which has been disconnected for non-payment of a
sewer bill.
         (c)   In the event that Utility staff or agents collect money at the
customer’s residence in order to stop disconnection, an administrative fee of
$25 shall be paid in addition to other charges to prevent disconnection.
         (d)   Reconnection after hours (Monday through Friday after 4:00 p.m.
and anytime on holidays and weekends), an additional $25 fee shall apply.
      (9)   Leak adjustment increment. $5.50 per 1,000 gallons. To be used when
the bill reflects unusual consumption which can be attributed to eligible
leakage on the customer’s side of the meter. This rate shall be applied to all
such unusual consumption above the customer’s historical average usage.
      (10)   Security deposit. Not to exceed one-twelfth of the annual
estimated charge for residential service, or one-sixth of the annual estimated
charge for commercial service. This fee may be changed by applicable statutory
provisions.
      (11)   Returned check charge. A service charge equal to the actual bank
fee assessed to the town or a maximum of $25 will be imposed upon any customer
whose check for payment of charges is returned by their bank for any reason.
      (12)   EFT, ACH, credit card and drop box payments. A service charge will
be imposed on EFT, ACH, credit card or drop box payments. The amount shall be
equal to the actual charges to the Utility from the financial institution for
processing payment.
      (13)   Bill reprint fee. A charge of $1 will be assessed to customers who
do not present the bar coded section of the bill provided by the town with
payment. This does not apply to payments processed by the town as part of an
electronic funds transfer initiated by the town.
   (B)   In accordance with the provisions of W. Va. Code § 24-2-4b, as
amended, the rules and regulations and the rates, charges and fees provided for
herein shall be effective no sooner than 45 days from the date of adoption.
   (C)   In accordance with the requirements of W. Va. Code § 8-11-4, as
amended, the town shall cause the proposed ordinance to be read by title (or in
full, if so demanded by a member of the governing body) at not less than two
meetings of the governing body with at least one week intervening between each
meeting. In accordance with the requirements of W. Va. Code § 8-20-10, the town
shall cause notice of the proposed adoption of this section to be published as
a Class I legal advertisement, with the publication being made at least one
week before the public hearing of the town required for the approval of this
section, and with said notice meeting the other requirements set forth in W.
Va. Code §§ 59-3-1 et seq.
   (D)   In accordance with the Public Service Commission of West Virginia’s
Rules for the Construction and Filing of Tariffs, 150 C.S.R. 2, notice of this
section shall be provided by:
      (1)   Causing to be published the Commission’s Tariff Form No. 12 as a
Class II legal advertisement, in a qualified newspaper of general circulation
in the area of the town, with the first
publication occurring within five days, or, if the notice is to be published in
a newspaper that issues on a weekly basis, by the first possible publication
date, after the adoption of this section;
      (2)   Posting a notice that conforms with Tariff Form No. 12 in a
conspicuous place at the town’s business premises beginning the day after the
Town Council meeting at which this section is adopted and continuing for 30
days; and
      (3)   Filing with the Commission, within five days after the adoption of
this section, a copy of this section along with other information as required
by § 23.1.7 of the Tariff Rules.
(Ord. passed 2-1-1982; Ord. passed 4-6-1987; Ord. passed 8-4-1990; Ord. passed
9-17-1996; Ord. passed 6-1-2004; Ord. passed 6-24-2002; Ord. passed 1-4-2021;
Ord. passed 3-24-2025)
WATER SYSTEM
§ 51.15 SCHEDULE OF RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   The following rates, charges and fees to be charged for providing
water services to customers of the municipally operated water public utility of
the town be and hereby are adopted to become effective for all service rendered
on and after 45 days from the date of adoption of this section.
      (1)   Applicability. Applicable within the entire territory served.
      (2)   Availability. Available for residential, commercial, industrial,
public authority and sale for resale water service.
      (3)   Rates (customers with metered water supply). $20.63 per 1,000
gallons.
      (4)   Minimum charge. Each customer shall pay a minimum charge per month
(equivalent to 2,000 gallons of water usage) based on the size of the meter as
follows.
5/8-inch meter   $41.26 per month
3/4-inch meter   $61.89 per month
1-inch meter     $103.15 per month
1-1/4-inch meter $150.60 per month
1-1/2-inch meter $206.30 per month
2-inch meter     $330.08 per month
3-inch meter     $618.90 per month
4-inch meter     $1,031.50 per month
6-inch meter     $2,063 per month
8-inch meter     $3,300.80 per month
 
      (5)   Flat-rate charge (customers with non-metered water supply).
Equivalent to 2,000 gallons of water usage, $41.26 per month.
      (6)   Bulk water rate. For purchased in bulk at the water plant or other
town designated location for bulk sales.
 
1 to 500 gallons       $10.50 per load
500 to 1,000 gallons   $21 per load
1,000 to 1,500 gallons $31.50 per load
1,500 to 2,000 gallons $42 per load
Over 2,000 gallons     $10.50 per 1,000 gallons (min. of $42)
 
      (7)   Delayed payment penalty. The above schedule is net. On all accounts
not paid in full when due, 10% will be added to the net current amount unpaid.
This delayed payment penalty is not interest and is to be collected only once
for each bill where it is appropriate.
      (8)   Multiple occupancy. On apartment buildings or other multiple
occupancy buildings, each family or business unit shall be required to pay not
less than the minimum monthly charge herein established for a five-eighths-inch
meter. Motels and hotels shall pay according to the size of meter installed.
      (9)   Service connection charge.
         (a)   The following charges are to be made whenever the utility
installs a new tap to serve an applicant.
         (b)   A tap fee of $100 will be charged to new customers applying for
service before construction is completed adjacent to the customer’s premises in
connection with a certificate proceeding before the Commission. This pre-
construction tap fee will be invalid after the completion of construction
adjacent to the applicant’s premises that is associated with a certificate
proceeding.
         (c)   A tap fee of $500, or the actual cost of the connection (solely
determined by the Utility), whichever is greater, shall be made for each new
connection to the water system.
      (10)   Fee for installation of removed meter. If a water meter is removed
to prevent a customer from illegally obtaining water after the customer’s
service has been disconnected for non- payment, the customer shall pay a
minimum meter installation fee of $125 plus additional charges to replace and
repair damaged equipment belonging to the Utility, before the meter is re-
installed and water service reinstated. This fee is in addition to any
reconnection fees. If the service has been cut off by the request of a renter
vacating a rented dwelling, this charge will be made to the owner of the
building.
      (11)   Returned check charge. A service charge equal to the actual bank
fee accessed to the town or a maximum of $25 will be imposed upon any customer
whose check for payment of charges is returned by the bank for any reason.
      (12)   Water disconnect/reconnect fees/administrative fees.
         (a)   If a bill is not paid within 30 days from the date of the bill,
water service to the customer will be disconnected and will not be restored
until all past due water bills have been paid in full together with all accrued
penalties plus a disconnection charge of $25.
         (b)   There shall be a $25 reconnection charge paid prior to
restoration of water service which has been previously disconnected for any
reason.
         (c)   In the event that Utility staff or agents collect money at the
customer’s residence in order to stop disconnection, an administrative fee of
$25 shall be paid in addition to other charges to prevent disconnection.
         (d)   Reconnection after hours (Monday through Friday after 4:00 p.m.
and anytime on holidays and weekends), an additional $25 fee shall apply.
      (13)   Incremental costs. An amount not to exceed $5.25 per 1,000 gallons
is to be used when a bill reflects unusual consumption which can be attributed
to eligible leakage on the customer’s side of the meter. This rate shall be
used to calculate consumption above the customer’s historical average usage.
The Utility shall establish a non-discriminatory policy regarding this
provision for leak adjustments.
      (14)   EFT, ACH, credit card and drop box payments. A service charge will
be imposed on EFT, ACH, credit card or drop box payments. The amount shall be
equal to the actual charges to the Utility from the financial institution for
processing payment.
      (15)   Security deposit. Not to exceed one-twelfth of the annual
estimated charge for residential service, or one-sixth of the annual estimated
charge for commercial service. This fee may be changed by applicable statutory
provisions.
      (16)   Bill reprint fee. A charge of $1 will be assessed to customers who
do not present the bar coded section of the bill provided by the Utility with
payment. This does not apply to payments processed by the town as part of an
electronic funds transfer initiated by the town.
      (17)   Emergency, customer convenience or seasonal turn on or off. There
shall be a $25 charge for each visit to the customer’s premises during normal
business hours (Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. through 4:30 p.m.) for such on
or off, except that if the service is both turned off and on within the same
eight-hour work day, only one $25 fee shall apply. Reconnection after hours
(Monday through Friday after 4:30 p.m., anytime on holidays and weekends) shall
be subject to an additional $15 fee.
      (18)   Testing or replacement of meter at customer’s request. Upon
request of any customer of the system, the town will test or replace the
customer’s water meter as soon as is reasonably possible for a fee of $25 due
in advance, and if the meter is found to be defective, the customer’s account
will be adjusted accordingly, and the fee refunded. If the meter is found to be
accurate within the prescribed guidelines of the Public Service Commission of
West Virginia, then the customer’s account will receive no adjustment.
      (19)   Sprinkler systems and private fire protection systems. Where
connections, hydrants, sprinklers and the like on private property are
maintained by the consumer:
 
2-inch or less service line with hydrants, sprinklers and/or  $15.75 per month
hose connections
3-inch or less service line with hydrants, sprinklers and/or  $33.60 per month
hose connections
4-inch or less service line with hydrants, sprinklers and/or  $63 per month
hose connections
6-inch or less service line with hydrants, sprinklers and/or  $131.25 per month
hose connections
8-inch or less service line with hydrants, sprinklers and/or  $252 per month
hose connections
10-inch or less service line with hydrants, sprinklers and/or $378 per month
hose connections
 
   (B)   In accordance with the provisions of W. Va. Code § 24-2-4b, as
amended, the rules and regulations and the rates, charges and fees provided for
herein shall be effective no sooner than 45 days from the date of adoption.
   (C)   In accordance with the requirements of W. Va. Code § 8-11-4, as
amended, the town shall cause the proposed ordinance to be read by title (or in
full, if so demanded by a member of the governing body) at not less than two
meetings of the governing body with at least one week intervening between each
meeting. In accordance with the requirements of W. Va. Code § 8-20-10, the town
shall cause notice of the proposed adoption of this section to be published as
a Class I legal advertisement, with the publication being made at least one
week before the public hearing of the town required for the approval of this
section, and with said notice meeting the other requirements set forth in W.
Va. Code §§ 59-3-1 et seq.
   (D)   In accordance with the Public Service Commission of West Virginia’s
Rules for the Construction and Filing of Tariffs, 150 C.S.R. 2, notice of this
section shall be provided by:
      (1)   Causing to be published the Commission’s Tariff Form No. 12 as a
Class II legal advertisement, in a qualified newspaper of general circulation
in the area of the town, with the first publication occurring within five days,
or, if the notice is to be published in a newspaper that issues on a weekly
basis, by the first possible publication date, after the adoption of this
section;
      (2)   Posting a notice that conforms with Tariff Form No. 12 in a
conspicuous place at the town’s business premises beginning the day after the
Town Council meeting at which this section is adopted and continuing for 30
days; and
      (3)   Filing with the Commission, within five days after the adoption of
this section, a copy of this section along with other information as required
by § 23.1.7 of the Tariff Rules.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1981; Ord. passed 11-9-1981; Ord. passed 2-1-1982; Ord. passed
6-26-1989; Ord. passed 8-4-1990; Ord. passed 9-17-1996; Ord. passed 1-20-1998;
Ord. passed 10-4-2010; Ord. passed 9-25-2017; Ord. passed 3-24-2025)
§ 51.16 UNIFORM POLICY ON LEAKS ON CUSTOMER’S SIDE OF METER.
   Pursuant to the Public Service Commission of West Virginia’s Rules for the
Government of Water Utilities, each utility is required to implement a written
leak adjustment policy consistent with 150 C.S.R. 7-6.4.3.a. The following has
been developed by the town to fulfill this requirement. This policy shall
supersede and replace any previous water leak adjustment policies implemented
by the town.
   (A)   The town will make a leak adjustment only when the water usage being
adjusted is in excess of 200% of the customer’s historical usage, as defined in
Water Rule 6.4.3.b, that can be attributed to leakage on the customer’s side of
the point of service. The leak adjustment will be computed pursuant to
applicable rules of the Public Service Commission and the leak adjustment rate
(incremental cost of water) specified in the town’s current tariff.
   (B)   A HIDDEN LEAK is a leak causing excess usage that is hidden from view,
such as in a line that is underground, behind a wall or in a crawl space, and
that produces no visible or audible signs that would alert a reasonably prudent
person to the presence of the leak.
   (C)   If the customer has a hidden leak, then the customer may request a
leak adjustment. Upon the customer providing adequate information to
demonstrate that there was a hidden leak and that it has been repaired (e.g.,
repair item receipts or contractor invoices), the town will process a hidden
leak adjustment in accordance with this policy. The town reserves the right to
require documentation, including, but not limited to, repair item receipts or
contractor invoices, to verify that a repair has been made and the leak was
hidden before processing a leak adjustment. In addition, for customers residing
within the municipal limits, the town reserves the right to require proof that
a building permit was obtained and that the repairs were made by a contractor
with a valid town business license.
   (D)   The town will provide a hidden leak adjustment to eligible customers
for a maximum of two billing periods: the period in which the leak developed
and the period immediately following that month when the leak should have been
repaired. The town may, in the alternative and as a courtesy to the customer,
adjust the two highest consecutive months during the time the leak ran. An
exception will be made if the leak occurred during a billing period or periods
during which usage was estimated, or if the town, in its sole discretion,
determines that other conditions exist that warrant an adjustment for
additional time periods.
   (E)   In the event of a second leak in the customer’s service pipe, the
customer should consider replacing the entire service pipe. Repeated leak
adjustments or abuse of this policy may result in a denial of leak adjustments
or discontinuation of service under Water Rule 7.3.8
(Ord. passed 4-4-2023)
UTILITY EXCISE TAX
§ 51.30 UTILITY TAX ADOPTED.
   There is hereby established an excise tax upon the privilege of purchasing,
using or consuming within the corporate limits of the town, any public utility
service or tangible personal property supplied by any public utility, subject
to the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission of West Virginia, or under
the regulatory control of the town, whether such public utility is privately or
municipally owned or otherwise owned by any type of governmental entity, and
hereby levied and imposed.
(Prior Code, § 11-301)
§ 51.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE. All service or tangible personal property purchasers
within this municipality from a seller thereof, which shall mean and include,
but not be limited to: telephone service; electrical service; gas service,
including bottled or liquid gas if the seller thereof is classified as a public
utility subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission of West
Virginia or subject to the regulatory control of the town; water service; sewer
service; garbage collection service; and cable television service; if the same
be purchased, used or consumed within the corporate limits of the town.
   PURCHASER. The user and shall mean and include the ultimate consumer of such
public utility services.
   SELLER. Includes every person, firm or corporation, whether the same shall
be a public service corporation, a municipal corporation, or a private
corporation, classified as a public utility and subject to the jurisdiction of
the Public Service Commission of West Virginia, or the regulatory control of
the town, who shall sell, furnish or supply a public utility service within the
town or partially within the corporate limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 11-302)
§ 51.32 IMPOSITION AND LEVYING OF TAX; AMOUNT OF TAX.
   There is hereby levied and imposed upon all purchasers of public utility
services, an excise tax thereon for the purchase, use or consumption thereof
within the corporate limits of the town, said tax shall amount to 2% of the
total charge for said public utility service, less any state or federal tax
thereon; said tax shall be collected by the seller thereof and paid by the
purchaser upon the amount charged on each periodic statement of said services.
Said tax levied and imposed thereon shall be in addition to all other taxes and
charges imposed by the town; provided, that in the event the total amount of
the tax for any one public utility service shall exceed the sum set by Council
from time to time, during any calendar month, to any single purchaser, no tax
shall be imposed on such amount.
(Prior Code, § 11-303)
§ 51.33 COLLECTION; PAYMENT; ACCOUNTING.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every seller of a public utility service to
collect from each purchaser thereof the tax herein imposed concurrently with
the collection of its periodic accounts.
   (B)   The amount of such tax collected during each calendar month shall be
reported by each such public utility to the Recorder of the town and shall
remit all monies so collected and reported unto the Recorder within 60 days of
the calendar month of collection, together with the name and address of all
purchasers who have failed or refused to pay same.
   (C)   The manner and form of all payments and reports to the town shall be
in a manner prescribed by the Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 11-304)
DEFERRED PAYMENT AND EXTENSION OF TIME POLICY
§ 51.45 OPTIONS FOR DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   The town will allow customers who are delinquent with their utility account
to enter into either a deferred payment agreement or an extension of time
agreement. The first option is an extension of time agreement as outlined
below. Should a hardship exist to the customer, he or she also has the option
to enter into a deferred payment agreement which is also outlined below.
(Ord. passed 3-6-2023)
§ 51.46 EXTENSION OF TIME AGREEMENT.
   Extension of time agreement will allow a customer to extend the due date of
his or her scheduled termination by no more than five working days. A customer
is allowed one extension of time agreement per calendar quarter. The customer
will be required to come to the town office and sign the extension of time
agreement prior to the close of business the day before scheduled termination
(i.e., if the date in the termination letter is October 23, the agreement must
be signed by 4:30 p.m. on October 22).
(Ord. passed 3-6-2023)
§ 51.47 DEFERRED PAYMENT AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Deferred payment agreement allows a customer to spread the delinquent
amount over a specified period of time once a financial hardship is determined.
A water customer who has been notified that water service is to be terminated
for non-payment of water bills shall be given the opportunity to enter into a
deferred payment agreement; provided, that the customer has demonstrated an
ability to pay but only in installments. The customer shall be informed at the
time a disconnect notice is issued of the availability of a reasonable payment
plan. The details of the deferred payment agreement are to be negotiated
between the utility and the customer and may consider several factors,
including, but not limited to the following: amount of the delinquency; ability
of the customer to pay; payment history; time the delinquency has been
outstanding; reasons why the delinquency has been outstanding; and any other
relevant factors. The customer will be required to come to the town office and
sign the deferred payment agreement prior to the close of business the day
before scheduled termination. The amount due for a deferred payment agreement
is the current balance plus the agreed upon dollar amount on the arrears. The
due date of the deferred payment agreement is the due date of the current bill.
If a customer has already entered into a deferred payment agreement, they
cannot add new bills to their already agreed upon payment agreement or enter
into a new deferred payment agreement unless the customer can provide
documentation that their financial condition has significantly changed. If
penalties are added to a customer’s account while a deferred payment agreement
is in effect, this is an indication of default on the customer’s part and will
result in a termination letter being issued. If a termination letter is issued
while a customer is under a deferred payment agreement, they are not eligible
for an extension of time agreement.
   (B)   Deferred payment payback time periods are usually as follows:
      (1)   Less than $100: not to exceed four months;
      (2)   One hundred one dollars through $150: not to exceed six months;
      (3)   One hundred fifty-one dollars through $200: not to exceed eight
months; and
      (4)   Over $201: negotiated on a case by case basis.
   (C)   These time frames are a recommended payback schedule for the dollar
amounts described. Should a customer’s situation warrant, the time period will
be negotiated to fit his or her situation. While under a deferred payment
agreement, if a customer defaults and his or her water service is terminated,
he or she will be subject to a reconnect fee, a deposit (if not currently on
file) plus payment of the current account balance under the terms of the broken
agreement. If a customer who has signed a deferred payment agreement defaults
or the payment is made with a check subsequently dishonored by the bank, the
utility may terminate service only after it has mailed written notice, by first
class mail, to the customer at least five calendar days, excluding state or
federal holidays, prior to termination; provided, that at the option of the
utility, either personal contact or telephone contact with the customer may be
substituted for contact by first class mail. If the customer makes the
delinquent payment within that notice period, service shall not be terminated.
However, if the customer has, during the previous 12 months, attempted to make
payment by a check which was subsequently dishonored by the bank, the utility
may refuse the customer’s check and immediately terminate service without
additional notice. If the customer’s financial condition significantly changes
and the existing payment agreement results in hardship, the utility shall
renegotiate the payment agreement. The customer shall provide documentation in
support of his or her claim that his or her financial condition has changed.
During the renegotiation period, the customer must continue to pay the current
bill on time and in full and make some payment on the delinquency.
   (D)   The terms of all agreements must be approved by two of the following:
Mayor, Administrator or Treasurer.
(Ord. passed 3-6-2023)
CHAPTER 52: GREASE TRAPS
Section
   
52.01   Title
   
52.02   When required
   
52.03   When not required
   
52.04   Conformance
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Grease Trap Ordinance”.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2000)
§ 52.02 WHEN REQUIRED.
   A grease trap or grease interceptor shall be required to receive the
drainage from fixtures and equipment with grease-laden waste located in food
preparation areas, such as in restaurants, hotel kitchens, hospitals, school
kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias, restaurants, clubs or any commercial
venture that cooks and sells food.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2000)
§ 52.03 WHEN NOT REQUIRED.
   A grease trap or a grease interceptor shall not be required for individual
dwelling units or any private living quarters.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2000)
§ 52.04 CONFORMANCE.
   Grease traps shall conform to Plumbing and Drainage Institute Section G101.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2000)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate this chapter, shall be guilty of misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time, or by imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2000)
CHAPTER 53: SEWERS
Section
Sewage
   
53.01   When sanitary sewage disposal facilities are required
   
53.02   Responsibility for installation and maintenance of facilities
   
53.03   When a connection to the sanitary sewer is required
   
53.04   When a septic tank is required
   
53.05   When a septic tank or a sanitary pit is required
   
53.06   Use of other than prescribed facilities
Cross-Connections, Auxiliary Intakes and the Like
   
53.20   Definitions
   
53.21   Regulated
   
53.22   Statement required
   
53.23   Violations
SEWAGE
§ 53.01 WHEN SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES ARE REQUIRED.
   Any building or structure wherein people live, are employed, or congregate
must be equipped with such sanitary facilities for sewage disposal as are
prescribed by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-201)
§ 53.02 RESPONSIBILITY FOR INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES.
   The owner of any property required by this subchapter to have sanitary
facilities for sewage disposal shall be responsible for the proper installation
of such facilities. The occupant or person having immediate use and control of
such property shall be responsible for maintaining the facilities in a sanitary
and usable condition unless by contractual arrangement between the parties the
owner expressly agrees to retain such responsibility.
(Prior Code, § 7-202)
§ 53.03 WHEN A CONNECTION TO THE SANITARY SEWER IS REQUIRED.
   Any building or structure within the meaning of §
53.01 and located on land which abuts upon a street or other public way
containing a sanitary sewer must be equipped with sanitary sewage disposal
facilities connected to such sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 7-203)
§ 53.04 WHEN A SEPTIC TANK IS REQUIRED.
   Other such buildings and structures within the fire limits but not located
on land abutting on a street or other public way containing sanitary sewer must
be equipped with sanitary sewer disposal facilities connected to a septic tank
approved by the Health Officer.
(Prior Code, § 7-204)
§ 53.05 WHEN A SEPTIC TANK OR A SANITARY PIT IS REQUIRED.
   All other such buildings and structures located outside the fire limits but
not on land abutting on a street or other public way containing a sanitary
sewer must be equipped with sanitary sewage disposal facilities unless he or
she expressly authorized and approves a sanitary pit privy.
(Prior Code, § 7-205)
§ 53.06 USE OF OTHER THAN PRESCRIBED FACILITIES.
   (A)   Where this subchapter requires a particular type of sewage disposal
facility the use of any other type, or disposal by any other means, is hereby
expressly prohibited unless approved by the Health Officer.
   (B)   The Health Officer is authorized to approve exceptions to the
provisions of this subchapter only when the lot size, soil composition, lay of
the land or other unusual circumstances make the installation and use of the
prescribed facilities unfeasible.
   (C)   Neither shall the Health Officer approve any installations under §§
53.04 or
53.05 unless conditions favor such installations as adequate for protection of
the public health.
(Prior Code, § 7-206)
CROSS-CONNECTIONS, AUXILIARY INTAKES AND THE LIKE
§ 53.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUXILIARY INTAKE. Any piping connections or other device whereby water may
be secured from a source other than that normally used.
   BY-PASS. Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the public water
supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage
reservoir or other device which is capable of importing contamination to the
public water supply.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection whereby the public water supply is
connected with any other water supply system, whether public or private, either
inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such manner that a flow of
water into the public water supply is possible either through the manipulation
of valves or because of ineffective check or back pressure valves, or because
of any other arrangements.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual
firm or association, and any municipal or private corporation organized or
existing under the laws of this or any other state or county.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. The waterworks system furnishing water to the
municipality for general use and which supply is recognized as the public water
supply by the state’s Department of Health.
(Prior Code, § 7-301)
§ 53.21 REGULATED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a cross-connection, auxiliary
intake, by-pass or interconnection to be made, or allow one to exist for any
purpose whatsoever unless the construction and operation of same have been
approved by the state’s Department of Health, and the operation of such cross-
connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass or interconnection is at all times under
the direct supervision of the Superintendent of the Waterworks of this
municipality.
(Prior Code, § 7-302) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.22 STATEMENT REQUIRED.
   Any person whose premises are supplied with water from the public water
supply, and who also has on the same premises a separate source of water
supply, or stores water in an uncovered or unsanitary storage reservoir from
which the water stored therein is circulated through a piping system, shall
file with the Superintendent of the Waterworks, a statement of the non-
existence of unapproved or unauthorized cross-connections, auxiliary intakes,
by-passes or interconnections. Such statement shall also contain an agreement
that no cross-connections, auxiliary intake, by-pass or interconnection will be
permitted upon the premises until the construction and operation of same have
received the approval of the state’s Department of Health, and the operation
and maintenance of same have been placed under the direct supervision of the
Superintendent of the Waterworks.
(Prior Code, § 7-303)
§ 53.23 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who now has cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes or
interconnections in violation of the provisions of this subchapter shall be
allowed a reasonable time within which to comply with such provisions. After a
thorough investigation of existing conditions and an appraisal of the time
required to complete the work the amount of time to be allowed shall be
designated by the Superintendent of the Waterworks. In addition to, or in lieu
of any fine and penalties that may be judicially assessed for violations of
this subchapter, the Superintendent of the Waterworks shall discontinue the
public water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a
cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass or interconnections, and service
shall not be restored until such cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass or
interconnection has been discontinued.
(Prior Code, § 7-304)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC CONTROL, INSTRUCTIONS, DEVICES AND SIGNALS
      
72.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
73.   EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
      
74.   LICENSING
      
75.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
76.   PEDESTRIANS
      
77.   PARKING
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
Police, Fire Department and Emergency Vehicles
   
70.15   Authority of Police and Fire Department officials
   
70.16   Application to vehicles upon streets and highways; exceptions
   
70.17   Obedience to police officers; fleeing
   
70.18   Application to government vehicles; exception
   
70.19   Authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.20   Application to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles
 
   
70.99   General penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases when used in this traffic code shall, for
the purpose of this traffic code, have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this section.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-1)
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, duly
chartered rescue squad, Police Department, ambulance service, state, county or
municipal agency and such privately owned ambulances, tow trucks, wreckers,
flag car services, vehicles providing road service to disabled vehicles,
service vehicles of a public service corporation, postal service vehicles, snow
removal equipment, Class A vehicles of firefighters, Class A vehicles of
members of ambulance services, and Class A vehicles of members of duly
chartered rescue squads, and all other emergency vehicles as are designated by
the agency responsible for the operation and control of these persons or
organizations. Class A vehicles are as defined by W. Va. Code § 17A-10-1.
Agency authorization and emergency equipment are defined in W. Va. Code § 17C-
15-26. Agencies responsible for issuing authorization for emergency vehicle
permits may promulgate such regulations that are necessary for the issuance of
permits for emergency vehicles.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-6)
   BICYCLE. Every device which does not have a motor attached and which is
propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem
wheels either of which is more than 20 inches in diameter.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-8)
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than seven passengers
and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than
a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-13)
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a street or
highway when within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use
for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels,
banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy
at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both
sides of the street or highway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-45)
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
such highway, street or roadway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-41)
   CROSSWALK. Includes:
      (1)   That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
street or highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the
edges of the traversable roadway; and
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-43)
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-31)
   ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE (EPAMD). A self-balancing, two
nontandem-wheeled device, designed to transport only one person, with an
electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts (one horse power),
whose maximum speed on a paved level surface, when powered solely by such a
propulsion system while ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds, is less
than 20 mph.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-66)
   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly
used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosive and which contains
any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by
percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or
of destroying life or limb.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-24)
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F, or less, as
determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-25)
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any
load thereon.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-26)
   INTERSECTION. Includes:
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two streets or highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
streets or highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict; and
      (2)   Where a street or highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street or highway by
an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the
event such intersecting street or highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such streets or highways
shall be regarded as a separate INTERSECTION.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-42)
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-39)
   MOPED. Every motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless otherwise specified in
this traffic code, which is equipped with two or three wheels, foot pedals to
permit muscular propulsion and an independent power source providing a maximum
of two brake horsepower. If a combustion engine is used, the maximum piston or
rotor displacement shall be 50 cubic centimeters regardless of the number of
chambers in such power source. The power source shall be capable of propelling
the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not to exceed 30 mph on a level road
surface and shall be equipped with a power drive system that functions directly
or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting by the operator
after the drive system is engaged.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-5a)
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-4)
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle having a piston displacement of more
than 50 cubic centimeters but not more than 150 cubic centimeters, or with not
more than five brake horsepower.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-5)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails, except motorized wheelchairs.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-3)
   OWNER. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or in the event a
vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is
entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this traffic code.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-32)
   PARK. When prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-54)
   PARKING AREA. Lots, areas or other accommodations for the parking of
vehicles off the street or highway and open to public use with or without
charge.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-60)
   PASSENGER VAN. Any van or other motor vehicle owned by any agency, business
or other legal entity and operated for the purpose of transportation of
children under the age of 18 years, other than a van utilized for private use,
taxicab, bus or school bus. PASSENGER VANS include, but are not limited to,
vehicles used by daycare centers, after-school centers and nursery schools;
provided, that the term PASSENGER VAN does not include any van or other motor
vehicle which is utilized for the specific purpose of transporting children to
medical facilities for the purpose of medical or dental treatment and which
loads and unloads the children on private property, making no stops for loading
or unloading along public roads or highways.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-64)
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot or any person using a wheelchair.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-30)
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-29)
   POLE TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by
another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or
pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle and
ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as
poles, pipes, trusses or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-17)
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to
make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-33)
   PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY; PRIVATE PROPERTY.
      (1)   PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
      (2)   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Real estate in private ownership without regard
to the manner in which it is used.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-36)
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property, upon cars, other than
streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-21)
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal or device erected by authority of
a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-49)
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-22)
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a street or
highway not comprising a business district when the property on such street or
highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with
residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-46)
   RESIDENTIAL STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way, whether publicly or privately maintained, located within any subdivision,
development or other similar area used primarily for residential purposes when
any part thereof is open to the common use of those living in such area for the
purpose of vehicular travel.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-62)
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-51)
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the
event a street or highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term
ROADWAY as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to
all such roadways collectively.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-37)
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-44)
   SCHOOL BUS. Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and
operated for the transportation of children to or from school, or privately
owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or
from school.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-7)
   SCHOOL GROUNDS. Includes the land on which a school is built together with
such other land used by students for play, recreation or athletic events while
attending school.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-55)
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-16)
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street or highway between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-38)
   STOP. When required, means complete cessation from movement.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-52)
   STOP, STOPPING OR STANDING. When prohibited, means any stopping or standing
of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-53)
   STREET OR HIGHWAY; ALLEY.
      (1)   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-35)
      (2)   ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear
or side of lots or buildings in urban districts and not intended for the
purpose of through vehicular traffic.
   THROUGH STREET or THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway or portion
thereof at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets
or highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and
when stop signs are erected as provided in this traffic code.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-40)
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any street or highway
for purposes of travel.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-50)
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. Any sign, signal marking and device not
inconsistent with this traffic code placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-47)
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-48)
   TRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-15)
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-12)
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks or wheelchairs.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-2)
   WHEELCHAIR. A motorized or nonmotorized wheeled device designed for, and
used by, a person with disabilities that is incapable of a speed in excess of
eight mph.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-1-65)
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
POLICE, FIRE DEPARTMENT AND EMERGENCY VEHICLES
§ 70.15 AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department to
enforce all street traffic laws of this municipality and all of the state
vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this municipality.
   (B)   Officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided
that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
   (C)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 70.16 APPLICATION TO VEHICLES UPON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this traffic code relating to the operation of vehicles
refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon streets and highways
except:
   (A)   Where a different place is specifically referred to in a given
section; and
   (B)   The provisions of this traffic code except §§
73.50 through
73.54 of this code of ordinances shall apply upon streets and highways as
defined in §
70.01.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-2-1) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 70.17 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS; FLEEING.
   (A)   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with a lawful order
or direction of any police officer or designated special officer invested by
law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-2-3(c))
   (B)   No person shall operate a vehicle so as to willfully elude or flee a
police officer or designated special officer after receiving a visible or
audible signal from such an officer to bring his or her vehicle to a stop.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.18 APPLICATION TO GOVERNMENT VEHICLES; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of
vehicles upon the streets or highways shall apply to the drivers of all
vehicles owned or operated by the United States, this state, or any county,
municipality, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state,
except as provided in this section and subject to such specific exceptions as
are set forth in this traffic code with reference to authorized emergency
vehicles.
   (B)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this traffic
code shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street or highway but
shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-2-4) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 70.19 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this traffic code;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the speed limits so long as he or she does not endanger life
or property; and
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
   (C)   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible
signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and
when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted flashing lamp as
authorized by §
73.18 of this code of ordinances which is visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, except
that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be
equipped with or display a warning light visible from in front of the vehicle.
   (D)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-2-5) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 70.20 APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this traffic code, except those
provisions of this traffic code which by their very nature can have no
application.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-2-6) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 70.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which no other
penalty is provided shall be fined not more than $100; upon a second conviction
within one year thereafter shall be fined not more than $200; and upon a third
or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than $500.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC CONTROL, INSTRUCTIONS, DEVICES AND SIGNALS
Section
   
71.01   Obedience to traffic control devices
   
71.02   Obedience to traffic control instructions at street construction
   
71.03   Traffic control signal terms and lights
   
71.04   Pedestrian control signals
   
71.05   Flashing traffic signals
   
71.06   Unauthorized signs and signals, biding from view, advertising
   
71.07   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic control devices
   
71.08   Traffic violations in construction zones
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or
police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this traffic code.
   (B)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required shall
be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged
violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section
does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even
though no signs are erected or in place.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-3-4) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL INSTRUCTIONS AT STREET CONSTRUCTION.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the traffic-control instructions of any
law enforcement officer or persons authorized by the Commissioner of Highways
or by proper local authorities to operate traffic control devices, act as
flaggers or operate authorized vehicles engaged in work at or near the site of
street or highway construction maintenance work, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle in this traffic code.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-3-4a) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL TERMS AND LIGHTS.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the
words “go”, “caution” or “stop”, or exhibiting different colored lights
successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be
used and such terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles
and pedestrians as follows.
   (A)   Green alone or “go”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited under §
72.116 of this code of ordinances, may proceed straight through or turn right
or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular
traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way
to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an
adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   Yellow alone or “caution” when showing following the green or “go”
signal.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
or “stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or “stop”
signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to
cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
   (C)   Red alone or “stop”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or “go” is
shown alone except as provided in division (C)(2) and (C)(3) below.
      (2)   A vehicle which is stopped in obedience to a red or “stop” signal
as close as practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection, may
cautiously make a right turn but such vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other vehicular traffic
proceeding as directed by the signal at such intersection, except that Council
may by ordinance prohibit any such right turn against a red or “stop” signal at
any intersection which ordinance shall be effective when a sign is erected at
such intersection giving notice thereof.
      (3)   A vehicle which is stopped in obedience to a red or “stop” signal
as close as practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection on a
one-way street which intersects another one-way street on which traffic moves
to the left, may cautiously make a left turn into the one-way street but such
vehicle shall yield the right-of- way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other vehicular traffic proceeding as directed by the signal
at such intersection, except that Council may by ordinance prohibit any such
left turn against a red or “stop” signal at any intersection, which ordinance
shall be effective when a sign is erected at such intersection giving notice
thereof.
      (4)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Red with green arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (E)   In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-3-5) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 71.04 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“wait” are in place such signals shall indicate as follows.
   (A)   Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in
the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers
of all vehicles.
   (B)   Wait. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction
of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his or her
crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while
the wait signal is showing.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-3-6) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 FLASHING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic
sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.
   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if
none, then before entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-3-7) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 71.06 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, BIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING.
   (A)   No local authority or person shall place, maintain or display upon or
in view of any street or highway any unauthorized traffic control device or
traffic control signal, or any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device
which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic
control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or
signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any street or highway any traffic control device bearing thereon
any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection
upon private property adjacent to a street or highway of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official
signs.
   (B)   Every such prohibited device, signal, sign or marking is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and the Commissioner of Highways or other
authority having jurisdiction over the street or highway is hereby empowered to
remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-3-8) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 71.07 ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any
other part thereof.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-3-9) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 71.08 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS IN CONSTRUCTION ZONES.
   (A)   At each and every location where street or highway construction work
is to be conducted a sign shall be posted at least 1,000 feet from the
construction site, or as close to 1,000 feet from the construction site as is
practicable given the location of the site when workers are present, notifying
all motorists as to the speed limit and displaying the words “construction
work”.
   (B)   No person shall violate any posted speed restriction or traffic
restriction at such construction site referred to in division (A) above.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude prosecution of
any operator of a motor vehicle who commits a violation of any other provision
of this traffic code for such violation.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-3-4b) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. See §
70.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
   (B)   General penalty. Whoever violates §§
71.01,
71.02 or
71.04 shall be fined not more than $100; upon a second conviction within one
year thereafter shall be fined not more than $200; and upon a third or
subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than $500.
   (C)   Construction zones.
      (1)   Any person who exceeds any posted speed restriction or traffic
restriction at a construction site referred to in §
71.08 by less than 15 mph shall be fined not more than $200.
      (2)   Any person who exceeds any posted speed restriction or traffic
restriction at a construction site referred to in §
71.08 by 15 mph or more shall be fined not more than $200 or imprisoned not
more than 20 days, or both.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
Accidents
   
72.001   Immediate reports of accidents
   
72.002   When driver unable to report
   
72.003   Garages to report bullet damage
   
72.004   Accidents involving death or personal injuries
   
72.005   Accidents involving damage to vehicle
   
72.006   Duty to give information and render aid
   
72.007   Collision with unattended vehicle
   
72.008   Collision with fixtures upon a street or highway
Driving Under the Influence and Reckless Driving
   
72.020   Driving under the influence
   
72.021   Reckless driving
Speed Restrictions
   
72.035   Maximum speed limits
   
72.036   Slow speed
   
72.037   Special speed limitations
   
72.038   Racing on streets and highways prohibited
Driving on Right Side of Roadway
   
72.050   Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions
   
72.051   Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions
   
72.052   Overtaking, passing to left; driver’s duties
   
72.053   Overtaking and passing upon right
   
72.054   Overtaking, passing to left of center
   
72.055   Additional restrictions on driving upon left side of roadway
   
72.056   Hazardous or no passing zones
   
72.057   One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
   
72.058   Driving in marked lanes or continuous lines of traffic
   
72.059   Following too closely
   
72.060   Driving upon divided roadways
   
72.061   Entering and exiting controlled-access highway
Turning, Starting and Signal
   
72.075   Conformity with provisions required
   
72.076   Right turns
   
72.077   Left turns on two-way roadways
   
72.078   Left turns on other than two-way roadways
   
72.079   Specified turns at intersections
   
72.080   “U” turns restricted
   
72.081   Starting vehicle
   
72.082   Signals before changing course; turning or stopping
   
72.083   Signals to be given by hand and arm or signal device
   
72.084   Hand and arm signals
Right-of-Way
   
72.095   Right-of-way at intersections
   
72.096   Right-of-way when turning left
   
72.097   Right-of-way at through street or highway or stop intersections
   
72.098   Driving onto roadway from private road or driveway; duty to yield
   
72.099   Right-of-way of emergency vehicle
   
72.100   Turning into private driveway, alley or building
Special Stops Required
   
72.115   Driving across grade crossing
   
72.116   Stops at dangerous grade crossings
   
72.117   Stopping at grade crossing
   
72.118   Moving heavy equipment across grade crossings
   
72.119   Through streets and stop intersections
   
72.120   Driving onto roadway from place other than roadway; stopping at
sidewalk
   
72.121   Stopping for school bus; signs and warning lights, sale of school bus
   
72.122   Stopping for passenger van; signs and warning lights
   
72.123   Obstructing intersection or crosswalk
Miscellaneous Rules, Funeral Processions, Security on Motor Vehicles
   
72.135   Unattended motor vehicle
   
72.136   Backing a vehicle
   
72.137   Drivers’ view and control to be unobstructed by load or persons
   
72.138   Passengers in seat with operator
   
72.139   Passengers on running board
   
72.140   Following authorized emergency vehicles
   
72.141   Approaching authorized emergency vehicles
   
72.142   Driving over fire hose
   
72.143   Funeral processions
   
72.144   Opening door of vehicle on traffic side
   
72.145   Boarding or alighting from vehicle
   
72.146   Unlawful riding
   
72.147   Squealing tires, cracking exhaust noises
   
72.148   Taking, injuring or tampering with vehicle
   
72.149   Driving upon sidewalk, street lawn or curb
   
72.150   Shortcutting; avoiding traffic control devices
   
72.151   Coasting prohibited
   
72.152   Driving through safety zone
   
72.153   Driving upon street posted as closed for repair
   
72.154   Obstruction of traffic
   
72.155   Vehicle security
   
72.156   Vehicle regulations on park property
   
72.157   Motorized scooters
   
72.158   Prohibited use of an electronic communications device, driving without
handheld features; definitions; exceptions; penalties
 
   
72.999   Penalty
ACCIDENTS
§ 72.001 IMMEDIATE REPORTS OF ACCIDENTS.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $1,000 or
more shall immediately by the quickest means of communication, whether oral or
written, give notice of such accident to the Police Department.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-4-6) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.002 WHEN DRIVER UNABLE TO REPORT.
   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making an
immediate report of an accident as required in §
72.001 and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the
accident capable of making a report, such occupant shall make or cause to be
made such report not made by the driver.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-4-8) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.003 GARAGES TO REPORT BULLET DAMAGE.
   The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any
motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been struck by any bullet, shall
report to the Police Department within 24 hours after such motor vehicle is
received, giving the engine number, registration number, and the name and
address of the owner or operator of such vehicle.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-4-12) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.004 ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to
death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such
accident of as close thereto as possible but shall then forthwith return to and
in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he or she has
fulfilled the requirements of §
72.006. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
(WV Code 17C-4-l(a)) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.005 ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident by any person resulting
only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall
immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto
as possible but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at
the scene of such accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of §
72.006. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary. Any person failing to stop of comply with such requirements under
such circumstances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(WV Code 17C-4-2) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.006 DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any
person shall give his or her name, address and the registration number of the
vehicle he or she is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit
his or her driver’s license to the person struck or the driver of occupant of
or attending any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured
in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or making
arrangements for the carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon or
hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such
treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-4-3) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.007 COLLISION WITH UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is
unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and
notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the
driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave
in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the and
address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a
statement of the circumstances thereof.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-4-4) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.008 COLLISION WITH FIXTURES UPON A STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage
to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take
reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such
property of such fact and of his or her name and address and of the
registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall upon request
and if available exhibit his or her driver’s license and shall make report such
accident when and as required.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-4-5) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE AND RECKLESS DRIVING
§ 72.020 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (A)   Any person who:
      (1)   Drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she:
         (a)   Is under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Is under the influence of any controlled substance;
         (c)   Is under the influence of any other drug;
         (d)   Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled
substance or any other drug; or
         (e)   Has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of eight
hundredths of one percent or more, by weight; and
      (2)   While driving does any act forbidden by law or fails to perform any
duty imposed by law in the driving of the vehicle, which act or failure
proximately causes the death of any person within one year next following the
act or failure, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be confined in jail for not less than 30 days nor more than one year and shall
be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000.
   (B)   Any person who:
      (1)   Drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she:
         (a)   Is under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Is under the influence of any controlled substance;
         (c)   Is under the influence of any other drug;
         (d)   Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled
substance or any other drug; or
         (e)   Has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of eight
hundredths of one percent or more, by weight; and
      (2)   While driving does any act forbidden by law or fails to perform any
duty imposed by law in the driving of the vehicle, which act or failure
proximately causes bodily injury to any person other than himself or herself,
is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in
jail for not less than one day nor more than 30 days, which jail term is to
include actual confinement of not less than 24 hours, and shall be fined not
less than $200 nor more than $1,000.
   (C)   Any person who:
      (1)   Drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she:
         (a)   Is under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Is under the influence of any controlled substance;
         (c)   Is under the influence of any other drug;
         (d)   Is under the combined influence of alcohol and controlled
substance or any other drug; or
         (e)   Has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of eight
hundredths of one percent or more, by weight, but less than fifteen hundredths
of one percent, by weight; and
      (2)   Is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
confined in jail for up to 30 days and shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500. A person sentenced pursuant to this division (C) shall receive
credit for any period of actual confinement he or she served upon arrest for
the subject offense.
   (D)   Any person who drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she
has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of fifteen hundredths of one
percent or more, by weight, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be confined in jail for not less than two days nor more than 30
days, which jail term is to include actual confinement of not less than 24
hours, and shall be fined not less than $200 nor more than $1,000. A person
sentenced pursuant to this division (D) shall receive credit for any period of
actual confinement he or she served upon arrest for the subject offense.
   (E)   Any person who, being an habitual user of narcotic drugs or
amphetamine or any derivative thereof, drives a vehicle in this municipality is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail
for not less than one day nor more than 30 days, which jail term is to include
actual confinement of not less than 24 hours, and shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $500. A person sentenced pursuant to this division (E) shall
receive credit for any period of actual confinement he or she served upon
arrest for the subject offense.
   (F)   Any person who:
      (1)   Knowingly permits his or her vehicle to be driven in this
municipality by any other person who:
         (a)   Is under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Is under the influence of any controlled substance;
         (c)   Is under the influence of any other drug;
         (d)   Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled
substance or any other drug; or
         (e)   Has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of eight
hundredths of one percent or more, by weight; and
      (2)   Is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
confined in jail for not more than 30 days and shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $500.
   (G)   Any person who knowingly permits his or her vehicle to be driven in
this municipality by any other person who is an habitual user of narcotic drugs
or amphetamine or any derivative thereof is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail for not more than 30 days and
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500.
   (H)   Any person under the age of 21 years who drives a vehicle in this
municipality while he or she has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood
of two hundredths of one percent or more, by weight, but less than eight
hundredths of one percent, by weight, for a first offense under this division
(H) is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $100. For a second or subsequent offense under this
division (H), the person is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be confined in jail for 24 hours and shall be fined not less
than $100 nor more than $500. A person who is charged with a first offense
under the provisions of this division (H) may move for a continuance of the
proceedings, from time to time, to allow the person to participate in the Motor
Vehicle Alcohol Test and Lock Program as provided in W. Va. Code § 17C-5A-3a.
Upon successful completion of the program, the court shall dismiss the charge
against the person and expunge the person’s record as it relates to the alleged
offense. In the event the person fails to successfully complete the program,
the court shall proceed to an adjudication of the alleged offense. A motion for
a continuance under this division (H) may not be construed as an admission or
be used as evidence. A person arrested and charged with an offense under the
provisions of this division (H) or division (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (F) or (G)
above may not also be charged with an offense under this division (H) arising
out of the same transaction or occurrence.
   (I)   Any person who:
      (1)   Drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she:
         (a)   Is under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Is under the influence of any controlled substance;
         (c)   Is under the influence of any other drug;
         (d)   Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled
substance or any other drug; or
         (e)   Has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of eight
hundredths of one percent or more, by weight; and
      (2)   The person while driving has on or within the motor vehicle one or
more other persons who are unemancipated minors who have not reached their
sixteenth birthday is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be confined in jail for not less than two days nor more than 30 days,
which jail term is to include actual confinement of not less than 48 hours and
shall be fined not less than $200 nor more than $1,000.
   (J)   (1)   A person may be charged in a warrant or indictment or
information for a second or subsequent offense under this section if the person
has been previously arrested for or charged with a violation of this section
which is alleged to have occurred within the applicable time period for prior
offenses, notwithstanding the fact that there has not been a final adjudication
of the charges for the alleged previous offense. In that case, the warrant or
indictment or information must set forth the date, location and particulars of
the previous offense or offenses.
      (2)   No person may be convicted of a second or subsequent offense under
this section unless the conviction for the previous offense has become final.
   (K)   The fact that any person charged with a violation of division (A),
(B), (C), (D), (E) or (F) above, or any person permitted to drive as described
under division (G) or (H) above, is or has been legally entitled to use
alcohol, a controlled substance or a drug does not constitute a defense against
any charge of violating division (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G) or (H)
above.
   (L)   For purposes of this section, the term CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE has the
meaning ascribed to it in W. Va. Code Chapter 60A.
   (M)   (1)   The sentences provided in this section upon conviction for a
violation of this section are mandatory and are not subject to suspension or
probation; provided, that the court may apply the provisions W. Va. Code
Chapter 62, Article 11A to a person sentenced or committed to a term of one
year or less for a first offense under this section. An order for home
detention by the court pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code Chapter 62,
Article 11B may be used as an alternative sentence to any period of
incarceration required by this section for a first or subsequent offense;
provided, however, that for any period of home incarceration ordered for a
person convicted of a second offense under this section, electronic monitoring
shall be required for no fewer than five days of the total period of home
confinement ordered and the offender may not leave home for those five days
notwithstanding the provisions of W. Va. Code § 62-11B-5; provided further,
that for any period of home incarceration ordered for a person convicted of a
third or subsequent violation of this section, electronic monitoring shall be
included for no fewer than ten days of the total period of home confinement
ordered and the offender may not leave home for those ten days notwithstanding
W. Va. Code § 62-11B-5.
      (2)   A person may be charged in a warrant or indictment or information
for a second or subsequent offense under this section, if the person has been
previously arrested for or charged with a violation of this section which is
alleged to have occurred within the applicable time periods for prior offenses,
notwithstanding the fact that there has not been a final adjudication of the
charges for the alleged previous offense. In such case the warrant or
indictment or information must set forth the date, location and particulars of
the previous offense or offenses. No person may be convicted of a second or
subsequent offense under this section unless the conviction for the previous
offense has become final.
   (N)   For purposes of this section, the phrase “in this municipality” means
anywhere within the physical boundaries of this municipality, including, but
not limited to, publicly maintained streets and highways, and subdivision
streets or other areas not publicly maintained but nonetheless open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
   (O)   When used in this section, the terms or phrases “driving under the
influence of intoxicating liquor”, “driving or operating a motor vehicle while
intoxicated” for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor
to drive any vehicle,” or any similar term or phrase shall be construed to mean
and be synonymous with the term or phrase “while under the influence of
alcohol.. . drives a vehicle” as the latter term or phrase is used in this
section.
   (P)   A warrant or indictment which charges or alleges an offense,
prohibited by the provisions of this section, and which warrant or indictment
uses any of the terms or phrases set forth in division (O) above, shall not
thereby be fatally defective if such warrant or indictment otherwise informs
the person so accused of the charges against him or her.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.021 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle upon any street or highway, or upon
any residential street, or in any parking area, or upon the ways of any
institution of higher education, whether public or private or upon the property
of the Board of Education, or upon any property within the municipal park and
public recreation system, in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of
persons or property.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to those areas
which have been temporarily closed for racing sport events or which may be set
aside by the municipality within the park and recreation system for exclusive
use by motorcycles or other recreational vehicles.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-5-3)
   (C)   Every person convicted of reckless driving may be punished upon a
first conviction by imprisonment for a period of not less than five days nor
more than 30 days, or by a fine of not more than $500, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, and on a second or subsequent conviction may be punished by
imprisonment for not less than ten days nor more than 30 days, or by a fine of
not more than $1,000, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
§ 72.035 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No person may drive a vehicle on a street or highway at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent under the existing conditions and the
actual and potential hazards. In every event speed shall be so controlled as
may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other
conveyance on or entering the streets and highways in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
   (B)   (1)   Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for
compliance with division (A) above the speed of any vehicle not in excess of
the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized
is lawful, but any speed in excess of the limits specified below in this
division (B) or established as hereinafter authorized is unlawful.
         (a)   Fifteen mph in a school zone during school recess or while
children are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours. A
SCHOOL ZONE is all school property including school grounds and any street or
highway abutting such school grounds and extending 125 feet along such street
or highway from the school grounds. Such speed restriction does not apply to
vehicles traveling on a controlled-access highway which is separated from the
school or school grounds by a fence or barrier approved by the Division of
Highways;
         (b)   Twenty-five mph in any business or residence district;
         (c)   Fifty-five mph on open country highways; except as otherwise
provided by this chapter.
      (2)   The speeds set forth in this section may be altered as authorized
in W. Va. Code § 17C-6.
   (C)   The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of
division (A) above, drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and
crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going
around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow
or winding roadway and when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians
or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
   (D)   The speed limit on controlled-access highways and interstate highways,
where no special hazard exists that requires a lower speed, shall be not less
than 55 mph and the speed limits specified in division (B) above do not apply.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-6-1) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.036 SLOW SPEED.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the
normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-6-3a(a)) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.037 SPECIAL SPEED LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Subject to all other speed restrictions of this traffic code no person
shall drive a vehicle not designed for carrying passengers and equipped with
pneumatic tires at a speed in excess of:
      (1)   Twenty mph in any business district;
      (2)   Twenty-five mph in any residence district;
      (3)   Forty mph on open country highway; and
      (4)   Trucks licensed at 8,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less shall
be permitted the same speed as passenger cars.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-6-4)
   (B)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle equipped with other than
pneumatic tires at a speed greater than a maximum of ten mph.
      (2)   No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated
structure constituting a part of a street or highway at a speed which is
greater than the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such
bridge or structure, when such structure is so signposted.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-6-5) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.038 RACING ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in, or aid or abet by serving as lookout or
timer or in any other capacity whatever, any speed race, as defined herein, on
any public street or highway in this municipality. For the purposes of this
section, SPEED RACE means:
      (1)   The operation of a motor vehicle in speed acceleration competition
with another motor vehicle or motor vehicles;
      (2)   The operation of a motor vehicle in speed acceleration competition
against time; or
      (3)   The operation of a motor vehicle in speed competition with another
motor vehicle or motor vehicles where the speed exceeds the lawful speed limit.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-6-8(a))
   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of division (A) above shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished for a
first offense by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100, and for a
second offense by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500, or by
imprisonment for not less than six days nor more than 30 days, or by both.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY
§ 72.050 DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
      (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; or
      (4)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
   (B)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed
of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall
be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.051 PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half
of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-7-2) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.052 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER’S DUTIES.
   The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to these limitations, exceptions and
special rules hereinafter stated.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall give an audible signal and pass to the left thereof at a
safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until
safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his or
her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-7-3) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.053 OVERTAKING AND PASSING UPON RIGHT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      (2)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in
each direction; and
      (3)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled
portion of the roadway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-7-4) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.054 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTER.
   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless
such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every
event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the roadway
before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-7-5) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.055 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the street
or highway where the driver’s view is obstructed within such distance as to
create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing; and
      (3)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct or tunnel.
   (B)   The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-7-6) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.056 HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES.
   When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily
observant person indicating that overtaking and passing or driving to the left
of the roadway would be especially hazardous, every driver of a vehicle shall
obey the directions thereof.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-7-7) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.057 ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic a vehicle
shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of such island.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-7-8(b), (c)) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.058 DRIVING IN MARKED LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith
shall apply.
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes a vehicle shall not
be driven in the center lane which is clearly marked as a left turn lane except
in preparation for a left turn or where such center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation.
   (C)   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.059 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (A)   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the street or highway.
   (B)   No operator of any motor truck, registered for a gross weight of more
than 8,000 pounds, bus, special mobile equipment or any motor vehicle drawing
another vehicle operating upon any roadway outside of a business or residence
district, shall follow within 200 feet of another motor truck, bus, special
mobile equipment or any motor vehicle drawing another vehicle; provided that
this provision shall not be construed to:
      (1)   Prevent overtaking and passing;
      (2)   Apply upon any lane specially designated for the use of motor
trucks or combinations of vehicles, or within any section of a roadway posted
or marked as a “no-passing zone”;
      (3)   Apply to any convoy of vehicles of the military service of the
United States or of this state; and
      (4)   Apply to funeral processions.
   (C)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or
residence district in a caravan or motorcade whether or not towing other
vehicles shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such
vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter
and occupy such space without danger. This provision shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions; or
      (2)   Any convoy of vehicles of the military service of the United States
or of this state.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-7-10) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.060 DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   Whenever any street or highway has been divided into two roadways by leaving
an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an
opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a crossover
or intersection established by public authority.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-7-11) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.061 ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-7-12) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
TURNING, STARTING AND SIGNAL
§ 72.075 CONFORMITY WITH PROVISIONS REQUIRED.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
provided in this subchapter.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-8-1) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.076 RIGHT TURNS.
   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-8-2) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.077 LEFT TURNS ON TWO-WAY ROADWAYS.
   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on
each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be
made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the
intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway
being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion
of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-8-3) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.078 LEFT TURNS ON OTHER THAN TWO-WAY ROADWAYS.
   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or
more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle
and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave
the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-8-4) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.079 SPECIFIED TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.
   Council or other designated traffic authority may cause markers, buttons or
signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and
direct that a different course from that specified in this chapter be traveled
by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers, buttons or signs are
so placed no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other
than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-8-5) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.080 “U” TURNS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any curve, or upon the approach to, or near the crest of a grade, where
such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within 500 feet.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-8-6)
   (B)   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction
within an intersection, or upon any street in a business district, or upon a
freeway, expressway or controlled-access highway, or where authorized signs are
erected to prohibit such movement, or at any other location unless such
movement can be made with reasonable safety to other users of the street and
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic that may be affected
by such movement.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.081 STARTING VEHICLE.
   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-8-7) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.082 SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE; TURNING OR STOPPING.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle
is in proper position upon the roadway as required in §§
72.075 to
72.079, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway or otherwise turn
a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn
any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter
provided in the event any other traffic may be affected by such movement.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be
given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning.
   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
such signal.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-8-8) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.083 SIGNALS TO BE GIVEN BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE.
   Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means
of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device,
but when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that hand-and-arm signal would
not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle then such signals
must be given by such a lamp or lamps or signal device.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-8-9) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.084 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the
left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
   (A)   Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally;
   (B)   Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward; and
   (C)   Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-8-10) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 72.095 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
street or highway.
   (B)   When two vehicles enter an intersection from a different street or
highway at approximately the same time the driver of the vehicle on the left
shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (C)   The right-of-way rules declared in divisions (A) and (B) above are
modified at through streets or highways and otherwise as hereinafter stated in
this section.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-9-1) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.096 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given a
signal when and as required by this traffic code may make such left turn and
the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the
opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicles making the left
turn.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-9-2) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.097 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY OR STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by §
72.119 at the entrance to a through street or highway and shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from such
through streets or highways or which are approaching so closely on such through
street or highway as to constitute an immediate hazard but the driver having so
yielded may proceed.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall likewise stop in obedience to a stop
sign as required herein at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one
or more entrances thereto although not a part of a through street or highway
and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which
are within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard, but may then proceed.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-9-3) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.098 DRIVING ONTO ROADWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY; DUTY TO YIELD.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a street or highway from a
private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the street or highway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-9-4) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.099 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
equipped with at least one flashing lighted lamp of a color authorized by §
73.18 of this code or ordinances, which is visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle other than
a police vehicle when operated as an authorized emergency vehicle, and when the
driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the driver
of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive
to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or
curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such
position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the street or highway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-9-5) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.100 TURNING INTO PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or driveway,
alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed by the
following rules:
   (A)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway;
   (B)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof;
   (C)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction, approach
for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the
left-hand curb or edge of the roadway; and
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private
road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across any alleyway,
private road, driveway or building.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
§ 72.115 DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSING.
   (A)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of
such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he or she can do so
safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
      (1)   (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagger gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; and
         (c)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of
the street or highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and
such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an
immediate hazard.
      (2)   Any approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-12-1) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.116 STOPS AT DANGEROUS GRADE CROSSINGS.
   Council or other designated traffic authority with the approval of the State
Commissioner of Highways is hereby authorized to designate particularly
dangerous highway grade crossings of railroads and to erect stop signs thereat.
When such stop signs are erected the driver of any vehicle shall stop within 50
feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall
proceed only upon exercising due care.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-12-2) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.117 STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSING.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (G) below, the driver of a commercial
motor vehicle specified in division (B) below shall not cross a railroad track
or tracks at grade unless he or she first:
      (1)   Stops the commercial motor vehicle within 50 feet of, and not
closer than 15 feet to, the tracks;
      (2)   Thereafter, listens and looks in each direction along the tracks
for an approaching train; and
      (3)   Ascertains that no train is approaching.
   (B)   When it is safe to do so, the driver may drive the commercial motor
vehicle across the tracks in a gear that permits the commercial motor vehicle
to complete the crossing without change of gears. The driver shall not shift
gears while crossing the tracks.
   (C)   The following commercial vehicles are required to stop at railroad
tracks or tracks:
      (1)   Every bus transporting passengers;
      (2)   Every commercial motor vehicle transporting any quantity of a
United States Department of Transportation defined division 2.3 chlorine;
      (3)   Every commercial motor vehicle which, in accordance with United
States Department of Transportation regulations, is marked or placarded and is
required to stop in accordance with 49 C.F.R. § 392.10(a)(3);
      (4)   Every cargo tank motor vehicle, loaded or empty, used for the
transportation of any hazardous material, as defined in Federal Department of
Transportation hazardous materials rules, 49 C.F.R. parts 107 through 180;
      (5)   Every cargo tank motor vehicle transporting a commodity which, at
the time of loading, has a temperature above its flashpoint as determined by 49
C.F.R. § 173.120; and
      (6)   Every cargo tank motor vehicle, whether loaded or empty,
transporting any commodity exemption in accordance with 49 C.F.R. part 107
subpart B.
   (D)   Any vehicle owned by an employer which, in carrying on the employer’s
business or in carrying employees to and from work, carries more than six
employees of the employer is required to stop at all railroad tracks or tracks
at grade, in accordance with division (A) above.
   (E)   All drivers of commercial motor vehicles not required to stop at
railroad tracks or tracks at grade as provided in division (A) above may not
cross a railroad track or tracks at grade unless he or she first slows the
commercial motor vehicle to a speed which will permit the commercial motor
vehicle to be stopped before reaching the nearest rail of the railroad crossing
and permit exercise of due caution to ascertain that the tracks are clear of an
approaching train.
   (F)   All drivers of commercial motor vehicles may not proceed to cross a
railroad crossing unless there is sufficient space to drive completely through
the crossing without stopping and the vehicle has sufficient undercarriage
clearance to drive completely through the crossing without stopping.
   (G)   No stop need be made at:
      (1)   Any crossing where a police officer, crossing flagger or a traffic
control signal directs traffic to proceed;
      (2)   A streetcar crossing, or railroad tracks used exclusively for
industrial switching purposes within a business district, as defined in 49
C.F.R. § 390.5;
      (3)   A railroad grade crossing controlled by a functioning highway
traffic signal transmitting a green indication which, under local law permits
the commercial motor vehicle to proceed across the track without slowing or
stopping; or
      (4)   A railroad grade crossing which is marked with a sign indicating
that the rail line is out of service.
   (H)   Any person driving a vehicle specified in this section or a vehicle
that requires a commercial driver’s license who fails to comply with the
requirements of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, that if the
electric or mechanical signal device is malfunctioning, this division (H) shall
not apply.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-12-3) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.118 MOVING HEAVY EQUIPMENT ACROSS GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating
speed of ten or less mph or a vertical body or load clearance of less than one-
half inch per foot of the distance between any two adjacent axles or in any
event, of less than nine inches, measured above the level surface of a roadway,
upon or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying
with this section.
   (B)   Notice of any such intended crossing shall be given to a station agent
of such railroad and a reasonable time be given to such railroad to provide
proper protection at such crossing.
   (C)   Before making any such crossing the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same not less than 15 feet nor
more than 50 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so stopped
shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching
train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall not
proceed until the crossing can be made safely.
   (D)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal or crossing gates or a flagger or otherwise of the immediate approach of
a railroad train or car. If a flagger is provided by the railroad, movement
over the crossing shall be under his or her direction.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-12-4) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.119 THROUGH STREETS AND STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Council or other designated traffic authority may designate through
streets or highways and erect stop signs at specified entrances thereto or may
designate any intersection as a stop intersection and erect like signs at one
or more entrances to such intersection.
   (B)   Every such sign shall bear the word “Stop” in letters not less than
six inches in height and such sign shall at nighttime be rendered luminous by
steady or flashing internal illumination, or by a fixed floodlight projected on
the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the
sign.
   (C)   Every stop sign shall be erected as near as practicable to the nearest
line of the crosswalk on the near side of the roadway.
   (D)   Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or in the event
there is no crosswalk shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none,
then at the point nearest the intersecting street or highway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting street or highway before
entering the intersection except when directed to proceed by a police officer
or traffic control signal.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-12-5) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.120 DRIVING ONTO ROADWAY FROM PLACE OTHER THAN ROADWAY; STOPPING AT
SIDEWALK.
   The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from any alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or private driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such
roadway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-12-6) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.121 STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; SIGNS AND WARNING LIGHTS, SALE OF SCHOOL BUS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school children shall stop the vehicle before reaching such
school bus when there is in operation on such school bus flashing warning
signal lights, as referred to in W. Va. Code § 17C-12-8 and such driver shall
not proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or is signaled by the school
bus driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer actuated. This
section applies wherever the school bus is receiving or discharging children,
including, but not limited to, any street, highway, parking lot, private road
or driveway; provided, that the driver of a vehicle upon a controlled access
highway need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a
different roadway or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross the roadway. If the identity of the driver cannot be
ascertained, then any such owner or lessee of the vehicle in violation of this
division (A) shall be subject to the penalty provided for a violation of this
division (A) provided, however, that such conviction shall not subject such
owner or lessee to farther administrative or other penalties for such offense,
notwithstanding other provisions of the West Virginia Code or this traffic code
to the contrary.
   (B)   Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear
upon the front and rear thereof a plainly visible sign containing the words
“school bus” in letters not less than eight inches in height. When a contract
school bus is being operated upon a street or highway for purposes other than
the actual transportation of children either to or from school, all markings
thereon indicating “school bus” shall be covered or concealed. Any school bus
sold or transferred to another owner by a county board of education, agency or
individual, shall have all flashing warning lights disconnected and all
lettering removed or permanently obscured, except when sold or transferred for
the transportation of school children.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-12-7) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.122 STOPPING FOR PASSENGER VAN; SIGNS AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (A)   Every passenger van used for the transportation of children shall bear
upon the front and rear thereof a plainly visible sign containing the warning
“Caution: Loading and Unloading Passengers” in letters not less than six inches
in height. Every such passenger van shall be equipped with either flashing
warning signal lights as are contemplated and referred to in W. Va. Code § 17C-
12-8, or a red caution flag which the driver or some other adult must use by
exiting the passenger van and displaying while assisting in the loading or
unloading of passengers. Such vehicles may also be equipped with a white
flashing strobotron warning light that meets the requirements set forth in W.
Va. Code § 17C-15-26(e).
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle upon meeting or overtaking from any direction
any passenger van which has stopped for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers shall stop his or her vehicle before reaching the passenger van when
there is in operation on the passenger van flashing warning signal lights or
when an adult is outside the passenger van with a red caution flag and
assisting with the loading or unloading of passengers. The driver of a vehicle
may not proceed until he or she is signaled by the passenger van driver to
proceed, the passenger van flashing signal lights are no longer actuated, or
the passenger resumes motion. This section applies whenever the passenger van
is loading or unloading children on any street, highway, parking lot, private
road or driveway; provided, that the driver of a vehicle upon a controlled
access highway need not stop upon meeting or passing a passenger van which is
on a different roadway or adjacent to the highway and where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross the roadway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-12-17a) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.123 OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
MISCELLANEOUS RULES, FUNERAL PROCESSIONS, SECURITY
ON MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 72.135 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to set
unattended on public, commercial or private property, without first stopping
the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key, and effectively setting the
brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the side, such as to the curb or side of a street or highway. A “written
warning” shall be given for the first offense on private property, but no such
written warning is required for violations on public or commercial property.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.136 BACKING A VEHICLE.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-14-2) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.137 DRIVERS’ VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his or her
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-14-4) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.138 PASSENGERS IN SEAT WITH OPERATOR.
   No more than three persons including the operator shall ride or be permitted
by such operator to ride in the seat with the operator of any motor vehicle
while such motor vehicle is being operated on the streets or highways of this
municipality; provided, however, that the limitation of this section shall not
apply to a truck cab or truck crew compartment properly designed for the
occupancy of four persons including the operator, and so designated on the
registration card by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-14-5) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.139 PASSENGERS ON RUNNING BOARD.
   No passenger shall ride nor shall the operator permit any passenger to ride
on the running boards of any motor vehicle while such vehicle is being operated
on the streets or highways of this municipality.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-14-6) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.140 FOLLOWING AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business may not
follow any authorized emergency vehicle traveling in response to a fire alarm
or other emergency closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle
within the block where such authorized emergency vehicle has stopped in answer
to a fire alarm or other emergency.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-14-9) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.141 APPROACHING AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The driver of any vehicle approaching a stationary authorized emergency
vehicle, when the authorized emergency vehicle is giving a signal by displaying
alternately flashing red, red and white, blue, or red and blue lights or amber
or yellow warning lights, shall:
   (A)   Proceed with due caution, yield the right-of-way by making a lane
change not adjacent to that of the authorized emergency vehicle, if possible
with regard to safety and traffic conditions, if on a highway having at least
four lanes with not less than two lanes proceeding in the same direction as the
approaching vehicle and reduce speed to a safe level for road conditions; or
   (B)   Proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining
a safe speed not to exceed 15 mph on any nondivided highway or street and 25
mph on any divided highway depending on road conditions, if changing lanes
would be impossible or unsafe.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-14-9a) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.142 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department
when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in command.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-14-10) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.143 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FUNERAL DIRECTOR and FUNERAL ESTABLISHMENT. Have the same meaning as set
forth in W. Va. Code § 30-6-4.
      FUNERAL ESCORT. A person or entity that provides escort services for
funeral processions, including law enforcement personnel and agencies.
      FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle that escorts a funeral
procession.
      FUNERAL LEAD VEHICLE. Any authorized law enforcement or non-law
enforcement motor vehicle or a funeral escort vehicle being used to lead and
facilitate the movement of a funeral procession. A funeral hearse may serve as
a FUNERAL LEAD VEHICLE.
      FUNERAL PROCESSION. Two or more vehicles accompanying the body of a
deceased person, or traveling to the church, chapel, cemetery or other location
at which the funeral service or final disposition is to be held, including a
funeral lead vehicle or a funeral escort vehicle.
   (B)   Funeral procession right-of-way.
      (1)   Regardless of any traffic control device or right-of-way provisions
prescribed by state or local ordinance, pedestrians and operators of all
vehicles, except as stated in division (B)(3) below, shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle which is part of a funeral procession being led by a funeral
escort vehicle or a funeral lead vehicle.
      (2)   When the funeral lead vehicle lawfully enters an intersection,
either by reason of a traffic control device or at the direction of law
enforcement personnel, the remaining vehicles in the funeral procession may
follow through the intersection regardless of any traffic control devices or
right-of-way provisions prescribed by state or local law.
      (3)   Funeral processions have the right-of-way at intersections
regardless of traffic control devices subject to the following conditions and
exceptions:
         (a)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the
right-of-way to an approaching emergency vehicle giving an audible or visible
signal;
         (b)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the
right-of-way when directed to do so by a police officer; and
         (c)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession must exercise due
care when participating in a funeral procession.
   (C)   Driving in procession.
      (1)   All vehicles comprising a funeral procession shall follow the
preceding vehicle in the funeral procession as closely as is practical and
safe.
      (2)   Any ordinance, law or rule stating that motor vehicles shall be
operated to allow sufficient space enabling any other vehicle to enter and
occupy such space without danger is not applicable to vehicles in a funeral
procession.
   (D)   Liability. Liability for any death, personal injury or property damage
suffered on or after July 1, 1999, by any person in a funeral procession may
not be imposed upon a funeral director or funeral establishment or their
employees or agents unless the death, personal injury or property damage is
proximately caused by the negligent or intentional act of a funeral director or
funeral establishment or their employees or agents.
   (E)   Equipment. All nonlaw enforcement funeral escort vehicles and funeral
lead vehicles may be equipped with at least one lighted circulation flashing
lamp exhibiting an amber or purple light or lens. Flashing amber or purple
lights may be used when such vehicles are used in a funeral procession.
(W. Va. Code § Art. 17C-23) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.144 OPENING DOOR OF VEHICLE ON TRAFFIC SIDE.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving
traffic for a period of time longer than is necessary to load or unload
passengers.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.145 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLE.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.146 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated
or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion. This
provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of
a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for
merchandise.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.147 SQUEALING TIRES, CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES.
   No person shall unnecessarily race the motor of any vehicle and no person
shall operate any motor vehicle, except in an emergency, in such a manner that
the vehicle is so rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position that
the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or chattering noise unusual to its
normal operation, or whereby the tires of such vehicle squeal or leave tire
marks on the roadway, commonly called “peeling”.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.148 TAKING, INJURING OR TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle, not his or her own, without consent
of the owner thereof, and with intent temporarily to deprive such owner of his
or her possession of such vehicle, but without intent to steal the vehicle. The
consent of the owner of a vehicle to its taking or driving shall not in any
case be presumed or implied because of such owner’s consent on a previous
occasion to the taking or driving of such vehicle by the same or a different
person. Any person who assists in, or is a party or accessory to or an
accomplice in any such unauthorized taking or driving, shall also be guilty of
a violation of this section.
(W. Va. Code § 17A-8-4)
   (B)   (1)   No person either individually or in association with one or more
persons shall willfully injure or tamper with any vehicle or break or remove
any part or parts of or from a vehicle without the consent, of the owner.
      (2)   No person with intent to commit any malicious mischief, injury or
other crime shall climb into or upon a vehicle whether it is in motion or at
rest or with like intent attempt to manipulate any of the levers, starting
mechanism, brakes or other mechanism or device of a vehicle while the same is
at rest and unattended or with like intent set in motion any vehicle while the
same is at rest and unattended.
(W. Va. Code § 17A-8-6) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.149 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK, STREET LAWN OR CURB.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle, upon a
sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary
driveway.
   (B)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a street lawn area or the curb of a
street, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway or when
otherwise lawfully authorized.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.150 SHORTCUTTING; AVOIDING TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   No driver shall leave the roadway and enter upon a public or private
lot, street or any other property to avoid a traffic control device.
   (B)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $100, or imprisoned in jail for not more than 30 days,
or both fined and imprisoned.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.151 COASTING PROHIBITED.
   The operator of any motor vehicle when traveling on a down grade on any
street, alley or highway shall not coast with the gears of such vehicle in
neutral.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.152 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   No operator of a vehicle shall drive the same over or through a safety zone.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.153 DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR.
   No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or any part
thereof, which has been closed in the process of its construction,
reconstruction or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by the authority
having jurisdiction to close such street or highway.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.154 OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC.
   No person shall operate, stop, stand or park any motor vehicle on any street
or alley within the municipality so as to obstruct or hinder the free flow of
motor vehicle traffic except in compliance with a lawful order of a police
officer or in compliance with a traffic control sign, signal or marking.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.155 VEHICLE SECURITY.
   Every owner or registrant of a motor vehicle shall maintain security upon
such vehicle as required by W. Va. Code Article 17D-2A, and no person shall
knowingly drive or operate on any street within the municipality any motor
vehicle upon which security is required by such Article unless the security is
provided, and violation of any of the provisions of W. Va. Code Article 17D-2A
including failure to have a certificate of insurance, if required, shall
constitute a violation under this section.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.156 VEHICLE REGULATIONS ON PARK PROPERTY.
   (A)   As used in this section, BOARD means the town’s Park and Recreation
Board and VEHICLE means any automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or any other form
of mechanical transportation.
   (B)   No person shall drive or propel or cause to be driven or propelled
along or over any roadway or other property under the supervision of the Board
at a greater rate of speed than 15 mph.
   (C)   No vehicle shall be parked or stopped on any roadway or on any other
property within park areas under the supervision of the Board, except as
designated parking areas. No vehicle shall be parked or stopped on areas within
the park areas or on areas of the roadway designated for travel of vehicles or
on paved areas not designated for parking, except on occasion when such area is
specifically designated as a parking or driving area, whichever applies, by the
Board or the town.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.157 MOTORIZED SCOOTERS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      MOTORIZED SCOOTERS. A scooter that is powered by a gasoline or electric
motor.
   (B)   Prohibited acts; exemptions.
      (1)   The riding, operation or other use of motorized scooters for
transportation or recreational purposes, within or upon the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parking lots and other property owned, leased or controlled by the
town and any of its boards, authorities or commissions is prohibited, unless
the person using such motorized scooter has a valid driver’s license under the
provisions of the West Virginia Code.
      (2)   It shall not be an offense for a motorized scooter to be operated
upon a designated parade route, when such person is a duly registered and
recognized participant in any properly permitted parade, provided that such
operation occurs in conjunction with said parade.
      (3)   The federal government, the State of West Virginia, and the town
are exempt from the provisions of this section.
      (4)   The provisions of this section does not apply to an electric
personal assistive mobility device as defined in §
76.09 of this code of ordinances and as operated by a mobility impaired person
as defined in §
70.01 of this code of ordinances.
      (5)   Any licensed driver permitted to operate a motorized scooter, under
division (A) above, shall comply with the required safety equipment set forth
in §
73.29 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any violation shall constitute the commission of a misdemeanor
criminal offense, and any officer of the Police Department of the town or any
officer of any other police agency, exercising proper jurisdiction within the
corporate limits of the town is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a
citation and to charge any such person who commits a violation. Any person
convicted of a first offense shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than
$100. Any person convicted of a second or further offense shall be fined not
less than $50 nor more than $250.
      (2)   The parent or other guardian of any person violating the provisions
of this section when such person shall not have attained the age of 18 years
shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such minor to violate any provision
of this section. Any such authorization or if such parent or other guardian
shall knowingly permit any such minor to violate the provisions of this section
shall constitute a criminal violation and shall subject such parent or guardian
to the criminal penalties set forth in this section. The citing and conviction
of any parent or guardian shall not prohibit the citing and conviction of the
operator of such motorized scooter.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.158 PROHIBITED USE OF AN ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE, DRIVING WITHOUT
HANDHELD FEATURES; DEFINITIONS; EXCEPTIONS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) below, a person may not drive or
operate a motor vehicle on a public street or highway while:
      (1)   Texting; or
      (2)   Using a cell phone or other electronic communications device,
unless the use is accomplished by hands-free equipment.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CELL PHONE. A cellular, analog, wireless or digital telephone.
      DRIVING or OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE. Operating a motor vehicle, with the
motor running, including while temporarily stationary because of traffic, a
traffic control device, or other momentary delays, but does not include
operating a motor vehicle after the driver has moved the vehicle to the side
of, or off, a highway and halted in a location where the vehicle can safely
remain stationary.
      ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE. A cell telephone, personal digital
assistant, electronic device with mobile data access, laptop computer, pager,
broadband personal communication device, two-way messaging device, electronic
game or portable computing device. For the purposes of this section, an
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE does not include:
         (a)   Voice radios, mobile radios, land mobile radios, commercial
mobile radios or two way radios with the capability to transmit and receive
voice transmissions utilizing a push-to-talk or press-to- transmit function; or
         (b)   Other voice radios used by a law enforcement officer, an
emergency services provider, an employee or agent of public safety
organizations, first responders, amateur radio operators (HAM) licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission and school bus operators.
      ENGAGING IN A CALL. When a person talks into or listens on an electronic
communication device, but shall not include when a person dials or enters a
phone number on a pushpad or screen to initiate the call.
      HANDS-FREE ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE. An electronic communication
device that has an internal feature or function, or that is equipped with an
attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of such electronic
communication device, by which a user engages in a call without the use of
either hand or both hands.
      HANDS-FREE EQUIPMENT. The internal feature or function of a hands-free
electronic communication device or the attachment or addition to a hands-free
electronic communication device by which a user may engage in a call or text
without the use of either hand or both hands.
      TEXTING. Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text from,
an electronic communication device, and includes, but is not limited to, short
message service, e-mailing, instant messaging, a command or request to access a
World Wide Web page or engaging in any other form of electronic text retrieval
or entry, for present or future communication. For purposes of this section,
TEXTING does not include the following actions:
         (a)   Reading, selecting or entering a telephone number, an extension
number, or voicemail retrieval codes and commands into an electronic device by
the pressing the device in order to initiate or receive a phone call or using
voice commands to initiate or receive a telephone call;
         (b)   Inputting, selecting or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system; or
         (c)   Using a device capable of performing multiple functions,
including fleet management systems, dispatching devices, smart phones, citizens
band radios or music players, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited in
this section.
      USING A CELL PHONE OR OTHER ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE. Holding in a
person’s hand or hands an electronic communication device while:
         (a)   Viewing or transmitting images or data;
         (b)   Playing games;
         (c)   Composing, sending, reading, viewing, accessing, browsing,
transmitting, saving or retrieving e-mail, text messages or other electronic
data; or
         (c)   Engaging in a call.
   (C)   Division (A) above shall not apply to:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer, a firefighter, an emergency medical
technician, a paramedic or the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle in
the performance of their official duties;
      (2)   A person using an electronic communication device to report to
appropriate authorities a fire, a traffic accident, a serious road hazard, or a
medical or hazardous materials emergencies; and
      (3)   The activation or deactivation of hands-free equipment or a
function of hands-free equipment.
   (D)   This section does not supersede the provisions of W. Va. Code § 17B-2-
3a or any more restrictive provisions for drivers of commercial motor vehicles
prescribed by the provisions of W. Va. Code Chapter 17E or federal law or rule.
   (E)   Any person who violates the provisions of division (A) above is guilty
of a traffic offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall for a first offense be
fined $100; for a second offense be fined $200; and for a third or subsequent
offense be fined $300. No court costs or other fees shall be assessed for a
violation of division (A) above.
   (F)   Driving or operating a motor vehicle on a public street or highway
while texting shall be enforced as a primary offense as of July 1, 2012.
Driving or operating a motor vehicle on a public street or highway while using
a cell phone or other electronic communication device without hands-free
equipment shall be enforced as a secondary offense as of July 1, 2012, and as a
primary offense as of July 1, 2013 for purposes of citation.
   (G)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to authorize
seizure of a cell phone or electronic device by any law enforcement agency.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 72.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   See §
70.99 for general traffic code penalty.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
72.001 through
72.008 after being involved in an accident resulting in physical injury but not
death to any person shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or fined not
more than $1,000 or both.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-4-1)
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates §
72.020 shall for a first offense be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500,
or imprisoned not less than five nor more than 30 days; for a second or
subsequent offense shall be fined not less than $50 or more than $1,000, or
imprisoned not less than ten nor more than 30 days, or both.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (C)(1) above, any person
convicted of a violation of §
72.020 who in doing so proximately causes another to suffer serious bodily
injury shall be confined in jail not less than ten days nor more than 30 days
or fined not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 or both.
      (3)   For purposes of division (C)(2) above, SERIOUS BODILY INJURY means
bodily injury which creates a substantial risk of death, which causes serious
or prolonged disfigurement, prolonged impairment of health or prolonged loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily organ.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
72.035 through
72.038 for which no other penalty is provided shall be fined not more than
$100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter shall be fined not
more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not
more than $500.
      (2)   Speeding.
         (a)   Unless otherwise provided in this division (D)(2), any person
who violates the provisions of §
72.035 shall be fined not more than $100; upon a second conviction within one
year thereafter, shall be fined not more than $200; and, upon a third or
subsequent conviction within two years thereafter, shall be fined not more than
$500.
         (b)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
72.035(B)(1) shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500; provided,
that if such conviction is based upon a violation of the provisions of §
72.035(B)(1) where the offender exceeded the speed limit by 15 mph or more in
the presence of one or more children, then the person shall be fined not less
than $100 nor more than $500.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-6-1)
      (3)   Street racing: whoever violates §
72.038 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100; for a second
offense fined not less than $50 nor more than $500, or by imprisonment for not
less than six days nor more than 30 days, or both; and for a third and each
subsequent offense fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, or by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both. For the purposes of this
section, a forfeiture of bail or collateral deposited to secure such person’s
appearance in court, which forfeiture has not been vacated, shall be equivalent
to a final conviction. If at the time of any violation of the provisions of §
72.038 by any person as an operator of a motor vehicle, such person was not
entitled to operate a motor vehicle in this state because his or her operator’s
or chauffeur’s license, or privilege to drive in this state if such person be a
nonresident, had earlier been suspended or removed, then in addition to the
penalties provided for in this section, the provisions of W. Va. Code § 17B-4-
3 shall be applicable.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-6-8)
   (E)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
72.050 through
72.061 shall be fined not more than $100; upon a second conviction within one
year thereafter shall be fined not more than $200; and upon a third or
subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than $500.
   (F)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
72.075 through
72.084 shall be fined not more than $100; upon a second conviction within one
year thereafter shall be fined not more than $200; and upon a third or
subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than $500.
   (G)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
72.095 through
72.100 shall be fined not more than $200; upon a second conviction within one
year thereafter shall be fined not more than $300; and upon a third or
subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than $1,000.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-9-6)
   (H)   (1)   Driving onto roadway from place other than roadway. Whoever
violates §
72.120 shall be fined not more than $100; upon a second conviction within one
year thereafter shall be fined not more than $200; and upon a third or
subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than $500.
      (2)   Stopping for school bus or passenger van. Any driver acting in
violation of §§
72.121(A) or
72.122(B) shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $200, or imprisoned
not more than 30 days, or both. If the identity of the driver cannot be
ascertained, then any such owner or lessee of the vehicle in violation of §§
72.121(A) or
72.122(B) shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100; provided,
however, that such conviction shall not subject such owner or lessee to further
administrative or other penalties for such offense, notwithstanding other
provisions of this traffic code to the contrary.
   (I)   (1)   Generally. Whoever violates any provision of §§
72.135 through
72.157 for which no other penalty is provided shall be fined not more than
$100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter shall be fined not
more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not
more than $500.
      (2)   Taking, injuring or tampering with vehicle. Whoever violates §
72.148 shall, for a first offense, be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned
not more than 30 days, or both.
(W. Va. Code § 17A-11-1)
      (3)   Vehicle security. Whoever violates §
72.155 shall be fined not less than $200 or more than $5,000 or imprisoned not
more than 30 days, or both.
(W. Va. Code § 17D-2A-9)
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 73: EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
Section
Equipment
   
73.01   Driving unsafe vehicles; application; farm and road equipment
exceptions
   
73.02   When lighted lights required
   
73.03   Measurement of distances and heights
   
73.04   Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles
   
73.05   Tail light; illumination of rear license plate
   
73.06   Red light or red flagon extended loads
   
73.07   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles
   
73.08   Lights on slow-moving vehicles
   
73.09   Spotlights and auxiliary lights
   
73.10   Signal lamps and signal devices
   
73.11   Cowl, fender and back-up lights; flashing hazard lights
   
73.12   Multiple-beam road-lighting equipment requirements
   
73.13   Use of headlight beams
   
73.14   Single-beam road-lighting equipment
   
73.15   Lights on motorcycles, motor-driven cycles and mopeds
   
73.16   Alternate road-lighting equipment
   
73.17   Number of driving lights required or permitted
   
73.18   Special restrictions on lights
   
73.19   Motor vehicle or motorcycle brakes
   
73.20   Inspection of brakes on motorcycles, motor-driven cycles and mopeds
   
73.21   Horn, siren and theft alarm signal
   
73.22   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise
   
73.23   Rear-view mirror
   
73.24   Windshield to be unobstructed, windshield wiper
   
73.25   Tire equipment restrictions
   
73.26   Reserved
   
73.27   Vehicles transporting explosives
   
73.28   Television receiver in driver’s view prohibited
   
73.29   Safety equipment for motorcyclists, motorcycles, motor-driven cycles
and mopeds
   
73.30   Certification labels on mopeds
   
73.31   Child passenger safety devices required; child safety seats and booster
seats
   
73.32   Certificate of inspection and approval
   
73.33   Alteration of suspension system
   
73.34   Sun screening devices
   
73.35   Operation of vehicles with safety belts
   
73.36   Use of engine compression brakes prohibited
Size, Weight and Load
   
73.50   Oversize or overweight vehicles
   
73.51   Projecting loads on passenger vehicles
   
73.52   Maximum width, height and length
   
73.53   Loads dropping or leaking
   
73.54   Towing requirements
 
   
73.99   Penalty
EQUIPMENT
§ 73.01 DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES; APPLICATION; FARM AND ROAD EQUIPMENT
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move and no owner shall cause or knowingly
permit to be driven or moved on any street or highway any vehicle or
combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any
person, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped
with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as
required in this section, or which is equipped in any manner in violation of
this section, or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any
act required under this section.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle not inconsistent with
the provisions of this section.
   (C)   The provisions of this section with respect to equipment on vehicles
shall not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road rollers or
farm tractors except as herein made applicable. Every farm tractor equipped
with an electric lighting system shall at all times mentioned in §
73.02 display a red tail lamp and either multiple-beam or single-beam head
lamps meeting the requirements of §
73.02.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-1) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.02 WHEN LIGHTED LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every vehicle other than a school bus, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle
or moped operated upon a street or highway within this municipality at any time
from sunset to sunrise or during fog, smoke, rain or other unfavorable
atmospheric conditions, or at any other time when there is not sufficient light
to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the street or highway at
a distance of 500 feet ahead shall display lighted head lamps and illuminating
devices as hereinafter respectively required for different classes of vehicles,
subject to exceptions with respect to parked vehicles as provided for in §
73.07(C). Every school bus, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and moped shall
display lighted head lamps at all times when upon the street or highway.
   (B)   Lighted lamps and other lighting devices that consist of multiple
light-emitting diodes (LEDs) or other illuminating components that function as
a single lighting unit are deemed to be functional so long as at least 66% of
the LEDs or other illuminating components are functional; provided, that the
lighted lamps or lighting devices must still project sufficient illumination to
satisfy all other requirements contained in this chapter.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-2) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.03 MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.
   (A)   Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to the distance from
which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible or within which
such lamps or devices shall be visible such provisions shall apply during the
times stated in §
73.02 in respect to a vehicle without load when upon a straight, level,
unlighted street or highway under normal atmospheric conditions unless a
different time or condition is expressly stated.
   (B)   Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to the mounted height
of lamps or devices it shall mean from the center of such lamp or device to the
level ground upon which the vehicle stands when such vehicle is without a load.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-3) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 73.04 HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or
moped shall be equipped with at least two head lamps with at least one on each
side of the front of the motor vehicle, which head lamps shall comply with the
requirements and limitations set forth in this section.
   (B)   Every motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and moped shall be equipped with
at least one and not more than two head lamps which shall comply with the
requirements and limitations of this section.
   (C)   Every head lamp upon every motor vehicle, including every motorcycle,
motor-driven cycle and moped, shall be located at a height measured from the
center of the head lamp of not more than 54 inches nor less than 24 inches to
be measured as set forth in §
73.03.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-4) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, and any other vehicle
which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles, shall be equipped with
at least one tail lamp mounted on the rear, which, when lighted as hereinbefore
required, shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail lamp
on the rearmost vehicle need actually be seen from the distance specified.
   (B)   Every tail lamp upon every vehicle shall be located at a height of not
more than 60 inches nor less than 30 inches to be measured as set forth in §
73.03(B).
   (C)   Either a tail lamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate and
render it clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. Any tail lamp
or tail lamps, together with any separate lamp for illuminating the rear
registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the head lamps
or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-5) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.06 RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS.
   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more
beyond the bed or body of such vehicle there shall be displayed at the extreme
rear end of the load, at the times specified in §
73.02, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the sides and rear. The red light or lantern required under this
section shall be in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle.
At any time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red
flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square and so hung that the entire area
is visible to the driver of a vehicle approaching from the rear.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-14) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during
the hours between sunset and sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light
to reveal any person or object within a distance of 500 feet upon such street
or highway no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours between
sunset and sunrise and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or
object within a distance of 500 feet upon such street or highway, such vehicle
so parked or stopped shall be equipped with one or more lamps meeting the
following requirements: at least one lamp shall display a white or amber light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and the same
lamp or at least one other lamp shall display a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear of the vehicle, and the location of such lamp
or lamps shall always be such that at least one lamp or combination of lamps
meeting the requirements of this section is installed as near as practicable to
the side of the vehicle which is closest to passing traffic. The foregoing
provisions shall not apply to a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped.
   (C)   Any lighted head lamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-15) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08 LIGHTS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES.
   All vehicles including animal-drawn vehicles and including those referred to
in §
73.01(C) not hereinbefore specifically required to be equipped with lamps,
shall at the times specified in §
73.02 be equipped with at least one lighted lamp or lantern exhibiting a white
light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle and with
a lamp or lantern exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-16) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.09 SPOTLIGHTS AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS.
   (A)   Spot lamps. Any motor vehicle except a public utility company
maintenance vehicle may be equipped with not more than one spot lamp and every
lighted spot lamp shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another vehicle
that no part of the high-intensity portion of the beam will be directed to the
left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle nor more than
100 feet ahead of the vehicle. A public utility company maintenance vehicle may
be equipped with more than one spot lamp but all lighted spot lamps shall be
aimed and used in conformity to the requirements of this division (A).
   (B)   Fog lamps. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two
fog lamps mounted on the front at a height not less than 12 inches nor more
than 30 inches above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands and so
aimed that when the vehicle is not loaded none of the high-intensity portion of
the light to the left of the center of the vehicle shall at a distance of 25
feet ahead project higher than a level of four inches below the level of the
center of the lamp from which it comes.
   (C)   Auxiliary passing lamp. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not
more than one auxiliary passing lamp mounted on the front at a height not less
than 24 inches nor more than 42 inches above the level surface upon which the
vehicle stands and every auxiliary passing lamp shall meet the requirements and
limitations set forth in this section.
   (D)   Auxiliary driving lamp. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not
more than one auxiliary driving lamp mounted on the front at a height not less
than 16 inches nor more than 42 inches above the level surface upon which the
vehicle stands and every such auxiliary driving lamp shall meet the
requirements and limitations set forth in this section.
   (E)   Roof-mounted off-road light bar lighting device. Any motor vehicle may
be equipped with a roof-mounted off-road light bar lighting device comprised of
multiple lamps; provided, that whenever the vehicle is operated or driven upon
any road or highway, the roof-mounted off-road light bar lighting device shall
be turned off and covered with an opaque covering that prohibits light from
being emitted while the vehicle is being operated on any road or highway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-17) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.10 SIGNAL LAMPS AND SIGNAL DEVICES.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped and when required under this traffic
code shall be equipped with the following signal lamps or devices.
      (1)   A stop lamp on the rear which shall emit a red or yellow light and
which shall be actuated upon application of the service (foot) brake and which
may but need not be incorporated with a tail lamp.
      (2)   A lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device capable of clearly
indicating any intention to turn either to the right or to the left and which
shall be visible both from the front and rear.
   (B)   A stop lamp shall be plainly visible and understandable from a
distance of 100 feet to the rear both during normal sunlight and at nighttime
and signal lamp or lamps indicating intention to turn shall be visible and
understandable during daytime and nighttime from a distance of 100 feet both to
the front and rear. When a vehicle is equipped with a stop lamp or other signal
lamps, such lamp or lamps shall at all times be maintained in good working
condition. No stop lamp or signal lamp shall project a glaring or dazzling
light.
   (C)   All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminated when in use at
the times mentioned in §
73.02.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-18) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.11 COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS; FLASHING HAZARD LIGHTS.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two side cowl or
fender lamps which shall emit an amber or white light without glare.
   (B)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one running-board
courtesy lamp on each side thereof which shall emit a white or amber light
without glare.
   (C)   Except for school buses as provided in this division (C), any motor
vehicle may be equipped with not more than two back-up lamps either separately
or in combination with other lamps, but any such back-up lamp shall not be
lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion. School buses used for the
transportation of school children in this municipality, whether owned and
operated by a county board of education or privately owned and operated under
contract with a county board of education, shall be equipped with two back-up
lamps, one on each side of the rear door, with white lens or reflectors,
capable of lighting the roadway and objects to the rear of the bus for safe
backing during darkness, and which, at the option of the county board of
education, may each provide 50 candlepower in illumination intensity instead of
32 candlepower.
   (D)   Any vehicle may be equipped with lamps which may be used for the
purpose of warning the operators of other vehicles of the presence of a
vehicular traffic hazard requiring the exercise of unusual care in approaching,
overtaking or passing, and when so equipped may display such warning in
addition to any other warning signals required by this section. The lamps used
to display such warning to the front shall be mounted at the same level and as
widely spaced laterally as practicable and shall display simultaneously
flashing white or amber lights, or any shade of color between white and amber.
The lamps used to display such warning to the rear shall be mounted at the same
level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable, and shall show
simultaneously flashing amber or red lights or any shade of color between amber
and red.
   (E)   Vehicles used by “rural mail carriers” in carrying or delivering mail
in rural areas may be equipped with amber flashing lights. Such lights shall be
on the front and rear of the vehicle and may be activated when the vehicle is
stopped or decreasing speed in order to stop in the course of carrying,
delivering or picking up mail along the route.
   (F)   Vehicles used as the lead car in a funeral procession are hereby
authorized to be equipped with, but are not required to use, purple lamps or
purple flashing lights. Such lamps may be used for the purpose of warning the
operators of other vehicles of the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard
requiring the exercise of unusual care in approaching, overtaking or passing a
funeral procession, and when so equipped may display such warning in addition
to any other warning signals required by this section. The lamps or flashing
lights used to display such warning to the front shall be mounted at the same
level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable and shall display
simultaneously either illuminating or flashing purple lights. The lamps used to
display such warning to the rear shall be mounted at the same level and as
widely spaced laterally as practicable, and shall show simultaneously flashing
or illuminated purple lights.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-19) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.12 MULTIPLE-BEAM ROAD-LIGHTING EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Except as hereinafter provided, the head lamps or the auxiliary driving lamp
or the auxiliary passing lamp or combinations thereof on motor vehicles other
than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped shall be so arranged that the
driver may select at will between distributions of light projected to different
elevations and such lamps may, in addition, be so arranged that such selection
can be made automatically, subject to the following limitations.
   (A)   There shall be an uppermost distribution of light, or composite beam,
so aimed and of such intensity as to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance
of at least 350 feet ahead for all conditions of loading.
   (B)   There shall be a lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam,
so aimed and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a
distance of at least 100 feet ahead; and on a straight level road under any
condition of loading none of the high-intensity portion of the beam shall be
directed to strike the eyes of an approaching driver.
   (C)   Every new motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle
or moped, registered in the state after January 1, 1952, which has multiple-
beam road-lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator, which
shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the head
lamps is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. Such indicator shall be so
designed and located that when lighted it will be readily visible without glare
to the driver of the vehicle so equipped.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-20) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.13 USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS.
   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder adjacent
thereto during the times specified in §
73.02, the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam,
directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles
at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following
requirements and limitations:
   (A)   Whenever a driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle within
500 feet, such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so
aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming
driver. The lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam specified in §
73.12(B) shall be deemed to avoid glare at all times regardless of road contour
and loading.
   (B)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle follows another vehicle within 200
feet to the rear, except when engaged in the act of overtaking and passing,
such driver shall use a distribution of light permissible under this traffic
code other than the uppermost distribution of light specified in §
73.12(A).
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-21)
   (C)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 73.14 SINGLE-BEAM ROAD-LIGHTING EQUIPMENT.
   Head lamps arranged to provide a single distribution of light shall be
permitted on motor vehicles manufactured and sold prior to July 1, 1952 in lieu
of multiple-beam road-lighting equipment herein specified if the single
distribution of light complies with the following requirements and limitations.
   (A)   The head lamps shall be so aimed that when the vehicle is not loaded
none of the high-intensity portion of the light shall at a distance of 25 feet
ahead project higher than a level of five inches below the level of the center
of the lamp from which it comes, and in no case higher than 42 inches above the
level on which the vehicle stands at a distance of 75 feet ahead.
   (B)   The intensity shall be sufficient to reveal persons and vehicles at a
distance of at least 200 feet.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-22) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.15 LIGHTS ON MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES AND MOPEDS.
   The head lamp or head lamps upon every motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and
moped may be of the single-beam or multiple-beam type but in either event shall
comply with the requirements and limitations as follows.
   (A)   Every head lamp or head lamps shall be of sufficient intensity to
reveal a person or a vehicle at a distance of not less than 100 feet when the
motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped is operated at any speed less than 25
mph and at a distance of not less than 200 feet when it is operated at a speed
of 25 or more mph.
   (B)   If the motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped is equipped with a
multiple-beam type head lamp or head lamps the upper beam shall meet the
minimum requirements set forth above and not exceed the limitations set forth
herein and the lowermost beam shall meet the requirements applicable to a
lowermost distribution of light as set forth herein.
   (C)   If the motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped is equipped with a
single-beam lamp or lamps, the lamp or lamps shall be so aimed that when the
vehicle is loaded none of the high-intensity portion of light, at a distance of
25 feet ahead, shall project higher than the level of the center of the lamp
from which it comes.
   (D)   (1)   Subject to division (B) above, a motorcycle may be equipped
with, and an operator of a motorcycle may use, the following auxiliary
lighting:
         (a)   Amber and white illumination;
         (b)   Standard bulb running lights; or
         (c)   Light-emitting diode pods and strips.
      (2)   Lighting under this division shall be:
         (a)   Non-blinking;
         (b)   Non-flashing;
         (c)   Non-oscillating; and
         (d)   Directed toward the engine and the drive train of the motorcycle
to prevent interference with the driver's operation of the vehicle.
(W. Va. Code, § 17C-15-23)
§ 73.16 ALTERNATE ROAD-LIGHTING EQUIPMENT.
   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in §
73.02 when equipped with two lighted lamps upon the front thereof capable of
revealing persons and objects 75 feet ahead in lieu of lamps required in §
73.12, or §
73.14, provided that at no time shall it be operated at a speed in excess of 20
mph.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-24) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.17 NUMBER OF DRIVING LIGHTS REQUIRED OR PERMITTED.
   (A)   At all times specified in §
73.02 at least two lighted lamps shall be displayed, one on each side at the
front of every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or
moped, except when such vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing
lights on parked vehicles.
   (B)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with head lamps as herein required
is also equipped with any auxiliary lamps or a spot lamp or any other lamp on
the front thereof projecting a beam of intensity greater than 300 candlepower,
not more than a total of four of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall
be lighted at any one time when upon a street or highway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-25) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.18 SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS ON LIGHTS.
   (A)   Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle other
than head lamps, spot lamps, auxiliary lamps or flashing front-direction
signals which projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300
candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level
of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet
from the vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any street
or highway with any lamp or device thereon displaying other than a white or
amber light visible from directly in front of the center thereof except as
authorized by division (D) below.
   (C)   Except as authorized in divisions (D) and (F) below and §
73.11, flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles; provided, that any
vehicle as a means for indicating right or left turn, or any vehicle as a means
of indicating the same is disabled or otherwise stopped for an emergency may
have blinking or flashing lights.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this traffic code, the
following colors of flashing warning lights are restricted for the use of the
type of vehicle designated.
      (1)   Blue flashing warning lights are restricted to police vehicles.
Authorization for police vehicles shall be designated by the chief
administrative official of each police department.
      (2)   Except for standard vehicle equipment authorized by §
73.11, red flashing warning lights are restricted to the following:
         (a)   Ambulances;
         (b)   Firefighting vehicles;
         (c)   Hazardous material response vehicles;
         (d)   Industrial fire brigade vehicles;
         (e)   Rescue squad vehicles not operating out of a Fire Department;
         (f)   School buses;
         (g)   Class A vehicles, as defined by W. Va. Code § 17A-10-1 of those
firefighters who are authorized by their fire chiefs to have the lights;
         (h)   Class A vehicles of members of duly chartered rescue squads not
operating out of a Fire Department;
         (i)   Class A vehicles of members of ambulance services or duly
chartered rescue squads who are authorized by their respective chiefs to have
the lights;
         (j)   Class A vehicles of out-of-state residents who are active
members of West Virginia fire departments, ambulance services or duly chartered
rescue squads who are authorized by their respective chiefs to have the lights;
         (k)   West Virginia Department of Agriculture emergency response
vehicles;
         (l)   Vehicles designated by the Secretary of the Department of
Military Affairs and Public Safety for emergency response or emergency
management by the Division of Corrections, Regional Jail and Correctional
Facility Authority, Division of Juvenile Services and Division of Homeland
Security and Emergency Management; and
         (m)   Class A vehicles of emergency response or emergency management
personnel as designated by the Secretary of the Department of Military Affairs
and Public Safety and the county commission of the county of residence.
      (3)   Red flashing warning lights attached to a Class A vehicle shall be
operated only when responding to or engaged in handling an emergency requiring
the attention of the firefighters, members of the ambulance services or
chartered rescue squads. The use of red flashing warning lights shall be
authorized as follows.
         (a)   Authorization for all ambulances shall be designated by the
Department of Health and Human Resources and the sheriff of the county of
residence.
         (b)   Authorization for all fire department vehicles shall be
designated by the Fire Chief and the State Fire Marshal’s Office.
         (c)   Authorization for all hazardous material response vehicles and
industrial fire brigades shall be designated by the Chief of the Fire
Department and the State Fire Marshal’s office.
         (d)   Authorization for all rescue squad vehicles not operating out of
a fire department shall be designated by the squad chief, the sheriff of the
county of residence and the Department of Health and Human Resources.
         (e)   Authorization for school buses shall be designated as set out in
W. Va. Code § 17C-14-12.
         (f)   Authorization for firefighters to operate Class A vehicles shall
be designated by their fire chiefs and the State Fire Marshal s Office.
         (g)   Authorization for members of ambulance services or any other
emergency medical service personnel to operate Class A vehicles shall be
designated by their chief official, the Department of Health and Human
Resources and the sheriff of the county of residence.
         (h)   Authorization for members of duly chartered rescue squads not
operating out of a fire department to operate Class A vehicles shall be
designated by their squad chiefs, the sheriff of the county of residence and
the Department of Health and Human Resources.
         (i)   Authorization for out-of-state residents operating Class A
vehicles who are active members of a West Virginia fire department, ambulance
services or duly chartered rescue squads shall be designated by their
respective chiefs.
         (j)   Authorization for West Virginia Department of Agriculture
emergency response vehicles shall be designated by the Commissioner or the
Department of Agriculture.
         (k)   Authorization for vehicles for emergency response or emergency
management by the Division of Corrections, Regional Jail and Correctional
Facility Authority, Division of Juvenile Services and Division of Homeland
Security and Emergency Management shall be designated by the Secretary of the
Department of Military Affairs and Public Safety.
         (l)   Authorization for Class A vehicles of emergency response or
emergency management personnel as designated by the Secretary of the Department
of Military Affairs and Public Safety and the county commission of the county
of residence.
      (4)   Yellow or amber flashing warning lights are restricted to the
following:
         (a)   All other emergency vehicles, including tow trucks and wreckers,
authorized by the W. Va. Code Chapter 17C and W. Va. Code § 17C-15-27;
         (b)   Postal service vehicles and rural mail carriers, as authorized
in §
73.11;
         (c)   Rural newspaper delivery vehicles;
         (d)   Flag car services;
         (e)   Vehicles providing road service to disabled vehicles;
         (f)   Service vehicles of a public service corporation;
         (g)   Snow removal equipment;
         (h)   School buses; and
         (i)   Automotive fire apparatus owned by a municipality or other
political subdivision, by a volunteer or part-volunteer fire company or
department or by an industrial fire brigade.
      (5)   The use of yellow or amber flashing warning lights shall be
authorized as follows.
         (a)   Authorization for tow trucks, wreckers, rural newspaper delivery
vehicles, flag car services, vehicles providing road service to disabled
vehicles, service vehicles of a public service corporation and postal service
vehicles shall be designated by the sheriff of the county of residence.
         (b)   Authorization for snow removal equipment shall be designated by
the Commissioner of the Division of Highways.
         (c)   Authorization for school buses shall be designated as set out in
W. Va. Code § 17C-14-12.
         (d)   Authorization for automotive fire apparatus shall be designated
by the Fire Chief in conformity with the NFPA 1901 standard for automotive fire
apparatus as published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) on
July 18, 2003, and adopted by the State Fire Commission by legislative rule (87
CSR 1 et seq.), except as follows:
            1.   With the approval of the State Fire Marshal, used automotive
fire apparatus may be conformed to the NFPA standard in effect on the date of
its manufacture or conformed to a later NFPA standard; and
            2.   Automotive fire apparatus may be equipped with blinking or
flashing headlamps.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, any vehicle
belonging to a county board of education, an organization receiving funding
from the state or federal transit administration for the purpose of providing
general public transportation, or hauling solid waste may be equipped with a
white flashing strobotron warning light. This strobe light may be installed on
the roof of a school bus, a public transportation vehicle, or a vehicle hauling
solid waste not to exceed one-third the body length forward from the rear of
the roof edge. The light shall have a single clear lens emitting light 360
degrees around its vertical axis and may not extend above the roof more than
six and one-half inches. A manual switch and a pilot light must be included to
indicate the light is in operation.
   (F)   No person shall install or use flashing warning lights of an
unauthorized color on a vehicle other than as specified in this section, except
that a police vehicle may be equipped with either or both blue or red warning
lights.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-26) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.19 MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE BRAKES.
   (A)   Brake equipment required.
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or
moped, when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with brakes
adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle,
including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall
be effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate
means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so
constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not
leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and moped, when operated upon
a street or highway, shall be equipped with at least one brake which may be
operated by hand or foot.
      (3)   Every trailer or semitrailer of a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or
more when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with brakes
adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold such vehicle and so
designed as to be applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its
cab, and such brakes shall be so designed and connected that in case of an
accidental breakaway of the towed vehicle the brakes shall be automatically
applied.
      (4)   Every new motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer hereinafter sold in
this state and operated upon the streets or highways shall be equipped with
service brakes upon all wheels, with the following exceptions.
         (a)   Trucks and truck-tractors having three or more axles need not
have brakes on the front wheels, except when such vehicles are equipped with at
least two steerable axles, the wheels of one such axle need not be equipped
with brakes.
         (b)   Any motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped and any semitrailer
of less than 1,500 pounds gross weight need not be equipped with brakes.
      (5)   In any combination of motor-driven vehicles, means shall be
provided for applying the rearmost trailer brakes, of any trailer equipped with
brakes, in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle and
developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest
rate; or means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the
rearmost trailer equipped with brakes; or both of the above means capable of
being used alternatively may be employed.
      (6)   Every such vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles,
motor-driven cycles and mopeds, shall be equipped with parking brakes adequate
to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under all conditions
of loading on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material. The parking
brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the foregoing
requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring action or by
equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (7)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that a failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (8)   The brake shoes operating within or upon the drums on the vehicle
wheels of any motor vehicle may be used for both service and hand operation.
   (B)   Performance ability of brakes. Every motor vehicle or combination of
motor-drawn vehicles shall be capable, at all times and under all conditions of
loading, of being stopped on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose
material, upon application of the service (foot) brake, within the distances
specified below, or shall be capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate
corresponding to these distances:
 
                                 Feet to stop Deceleration from 20 miles in
                                               feet per per hour second
Vehicle or combinations of
vehicles having brakes on all     30           14
wheels
Vehicles or combinations of
vehicles not having brakes on all 40           10.7
wheels
 
   (C)   Maintenance of brakes. All brakes shall be maintained in good working
order and shall be so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with
respect to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-31) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.20 INSPECTION OF BRAKES ON MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES AND MOPEDS.
   No person shall operate on any street or highway any motorcycle, motor-
driven cycle or moped in the event the Commissioner of Highways has disapproved
the brake equipment upon such vehicle or type of vehicle.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-32) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.21 HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a street or highway shall be
equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound
audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet, but
no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound
or a whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall when reasonably necessary to
ensure safe operation give audible warning with his or her horn but shall not
otherwise use such horn when upon a street or highway.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a
vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise permitted in this
section.
   (C)   It is permissible but not required that any commercial vehicle be
equipped with a theft alarm signal device which is so arranged that it cannot
be used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal.
   (D)   Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle
or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a
distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by the Department of
Motor Vehicles, but such siren shall not be used except when such vehicle is
operated in response to an emergency or in the immediate pursuit of an actual
or suspected violator of the law, in which such latter events the driver of
such vehicle shall sound such siren when reasonably necessary to warn
pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-33) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.22 MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move on any street or highway within the town
any motor vehicle, trailer, semi-truck or pole trailer or any combination
thereof, unless the equipment upon every such vehicle is in good working order
and adjustment and the vehicle is in such safe mechanical condition as not to
endanger the driver or other occupant or any person upon any street or highway
within the town. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in
good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual
noise; such muffler shall be the muffler originally installed by the
manufacturer of the vehicle or if a replacement, the equivalent thereof. No
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a street or highway within the town. The engine and power mechanisms
of every motor vehicle shall be so equipped and adjusted as to prevent the
escape of excessive fumes or smoke. Any person violating the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 17C-15-34
§ 73.23 REAR-VIEW MIRROR.
   Every motor vehicle which is so constructed or loaded as to obstruct the
driver’s view to the rear thereof from the driver’s position shall be equipped
with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the street or
highway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-35) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.24 WINDSHIELD TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED, WINDSHIELD WIPER.
   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster or other
nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings or side or rear
windows of such vehicle which obstructs the driver’s clear view of the street
or highway or any intersecting street or highway.
   (B)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield, which device
shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the
vehicle.
   (C)   Every windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in
good working order.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-36)
   (D)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $500.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 73.25 TIRE EQUIPMENT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Every solid rubber tire on a vehicle shall have rubber on its entire
traction surface at least one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the
entire periphery.
   (B)   No person shall operate or move on any highway any motor vehicle,
trailer or semitrailer having any metal tire in contact with the roadway.
   (C)   No tire on a vehicle moved on a highway shall have on its periphery
any block, stud, flange, cleat or spike or any other protuberance of any
material other than rubber which projects beyond the tread of the traction
surface of the tire, except that:
      (1)   It shall be permissible to use farm machinery with tires having
protuberances which will not injure the street or highway;
      (2)   It shall be permissible to use tire chains of reasonable
proportions upon any vehicle when required for safety because of snow, ice or
other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to skid;
      (3)   It shall be permissible to use studded tires during the period from
November 1, of each year until April 15 of the following year. Provided that in
the interest of highway maintenance, no vehicle moved on a street or highway,
other than school buses, shall be equipped with studded tires which are
operational with a recommended air pressure greater than 40 pounds per square
inch; and
      (4)   No studded tires or chains shall be sold or used within the
municipality which do not meet the specifications established by the rules and
regulations which the Commissioner of Highways shall promulgate.
   (D)   Council may in its discretion issue special permits authorizing the
operation upon the street or highway of traction engines or tractors having
movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the periphery of such movable
tracks or farm tractors or other farm machinery, the operation of which upon a
highway would otherwise be prohibited under this traffic code.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-37) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.26 RESERVED.
§ 73.27 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   Any person operating any vehicle transporting any explosive as a cargo or
part of a cargo upon a street or highway shall at all times comply with the
provisions of this section.
   (A)   Such vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and the rear
with the word “Explosives” in letters not less than eight inches high, or there
shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than 24
inches square marked with the word “Danger” in white letters six inches high.
   (B)   Every such vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use and placed at a convenient
point on the vehicle soused.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-41) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.28 TELEVISION RECEIVER IN DRIVER’S VIEW PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No motor vehicle may be operated on a street or highway in this
municipality when equipped with a television receiver, video monitor,
television or video screen unless the receiver, screen or monitor is configured
so that the moving images are not in view of the operator while the vehicle is
in motion, or it falls within one or more of the categories set forth in
divisions (B) or (C) below.
   (B)   This prohibition does not apply to the following equipment installed
in a vehicle:
      (1)   A visual display if it does not show video or television broadcast
images in view of the operator while the motor vehicle is in motion;
      (2)   A global positioning device;
      (3)   A mapping display;
      (4)   A visual display used to enhance or supplement the driver’s view
forward, behind or to the sides of a motor vehicle for the purpose of
maneuvering the vehicle;
      (5)   A visual display used to enhance or supplement a driver’s view of
vehicle occupants; or
      (6) Television-type receiving equipment used exclusively for safety or
traffic engineering information.
   (C)   A television receiver, video monitor, television or video screen or
other similar means of visually displaying a television broadcast or video
signal is not prohibited if the equipment has an interlock device that, when
the motor vehicle is driven, disables the equipment for all uses, except as a
visual display described in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(6) above.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-42) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.29 SAFETY EQUIPMENT FOR MOTORCYCLISTS, MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES
AND MOPEDS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on any motorcycle or motor-
driven cycle unless he or she is wearing securely fastened on his or her head
by either a neck or chin strap a protective helmet designed to deflect blows,
resist penetration and spread impact forces. Any helmet worn by an operator or
passenger shall meet the current performance specifications established by the
American National Standards Institute Standard, Z 90.1, the United States
Department of Transportation Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 218 or
Snell Safety Standards for Protective Headgear for Vehicle Users.
   (B)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on any motorcycle or motor-
driven cycle unless he or she is wearing safety, shatter-resistant eyeglasses
(excluding contact lenses), or eye goggles or face shield that complies with
the performance specifications established by the American National Standards
Institute for Head, Eye and Respiratory Protection, Z 2.1. In addition, if any
motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped is equipped with a windshield or
windscreen, the windshield or windscreen shall be constructed of safety,
shatter-resistant material that complies with the performance specifications
established by Department of Transportation Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standard No. 205 and American National Standards Institute, Safety Glazing
Materials for Glazing Motor Vehicles Operated on Land Highways, Standard Z
26.1.
   (C)   No person shall operate a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped on
which the handlebars or grips are more than 15 inches higher than the uppermost
part of the operator’s seat when the seat is not depressed in any manner.
   (D)   A person operating a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped shall
ride in a seated position facing forward and only upon a permanent operator’s
seat attached to the vehicle. No operator shall carry any other person nor
shall any other person ride on such a vehicle unless the vehicle is designed to
carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride behind the
operator upon the permanent operator’s seat if it is designed for two persons,
or upon another seat firmly attached to the vehicle to the rear of the
operator’s seat and equipped with footrests designed and located for use by the
passenger or in a sidecar firmly attached to the vehicle. No person shall ride
sidesaddle on a seat. An operator may carry as many passengers as there are
seats and footrests to accommodate those passengers. Additional passengers may
be carried in a factory produced side car provided that there is one passenger
per seat. Passengers riding in a sidecar shall be restrained by safety belts.
   (E)   Every motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and moped shall be equipped with
a rearview mirror affixed to the handlebars or fairings and adjusted so that
the operator shall have a clear view of the road and condition of traffic
behind him or her for a distance of at least 200 feet.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-44) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.30 CERTIFICATION LABELS ON MOPEDS.
   Every moped sold in this municipality shall have permanently affixed to it a
certification label which shall contain the following information:
   (A)   Name of manufacturer;
   (B)   Month and year of manufacture;
   (C)   Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR);
   (D)   Gross axle weight rating for front   and rear axles (GAWR);
   (E)   Vehicle identification number;
   (F)   Classification type; and
   (G)   Statement of conformance to federal standards as required by federal
law.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-45) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.31 CHILD PASSENGER SAFETY DEVICES REQUIRED; CHILD SAFETY SEATS AND BOOSTER
SEATS.
   Every driver who transports a child under the age of eight years in a
passenger automobile, van or pickup truck other than one operated for hire
shall, while the motor vehicle is in motion and operated on a street or
highway, provide for the protection of the child by properly placing,
maintaining and securing the child in a child passenger safety device system
meeting applicable federal motor vehicle safety standards; provided, that if a
child is under the age of eight years and at least four feet nine inches tall,
a safety belt shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of this section.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined
not less than $10 nor more than $20.
   (B)   A violation of this section does not by virtue of the violation
constitute evidence of negligence or contributory negligence or comparative
negligence in any civil action or proceeding for damages.
   (C)   If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity may not affect other
provisions or applications of this section and to this end the divisions of
this section are declared to be severable.
   (D)   If all seat belts in a vehicle are being used at the time of
examination by a law officer and the vehicle contains more passengers than the
total number of seat belts or other safety devices as installed in compliance
with federal motor vehicle safety standards, the driver may not be considered
in violation of this section.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-46) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 73.32 CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
   No owner or operator of any vehicle required to be inspected under W. Va.
Code Article 17C-16 shall operate or permit to be operated such vehicle without
having displayed thereon a current and valid certificate of inspection and
approval or fail to produce same upon demand of any authorized person as
therein designated.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-16-9) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 73.33 ALTERATION OF SUSPENSION SYSTEM.
   (A)   No person shall operate upon a public street or highway any motor
vehicle registered or required to be registered in this state if it has been
modified by alteration of its bumper mounting on the frame more than four
inches from the lower edge of the original manufactured bumper configuration
for that vehicle. The bumper must be at least three inches in vertical width,
centered on the center line of the motor vehicle and not less than the width of
the wheel track distance. The maximum distance between the vehicle body to the
vehicle frame shall not exceed three inches The distance from the vehicle body
to the vehicle frame shall be measured from the vehicle body mount seat to the
vehicle frame mount seat. No vehicle shall be modified to cause the vehicle
body or chassis to come in contact with the ground, expose the fuel tank to
damage from collision, or cause the wheels to come in contact with the body
under normal operation. No part of the original suspension system shall be
disconnected to defeat the safe operation of the suspension system. Front end
suspension by the use of lift blocks is expressly prohibited. However, nothing
contained in this section prevents the installation of heavy duty equipment,
including shock absorbers and overload springs. Nothing contained in this
section prohibits the operation on a public street or highway of a motor
vehicle with normal wear to the suspension system if such normal wear does not
adversely affect the control of the vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall operate upon a public street or highway any motor
vehicle registered in this state if it has been modified by alteration of its
altitude from the ground to the extent that its bumpers, measured to any point
on the lower edge of the main horizontal bumper bar, exclusive of any bumper
guards, do not fall within the limits specified herein for its gross vehicle
weight rating category. The front and rear bumper height of trucks whose gross
vehicle weight rating is 10,000 pounds or less may be no less than six inches
and no more than 31 inches. The provisions of this division (B) do not apply to
trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds. For the
purpose of this section, the term GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATINGS means
manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight ratings established for that vehicle.
   (C)   In the absence of bumpers, and in cases where bumper heights have been
lowered or modified more than four inches, height measurements under division
(A) or (B) above shall be made to the bottom of the frame rail.
   (D)   This section does not apply to specially designed or modified motor
vehicles when operated off the public streets or highways in races and similar
events. Such motor vehicles may be lawfully towed on the highways of this
state.
   (E)   No person shall operate upon a public street or highway any motor
vehicle registered or required to be registered in this state if it has been
modified by alteration as set out in the provisions of this section unless the
tires on the altered motor vehicle meet specifications approved by the United
States Department of Transportation. In addition, neither the motor vehicle nor
the chassis shall come in contact with the tires under normal operation.
   (F)   Modified vehicles must have a special inspection sticker which must be
inspected by July 31, 1990. The Police Department shall record on accident
report forms whether a modified vehicle was involved in the accident.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-48) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.34 SUN SCREENING DEVICES.
   (A)   No person may operate a motor vehicle that is registered or required
to be registered in the state on any public highway, road or street that has a
sun screening device on the windshield, the front side wings and side windows
adjacent to the right and left of the driver and windows adjacent to the rear
of the driver that do not meet the requirements of this section; provided, that
law enforcement K-9 and other emergency vehicles that are designed to haul
animals are exempt from this requirement.
   (B)   A sun screening device when used in conjunction with the windshield
must be nonreflective and may not be red, yellow or amber in color. A sun
screening device may be used only along the top of the windshield and may not
extend downward beyond the ASI line or more than five inches from the top of
the windshield whichever is closer to the top of the windshield.
   (C)   A sun screening device when used in conjunction with the automotive
safety glazing materials of the side wings or side windows located at the
immediate right and left of the driver shall be a nonreflective type with
reflectivity of not more than 20% and have a light transmission of not less
than 35%. The side windows behind the driver and the rear most windows may have
a sun screening device that is designed to be used on automotive safety glazing
materials that has a light transmission of not less than 35% and a reflectivity
of not more than 20%. If a sun screening device is used on glazing behind the
driver, one right and one left outside rear view mirror is required.
   (D)   Each manufacturer shall:
      (1)   Certify to the State Police and Division of Motor Vehicles that a
sun screening device used by it is in compliance with the reflectivity and
transmittance requirements of this section;
      (2)   Provide a label not to exceed one and one-half square inches in
size, with a means for the permanent and legible installations between the sun
screening material and each glazing surface to which it is applied that
contains the manufacturer’s name and its percentage of light transmission; and
      (3)   Include instructions with the product or material for proper
installation, including the affixing of the label specified in this section.
The labeling or marking must be placed in the left lower corner of each glazing
surface when facing the vehicle from the outside.
   (E)   No person shall:
      (1)   Offer for sale or for use any sun screening product or material for
motor vehicle use not in compliance with this section; or
      (2)   Install any sun screening product or material on vehicles intended
for use on public roads without permanently affixing the label specified in
this section.
   (F)   The provisions of this section do not apply to a motor vehicle
registered in this state in the name of a person, or the person’s legal
guardian, who has an affidavit signed by a physician or an optometrist licensed
to practice in this state that states that the person has a physical condition
that makes it necessary to equip the motor vehicle with sun screening material
which would be of a light transmittance or luminous reflectance in violation of
this section. The affidavit must be in the possession of the person so
afflicted, or the person’s legal guardian, at all times while being transported
in the motor vehicle.
   (G)   The light transmittance requirement of this section does not apply to
windows behind the driver on trucks, buses, trailers, mobile homes and
multipurpose passenger vehicles.
   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BUS. A motor vehicle with motive power, except a trailer, designed for
carrying more than ten persons.
      LIGHT TRANSMISSION. The ratio of the amount of total light to pass
through a product or material to the amount of the total light falling on the
product or material.
      LUMINOUS REFLECTANTS. The ratio of the amount of total light that is
reflected outward by the product or material to the amount of the total light
falling on the product or materials.
      MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the manufacturing or assembling of
sun screening products or materials designed to be used in conjunction with
vehicle glazing materials for the purpose of reducing the effects of the sun.
      MOTOR HOMES. Vehicular units designed to provide temporary living
quarters built into and an integral part of or permanently attached to a self-
propelled motor vehicle chassis.
      MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. A motor vehicle with motive power, except
a trailer, designed to carry ten persons or less which is constructed either on
a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road operation.
      NONREFLECTIVE. A product or material designed to absorb light rather than
to reflect it.
      PASSENGER CAR. A motor vehicle with motive power, except a multipurpose
passenger vehicle, motorcycle or trailer, designed for carrying ten persons or
less.
      SUN SCREENING DEVICE. Film material or device that is designed to be used
in conjunction with motor vehicle safety glazing materials for reducing the
effects of the sun.
      TRUCK. A motor vehicle with motive power, except a trailer, designed
primarily for the transportation of property or special purpose equipment.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-36a) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.35 OPERATION OF VEHICLES WITH SAFETY BELTS.
   (A)   A person shall not operate a passenger vehicle on a public street or
highway unless the person, any passenger in the back seat under 18 years of
age, and any passenger in the front seat of such passenger vehicle is
restrained by a safety belt meeting applicable federal motor vehicle safety
standards. For the purposes of this section, PASSENGER VEHICLE means a motor
vehicle which is designed for transporting ten passengers or less, including
the driver, except that such term does not include a motorcycle, a trailer or
any motor vehicle which is not required on the date of the enactment of this
section under a federal motor vehicle safety standard to be equipped with a
belt system. The provisions of this section shall apply to all passenger
vehicles manufactured after January 1, 1967, and being 1968 models and newer.
   (B)   The required use of safety belts as provided herein does not apply to
a duly appointed or contracted rural mail carrier of the United States Postal
Service who is actually making mail deliveries or to a passenger or operator
with a physically disabling condition whose physical disability would prevent
appropriate restraint in such safety belt if the condition is duly certified by
a physician who shall state the nature of the disability as well as the reason
such restraint is inappropriate.
   (C)   A person may not operate a passenger vehicle on a public street or
highway of the state unless the person, any passenger in the back seat under 18
years of age, and any passenger in the front seat of the passenger vehicle is
restrained by a safety belt meeting applicable federal motor vehicle safety
standards. For the purposes of this division (C), the term PASSENGER VEHICLE
means a motor vehicle which is designed for transporting 15 passengers or less,
including the driver, except that the term does not include a motorcycle, a
trailer or any motor vehicle which is not required on the date of the enactment
of this section under a federal motor vehicle safety standard to be equipped
with a belt system. The provisions of this division (C) apply to all passenger
vehicles manufactured after January 1, 1967, and being 1968 models and newer.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-49a)
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, no
points may be entered on any driver’s record maintained by the Division of
Motor Vehicles as a result of a violation of this section.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to abrogate or
alter the provisions of §
73.31 relating to the mandatory use of child passenger safety devices.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-49)
   (F)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be fined
not more than $25. No court costs or other fees shall be assessed for a
violation of this section.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 73.36 USE OF ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate
or cause to be used or operated within the corporate town limits of the town,
any engine brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed in
the aid of braking or decelerating of any vehicle that results in excessive,
loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle on any public ways,
including, but not limited to, streets, alleys, easements and rights-of-way,
established for vehicle operation, except when necessary for the protection of
persons and/or property which cannot be avoided by application of an
alternative braking system. Noise caused by the application of engine
compression brakes which is effectively muffled or if the application is
necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the town is exempt from the
provisions of this section. Noise created by emergency equipment for emergency
purposes is also exempt.
   (B)   Any person violating this section shall be fined not more than $100 or
imprisoned not more than ten days, or both; upon a second conviction within one
year thereafter, shall be fined not more than $200 or imprisoned not more than
20 days, or both; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD
§ 73.50 OVERSIZE OR OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES.
   (A)   Use of state route. No person shall operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the
maximum specified in W. Va. Code Article 17C-17 upon any state route within the
municipality, except pursuant to special written permit issued by the
Commissioner of Highways, or upon any local truck route. Every such permit
shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers
and shall be open to inspection by any police officer.
   (B)   Local fee or charge. No holder of a permit issued by the Commissioner
of Highways shall be required to obtain any local permit or license or pay any
local fee or charge for movement on any state route within the municipality;
however, it shall be unlawful to operate any such vehicle or combination of
vehicles upon any roadway within the municipality which is not a state route,
except as provided in division (C) below.
   (C)   Use of local streets. No person shall operate a vehicle exceeding a
size as specified in §
73.52 or exceeding a gross weight of five tons, upon any street in the
municipality other than a state route, except those local streets designated as
a truck route and marked as such by appropriate traffic signs, and except when
such operation is necessary to load or unload property, to go to or from the
usual place of storage of such vehicle or to perform any other legitimate
business or act other than passage through the municipality. Operators of
vehicles so deviating from either a state route or a designated truck route
within the municipality shall confine such deviation to that required in order
to accomplish the purpose of the departure.
   (D)   Local permit and conditions.
      (1)   Upon application and for good cause, the Police Chief may issue a
local permit authorizing an applicant to move an oversize or overweight vehicle
or combination of vehicles upon local streets.
      (2)   No permitee shall be required to obtain a special permit from the
Commissioner of Highways for the movement of the vehicle or combination of
vehicles on streets or highways under local jurisdiction; however, the approval
of the Commissioner of Highways shall be required for movement upon state
routes as provided in division (A) above.
      (3)   The Police Chief may grant a permit for a single or round trip, or
for such period of time, not to exceed one year, as the Police Chief in his or
her discretion deems advisable, or for the duration of any construction
project. The Police Chief may limit or prescribe terms or conditions of
operation for such vehicle or combination of vehicles by designating the route,
hours, speed or such other restrictions as may be necessary for the
preservation of the public peace, property, health and safety. The Police Chief
may require the posting of bond or other security necessary to compensate for
any damage to a roadway or road structure.
      (4)   For each such permit, the Police Chief shall charge $5, and for
each hour of time or any part thereof spent by each police officer in
supervising the movement of such vehicle, the applicant shall pay the sum of
$10.
      (5)   Signs shall be posted indicating “no thru trucks - gross weight 5
tons” or words of similar import to apprise drivers of the limitations imposed
by this section. No driver shall disobey the instructions indicated on any such
sign.
      (6)   Violation of any of the limitations, terms or conditions of the
permit granted by the Police Chief shall be cause for immediate revocation or
suspension of such permit, and denial of request for any future permit. Such
violation shall also subject the violator to the penalty prescribed by §
70.99.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 73.51 PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES.
   (A)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any street or highway
with any load carried thereon extending beyond the line of the fenders of the
left side of such vehicle nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the right side thereof.
   (B)   A motor home, travel trailer or truck camper may exceed the maximum
width prescribed in §
73.52, if the excess width is attributable to an appurtenance that does not
exceed more than six inches beyond the body of the vehicle.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-17-3) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.52 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH.
   (A)   A vehicle, including any load thereon, may not exceed a height of 13
feet six inches, but the owner or owners of such vehicles shall be responsible
for damage to any bridge or highway structure and to municipalities for any
damage to traffic control devices or other highway structures where such
bridges, devices or structures have a vehicle clearance of less than 13 feet
six inches.
   (B)   A motor vehicle, including any load thereon, may not exceed a length
of 40 feet extreme overall dimension, inclusive of front and rear bumpers,
except that a motor home and school bus may not exceed a length of 45 feet,
exclusive of front and rear bumpers.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided in this division (C) or in division (D)
below, a combination of vehicles coupled together may not consist of more than
two units and no combination of vehicles including any load thereon shall have
an overall length, inclusive of front and rear bumpers, in excess of 55 feet
except as provided in W. Va. Code § 17C-17-11b, and except as otherwise
provided in respect to the use of a pole trailer as authorized in W. Va. Code §
17C-17-5. The limitation that a combination of vehicles coupled together may
not consist of more than two units may not apply to:
      (1)   A combination of vehicles coupled together by a saddle mount device
used to transport motor vehicles in a drive-away service when no more than
three saddle mounts are used, if equipment used in the combination meets the
requirements of the safety regulations of the United States Department of
Transportation and may not exceed an overall length of more than 75 feet; or
      (2)   A combination of vehicles coupled together, one of which is a
travel trailer or folding camping trailer having an overall length, exclusive
of front and rear bumpers, not exceeding 65 feet.
   (D)   A combination of two vehicles coupled together, one of which is a
motor home, or a combination of vehicles coupled together, one of which is a
travel trailer or folding camping trailer, may not exceed an overall length,
exclusive of front and rear bumpers of 65 feet.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D)
above, the Commissioner of Highways may designate, upon his or her own motion
or upon the petition of an interested party, a combination vehicle length not
to exceed 70 feet.
   (F)   The length limitations for truck tractor-semitrailer combinations and
truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer combinations operating on the national system
of interstate and defense highways and those classes of qualifying federal-aid
primary system highways so designated by the United States Secretary of
Transportation and those highways providing reasonable access to and from
terminals, facilities for food, fuel, repairs and rest and points of loading
and unloading for household goods carriers from such highways and further, as
to other highways so designated by the West Virginia Commissioner of Highways,
shall be as follows: the maximum length of a semitrailer unit operating in a
truck tractor-semitrailer combination shall not exceed 48 feet in length except
where semitrailers have an axle spacing of not more than 37 feet between the
rear axle of the truck tractor and the front axle of the semitrailer, such
semitrailer shall be allowed to be not more than 53 feet in length and the
maximum length of any semitrailer or trailer operating in a truck tractor-
semitrailer-trailer combination may not exceed 28 feet in length and in no
event shall any combinations exceed three units, including the truck tractor;
provided, that no bing herein contained shall impose an overall length
limitation as to commercial motor vehicles operating in truck tractor-
semitrailer or truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer combinations.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-17-4)
   (G)   The total outside width, exclusive of safety equipment authorized by
the United States Department of Transportation, of any vehicle or the load
thereon may not exceed 96 inches, except as otherwise provided in W. Va. Code
Article 17C-17; provided, that any vehicle with a total outside width of 102
inches, exclusive of safety equipment authorized by the United States
Department of Transportation, may be operated on any street or highway
designated by the United States Department of Transportation or the
Commissioner of the Department of Highways or on any street or highway having a
minimum lane width of ten feet.
   (H)   Motor homes, travel trailers, truck campers, and motor buses with a
total outside width of 102 inches, excluding safety equipment authorized by the
United States Department of Transportation may operate on any street or
highway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-17-2) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.53 LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING.
   (A)   No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be operated on any street
or highway unless such vehicle or combination of vehicles is so constructed or
loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or
otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose
of securing traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway
in cleaning or maintaining such roadway.
   (B)   No person shall operate on any street or highway any vehicle or
combination of vehicles with any load unless such load and any covering thereon
is securely fastened so as to prevent such covering or load from becoming
loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the street or
highway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-17-6) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.54 TOWING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   When one vehicle is towing another the drawbar or other connection
shall be of sufficient strength to pull all weight towed thereby and such
drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one vehicle to the
other except the connection between any two vehicles transporting poles, pipe,
machinery or other objects of structural nature which cannot readily be
dismembered.
   (B)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists of a
chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a white
flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-17-7) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. See §
70.99 for general traffic code penalty.
   (B)   (1)   General penalty. Unless otherwise provided for in §§
73.01 through
73.36, any person violating any provision of §§
73.01 through
73.36 shall be fined not more than $100; upon a second conviction within one
year thereafter, shall be fined not more than $200; and upon a third or
subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than $500.
      (2)   Brakes. Any person violating §§
73.19 or
73.20 shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than ten days,
or both; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200 or imprisoned not more than 20 days, or both; and upon a
third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned
not more than 30 days, or both.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-6)
      (3)   Sunscreening devices. Whoever violates §
73.34 shall be fined not more than $200.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-15-36a)
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 74: LICENSING
Section
Original and Renewal of Registration
   
74.01   Registration, certificate of title required
   
74.02   Registration card
   
74.03   Display of registration plates
   
74.04   Operation of vehicle without evidence of registration; use of temporary
facsimile
   
74.05   Improper use of registration card, plate or permit
   
74.06   Driver or motorcycle license required
   
74.07   Persons exempt from license
   
74.08   License to be carried and exhibited on demand
   
74.09   Certain acts prohibited
   
74.10   Driving under suspension or revocation
   
74.11   Owner or operator allowing another to drive
Uniform Commercial Driver’s License Act
   
74.25   Definitions
   
74.26   Limitation on number of driver’s licenses
   
74.27   Employer responsibilities
   
74.28   Commercial driver’s license required
   
74.29   Exemptions
   
74.30   Drivers prohibited from operating with any alcohol in system
 
   
74.99   Penalty
ORIGINAL AND RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION
§ 74.01 REGISTRATION, CERTIFICATE OF TITLE REQUIRED.
   No person shall drive or move and no owner shall knowingly permit to be
driven or moved upon any street or highway any vehicle of a type required to be
registered under W. Va. Code Chapter 17A-3 which is not registered or for which
a certificate of title has not been issued or applied for or for which the
appropriate fee has not been paid when and as required, except as otherwise
permitted by the provisions therein; provided, that in the event of the sale of
a vehicle by a person other than a registered dealer, the person purchasing the
same may, for a period of not more than ten days, operate such vehicle under
the registration of its previous owner and display the registration thereof;
provided further that he or she shall have and display on the demand of any
proper officer the consent in writing of such previous owner so to use such
registration.
(W. Va. Code § 17A-3-1) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.02 REGISTRATION CARD.
   Every owner upon receipt of a registration card shall write his or her
signature thereon with pen and ink in the space provided. Every such
registration card shall at all times be carried in the vehicle to which it
refers or shall be carried by the person driving or in control of such vehicle
who shall display the same upon demand of a police officer or any officer or
employee of the Department of Motor Vehicles.
(W. Va. Code § 17A-3-13) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.03 DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION PLATES.
   (A)   Registration plates issued for vehicles required to be registered
shall be attached to the rear thereof except that on truck tractors and road
tractors designed and constructed to pull trailers or semi-trailers, the
registration plate shall be mounted to the front.
   (B)   Every registration plate shall at all times be securely fastened in a
horizontal position to the vehicle for which it is issued so as to prevent the
plate from swinging and at a height of not less than 12 inches from the ground,
measuring from the bottom of such plate, in a place and position to be clearly
visible and shall be maintained free from foreign materials and in a condition
to be clearly legible.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B) above, an owner of a
motor vehicle with a Class G registration as defined in W. Va. Code § 17A-10-
1 may choose to:
      (1)   Display a standard Class G registration plate in a horizontal
position; or
      (2)   Display a specially designed Class G registration plate in a
vertical position.
(W. Va. Code § 17A-3-15) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.04 OPERATION OF VEHICLE WITHOUT EVIDENCE OF REGISTRATION; USE OF TEMPORARY
FACSIMILE.
   No person shall operate, nor shall an owner knowingly permit to be operated,
upon any highway any vehicle required to be registered under this chapter
unless there shall be attached thereto and displayed thereon or shall be in the
possession of the operator when and as required by this chapter a valid
registration card and registration plate or plates issued therefor by the
Department for the current registration year, except as otherwise expressly
permitted in this chapter.
(W. Va. Code § 17A-9-2) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.05 IMPROPER USE OF REGISTRATION CARD, PLATE OR PERMIT.
   No person shall lend to another any certificate of title, registration card,
registration plate, special plate or permit issued to him or her if the person
desiring to borrow the same would not be entitled to the use thereof, nor shall
any person knowingly permit the use of any of the same by one not entitled
thereto, nor shall any person display upon a vehicle any registration card,
registration plates or permit not issued for such vehicle or not otherwise
lawfully used thereon under this traffic code.
(W. Va. Code § 17A-9-3) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.06 DRIVER OR MOTORCYCLE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, except those hereinafter expressly exempted, shall drive
any motor vehicle upon a street or highway in this municipality or upon any
subdivision street when the use of such subdivision street is generally used by
the public unless the person has a valid driver’s license under the provisions
of the West Virginia Code for the type or class of vehicle being driven.
   (B)   Any person licensed to operate a motor vehicle as provided in the West
Virginia Code may exercise the privilege thereby granted as provided in the
West Virginia Code and, except as otherwise provided by law, shall not be
required to obtain any other license to exercise such privilege by any county,
municipality or local board or body having authority to adopt local police
regulations.
   (C)   No person, except those hereinafter expressly exempted, shall drive
any motorcycle upon a street or highway in this municipality or upon any
subdivision street, as used in W. Va. Code Article 8-24 when the use of such
subdivision street is generally used by the public unless the person has a
valid motorcycle license or a valid license which has been endorsed under W.
Va. Code § 17B-2-7b for motorcycle operation or has a valid motorcycle
instruction permit.
(W. Va. Code § 17B-2-1) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.07 PERSONS EXEMPT FROM LICENSE.
   The following persons are exempt from the license required under §
74.06:
   (A)   Any person while operating a motor vehicle in the armed services of
the United States while in the performance of his or her official duties;
   (B)   A nonresident who is at least 16 years of age and who has in his or
her immediate possession a valid driver’s license issued to the person in the
person’s home state or country unless the Commissioner determines the person’s
home state or country does not extend the same privileges to a resident of this
state, may operate a motor vehicle in this state only as a noncommercial driver
for a period not to exceed 90 days in any one calendar year;
   (C)   A nonresident who is at least 16 years of age, who has in the person’s
immediate possession a valid driver’s license issued to the person in the
person’s home state or country and who is employed in this state, or owns,
maintains or operates a place or places of business in this state, or engages
in any trade, profession or occupation in this state, in addition to the
driving privileges extended under division (B) above, unless the Commissioner
determines the person’s home state or country does not extend the same
privileges to a resident of this state, may operate a motor vehicle in this
state only as a noncommercial driver in traveling to and from the person’s
place or places of employment, place or places of business or place or places
at which the person engages in the trade, profession or occupation and in the
discharge of the duties of the person’s employment, business, trade, profession
or occupation if the duties are such that, if performed by a resident of the
State of West Virginia over the age of 18 years of age, the resident would not
be required under the provisions of W. Va. Code Chapter 17 to obtain a Class A,
B, C or D driver’s license. However, this division (C) shall not exempt any
person who is required to obtain a West Virginia driver’s license in accordance
with the provisions of W. Va. Code § 17B-2-1a;
   (D)   A nonresident who is at least 18 years of age and who has in his or
her immediate possession a valid commercial driver’s license issued to the
person in his or her home state or country and which meets the requirements of
the Federal Commercial Motor Vehicle Act of 1986, Title XII of Pub. Law No. 99-
570 (now found at 49 U.S.C. § 31308) and unless the Commissioner determines the
person’s home state or country does not extend the same privilege to a resident
of this state may operate a motor vehicle in this state either as a commercial
driver subject to the age limits applicable to commercial driver in this state,
or as a noncommercial driver subject to the limitations imposed on nonresident
drivers in divisions (B) and (C) above; and
   (E)   Any person who is a student, properly enrolled and registered in an
accredited school, college or university in this state, who is at least 16
years of age and who has in his or her immediate possession a valid driver’s
license issued to the person in the person’s home state, notwithstanding the
limitations of divisions (B) and (C) above may operate motor vehicle in this
state only as noncommercial driver; provided, that the state of which the
person is a resident shall extend the same privileges to residents of this
state. This exemption shall be canceled immediately when the student is
graduated from school, college or university or is expelled or ceases to be a
student.
(W. Va. Code § 17B-2-2) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.08 LICENSE TO BE CARRIED AND EXHIBITED ON DEMAND.
   (A)   Every licensee shall have his or her driver’s license in such person’s
immediate possession at all times when operating a motor vehicle and shall
display the same, upon demand of a magistrate, municipal judge, circuit court
judge, peace officer, police officer or an employee of the Division of Motor
Vehicles; provided, that no person charged with violating this section shall be
convicted if such person produces in court or at the office of the arresting
officer a driver’s license issued to such person and valid at the time of such
person’s arrest.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
violation of this section and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than, $500.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 74.09 CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall commit any one of the following acts:
   (A)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed or have in his or her
possession any fictitious or fraudulently altered driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or non-operator’s identification;
   (B)   Lend his or her driver’s or commercial driver’s license or non-
operator’s identification to any other person or knowingly permit the use
thereof by another;
   (C)   Display or represent as one’s own any driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or non-operator’s identification not issued to him or her;
   (D)   Use a false or fictitious name in any application for a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or non-operator’s identification or knowingly make
a false statement or knowingly conceal a material fact or otherwise commit a
fraud in any such application;
   (E)   Permit any unlawful use of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or non-operator’s identification issued to him or her; or
   (F)   Do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this
traffic code or W. Va. Code Chapter 17.
(W. Va. Code § 17B-4-1) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.10 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any public street or highway of
this municipality at a time when his or her privilege so to do has been
lawfully suspended or revoked.
(W. Va. Code § 17B-4-3)
   (A)   Any person who drives a motor vehicle on any public street or highway
of or in the town at a time when his or her privilege to do so has been
lawfully suspended or revoked by the State of West Virginia or any other
jurisdiction is, for the first offense, guilty of a violation of §
74.10, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more
than $500; for the second offense, the person is guilty of a violation of §
74.10, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in a county or regional
jail for a period of ten days and, in addition to the mandatory jail sentence,
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500; for the third or any
subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a violation of §
74.10, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in a county or regional
jail for a term not to exceed 30 days, and, in addition to the mandatory jail
sentence, shall be fined not less than $150 nor more than $500.
   (B)   Any person who drives a motor vehicle on any public street or highway
of or in the town at a time when his or her privilege to do so has been
lawfully revoked or driving under the influence of alcohol, controlled
substances or other drugs, or for driving while having an alcoholic
concentration in his or her blood of eight hundredths of one percent or more,
by weight, or for refusing to take a secondary chemical test of blood alcohol
content, is, for the first offense, guilty of a violation of §
74.10, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in a county or regional
jail for a term not to exceed ten days and, in addition to the mandatory jail
sentence, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500; for the second
offense, the person is guilty of a violation of §
74.10, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in a county or regional
jail for a term not to exceed 20 days and in addition to the mandatory jail
sentence, shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $750; for the third
or any subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a violation of §
74.10, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in a county or regional
jail for a term not to exceed 30 days and, in addition to the mandatory jail
sentence, shall be fined not less than $750 nor more than $1,000.
   (C)   Any person who drives a motor vehicle on any public street or highway
of or in the town at a time when his or her privilege to do so has been
lawfully suspended for driving while under the age of 21 years with an alcohol
concentration in his or her blood of two hundredths of one percent or more, by
weight, but less than eight hundredths of one percent, by weight, is guilty of
a violation of §
74.10 and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in a county or regional
jail for 24 hours or shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500, or
both.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 74.11 OWNER OR OPERATOR ALLOWING ANOTHER TO DRIVE.
   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him
or her or under his or her control to be driven upon any street or highway by
any person who is not authorized hereunder or in violation of any of the
provisions of this traffic code.
(W. Va. Code § 17B-4-4) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
74.99
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE ACT
§ 74.25 DEFINITIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this traffic code, the following
definitions apply to this subchapter.
   ALCOHOL. Means:
      (1)   Any substance containing any form of alcohol, including, but not
limited to, ethanol, methanol, propanol and isopropanol;
      (2)   Beer, ale, port or stout and other similar fermented beverages
(including sake or similar products) of any name or description containing 0.5%
or more of alcohol by volume, brewed or produced from malt, wholly or in part,
or from any substitute therefor;
      (3)   Distilled spirits or that substance known as ethyl alcohol, ethanol
or spirits of wine in any form (including all dilutions and mixtures thereof
from whatever source or by whatever process produced); or
      (4)   Wine of not less than 0.5 % of alcohol by volume.
   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. Means:
      (1)   The number of grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood;
      (2)   The number of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath;
      (3)   The number of grams of alcohol per sixty-seven milliliters of
urine; or
      (4)   The number of grams of alcohol per eighty-six milliliters of serum.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued in accordance with the
requirements of W. Va. Code Article 17E-1 to an individual which authorizes the
individual to drive a class of commercial motor vehicle.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER INSTRUCTION PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to W. Va.
Code § 17E-1-9(d).
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle designed or used to transport
passengers or property:
      (1)   If the vehicle has a gross combination vehicle weight rating of
26,001 pounds or more inclusive of a towed unit(s) with a gross vehicle weight
rating of more than 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   If the vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than
26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   If the vehicle is designed to transport 16 or more passengers,
including the driver; or
      (4)   If the vehicle is of any size transporting hazardous materials as
defined in this section.
   CONVICTION. An unvacated adjudication of guilt; a determination that a
person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original
jurisdiction or by an authorized administrative tribunal or proceeding; an
unvacated forfeiture of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s
appearance in court; a plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court
or the payment of a fine or court cost, or violation of a condition of release
without bail regardless of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended, or
probated.
   DISQUALIFICATION. Any of the following three actions:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation or cancellation of a driver’s license by
the state or jurisdiction of issuance;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privilege to drive a commercial motor
vehicle by a state or other jurisdiction as the result of a violation of state
or local law relating to motor vehicle traffic control other than parking or
vehicle weight except as to violations committed by a special permittee on the
coal resource transportation system or vehicle defect violations; and
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. part 391 (2004).
   DRIVE. To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle in any
place open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic. For
purposes of §
74.30, DRIVE includes operation or physical control of a motor vehicle anywhere
in this municipality.
   DRIVER. Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a
commercial motor vehicle, in any place open to the general public for purposes
of vehicular traffic, or who is required to hold a commercial driver license.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued by a state to an individual which
authorizes the individual to drive a motor vehicle of a specific class.
   EMPLOYEE. Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, including full time,
regularly employed drivers; casual, intermittent or occasional drivers; leased
drivers and independent, owner-operator contractors (while in the course of
operating a commercial motor vehicle) who are either directly employed by or
under lease to drive a commercial motor vehicle for an employer.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, including the United States, a state or a political
subdivision of a state, who owns or leases a commercial motor vehicle, or
assigns a person to drive a commercial motor vehicle.
   FARM VEHICLE. Includes a motor vehicle or combination vehicle registered to
the farm owner or entity operating the farm and used exclusively in the
transportation of agricultural or horticultural products, livestock, poultry
and dairy products from the farm or orchard on which they are raised or
produced to markets, processing plants, packing houses, creameries, railway
shipping points and cold storage plants and in the transportation of
agricultural or horticultural supplies and machinery to such farms or orchards
to be used thereon.
   FARMER. Includes owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or person in control of the
premises used substantially for agricultural or horticultural pursuits, who is
at least 18 years of age with two years licensed driving experience.
   FARMER VEHICLE DRIVER. The person employed and designated by the farmer to
drive a farm vehicle as long as driving is not his or her sole or principal
function on the farm, who is at least 18 years of age with two years licensed
driving experience.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires but
not operated upon rails.
   OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. A temporary prohibition against driving a commercial
motor vehicle as a result of a determination by a law enforcement officer, an
authorized enforcement officer of a federal, state, Canadian, Mexican, county
or local jurisdiction including any special agent of the Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration pursuant to 49 C.F.R. §§ 386.72, 392.5, 395.13, 396.9 or
compatible laws or the North American uniform out-of-service criteria that an
imminent hazard exists.
   VIOLATION OF AN OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. Means:
      (1)   The operation of a commercial motor vehicle during the period the
driver was placed out of service; or
      (2)   The operation of a commercial motor vehicle by a driver after the
vehicle was placed out of service and before the required repairs are made.
(W. Va. Code § 17E-1-3) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 74.26 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DRIVER’S LICENSES.
   No person who drives a commercial motor vehicle shall have more than one
driver license at one time except during the ten-day period beginning on the
date the person is issued a driver’s license.
(W. Va. Code § 17E-1-4) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.27 EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Each employer must require the applicant to provide the information
specified in W. Va. Code § 17E-1-5.
   (B)   No employer may knowingly allow, permit, require or authorize a driver
to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period:
      (1)   In which the driver has a driver’s license suspended, revoked or
canceled by a state; has lost the privilege to drive a commercial motor vehicle
in a state, or has been disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   In which the driver has more than one driver’s license at one time;
      (3)   During any period in which the driver, or the commercial motor
vehicle he or she is driving or the motor carrier operation, is subject to an
out-of-service order;
      (4)   In violation of federal, state or local law or regulation
pertaining to railroad highway grade crossings; or
      (5)   During any period the driver is in violation of any provision of 49
C.F.R. part 382 related to controlled substances and alcohol use and testing.
(W. Va. Code § 17E-1-6) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.28 COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except when driving under a commercial driver’s instruction permit
accompanied by the holder of a commercial driver’s license valid for the
vehicle being driven, no person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle unless
the person holds a commercial driver’s license and applicable endorsements
valid for the vehicle they are driving.
   (B)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle while their driving
privilege is suspended, revoked, canceled, expired, subject to a
disqualification or in violation of an out-of-service order.
   (C)   Drivers of a commercial motor vehicle shall have a commercial driver’s
license in their possession at all times while driving.
(W. Va. Code § 17E-1-7) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.29 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Farmers. Bona fide farmers or farm vehicle drivers, as defined,
operating a vehicle otherwise covered by the commercial driver’s license
requirements may be exempted from the provisions of this subchapter only if the
vehicle used is:
      (1)   Driven by a farmer or farm vehicle driver;
      (2)   Used only to transport either agricultural products, farm
machinery, farm supplies, to or from a farm;
      (3)   Not used in the operation of a common or contract motor carrier;
and
      (4)   Used within 150 miles of the qualifying farm. Farmers who wish to
be exempted from the commercial driver’s license requirements must apply to the
Division of Motor Vehicles for a certificate of exemption.
   (B)   Military personnel. Active duty military personnel operating vehicles
being used for military purposes are exempted from the provisions of this
subchapter in accordance with the provisions of 49 C.F.R. § 383.3(c).
   (C)   Firefighting and rescue equipment. Operators of vehicles authorized to
hold an authorized emergency vehicle permit for use of red signal lights only
are exempt from the provisions of this subchapter while the authorized
emergency vehicle permit is in force. Vehicles in this class include, but are
not limited to, firefighters and rescue equipment:
      (1)   Owned and operated by state, county and municipal fire departments;
      (2)   Owned and operated by state, county and municipal civil defense
organizations;
      (3)   Owned and operated by a manufacturer engaged in a type of business
that requires firefighter equipment to protect the safety of their plants and
its employees; and
      (4)   Owned and operated by volunteer fire departments.
   (D)   Operators of off-road construction and mining equipment. Operators of
equipment which, by its design, appearance and function, is not intended for
use on a public road, including, without limitation, motorscrapers, backhoes,
motorgraders, compactors, excavators, tractors, trenches and bulldozers, are
exempt from the provisions of this subchapter; provided, that the exemption
recognized by this division (D) shall not be construed to permit the operation
of such equipment on any public road except such operation as may be required
for a crossing of such road; provided, however, that no such equipment may be
operated on a public road for a distance exceeding 500 feet from the place
where such equipment entered upon the public road.
   (E)   Exempt vehicles. The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act of
1999, being 49 U.S.C. §§ 101 et seq., exempts vehicles used exclusively for
personal use such as recreation vehicles and rental trucks used only to
transport the driver’s personal or household property.
(W. Va. Code § 17E-1-8) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 74.30 DRIVERS PROHIBITED FROM OPERATING WITH ANY ALCOHOL IN SYSTEM.
   (A)   In addition to any other penalties provided by the West Virginia Code
or these codified ordinances, any person who drives, operates or is in physical
control of a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol concentration in
his or her blood, breath or urine of four hundredths of one percent or more, by
weight, shall be imprisoned for not less than 24 hours nor more than 30 days,
and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500. A person convicted of
a second or any subsequent offense under the provisions of this division (A)
shall be imprisoned for a period of 30 days, and the court may, in its
discretion, impose a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than $3,000.
   (B)   A person who violates the provisions of division (A) above shall be
treated in the same manner set forth in W. Va. Code § 17C-19-3, as if he or she
had been arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol or of any
controlled substance.
   (C)   In addition to any other penalties provided by the West Virginia Code
or these codified ordinances, a person who drives, operates or is in physical
control of a commercial motor vehicle having any measurable alcohol in such
person’s system or who refuses to take a preliminary breath test to determine
such person’s blood alcohol content as provided by W. Va. Code § 17E-1-15 shall
be placed out of service for 24 hours by the arresting law enforcement officer.
(W. Va. Code § 17E-1-14) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 74.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. See §
70.99 for general traffic code penalty.
   (B)   (1)   General penalty. Whoever violates any provision of §§
74.01 through
74.11 for which no other penalty is provided shall be fined not more than $500;
for a second or subsequent violation of the same provision such person shall be
fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
      (2)   Driving under suspension or revocation.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in W. Va. Code § 17B-4-3(b) or (d),
or division (B)(2)(b) or (B)(2)(c) below, whoever drives a motor vehicle on any
street or highway of this municipality at a time when his or her privilege so
to do has been lawfully suspended or revoked shall, for the first offense, be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $500; for the second offense, such
person, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500; for the third or
any subsequent offense, such person shall be imprisoned for a period of 30 days
and, in addition to such mandatory jail sentence, shall be fined not less than
$150 nor more than $500. A record of the conviction of any person under this
division (B)(2)(a) upon a charge of driving a vehicle while the license of such
person was suspended lawfully shall be sent to the State Department of Motor
Vehicles.
         (b)   Any person who drives a motor vehicle on any public highway at a
time when his or her privilege to do so has been lawfully revoked for driving
under the influence of alcohol, controlled substances or other drugs, or any
combination thereof, or for driving while having an alcoholic concentration in
his or her blood of eight hundredths of one percent or more, by weight, or for
refusing to take a secondary chemical test of blood alcohol content, for the
first offense shall be imprisoned 30 days and in addition to the mandatory jail
sentence, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500; for the second
offense, shall be imprisoned 30 days and in addition to the mandatory jail
sentence, shall be fined not less than $1,000 nor more than $3,000; for the
third or any subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   Any person who drives a motor vehicle on any public highway at a
time when his or her privilege to do so has been lawfully suspended for driving
while under the age of 21 years with an alcohol concentration in his or her
blood of two hundredths of one percent or more, by weight, but less than eight
hundredths of one percent, by weight, shall be imprisoned for 24 hours or shall
be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500, or both.
         (d)   An order for home detention by the court pursuant to the
provisions of W. Va. Code Article 62-11B may be used as an alternative sentence
to any period of incarceration required by this section.
      (3)   Additional penalties. Whoever violates §§
74.02,
74.03,
74.05,
74.09 or
74.11 shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or
both.
   (C)   Uniform Commercial Driver’s License Act. Unless another penalty is
provided in §§
74.25 through
74.30, whoever violates any provision of §§
74.25 through
74.30 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, or imprisoned for
not more than 30 days, or both except that for the second violation of §
74.28, the offender shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $2,000 or
imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. For the third or any subsequent
conviction for violation of §
74.28, the offender shall be fined not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,500,
or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both.
(W. Va. Code § 17E-1-25)
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 75: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
All-Terrain Vehicles
   
75.01   Reserved
Bicycles
   
75.20   Compliance; code application to bicycles
   
75.21   Obedience to traffic rules; exceptions
   
75.22   Riding upon seats; number of persons
   
75.23   Attaching bicycle or sled to vehicle
   
75.24   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
75.25   Carrying articles
   
75.26   Lights and reflector on bicycle; signal device; brakes
   
75.27   Reckless operation; control, course and speed
   
75.28   Parental duties
   
75.29   Impounding
   
75.30   Riding on sidewalk prohibited
   
75.31   Bicycle helmets for children
Motorcycles
   
75.45   Motorcycle riding
   
75.46   Motorcycle muffler noise
   
75.47   Motorcycle packs prohibited
Skate Boards, Razor Scooter or Roller Blade Skates
   
75.60   Prohibitions
 
   
75.99   Penalty
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
§ 75.01 RESERVED.
BICYCLES
§ 75.20 COMPLIANCE; CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES.
   (A)   No person shall do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act
required in this subchapter.
   (B)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this traffic code.
   (C)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any street or highway or upon any path set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11-1) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.21 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC RULES; EXCEPTIONS.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this traffic code, except as to special regulations in this
subchapter and except as to those provisions of this traffic code which by
their nature can have no application.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11-2) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.22 RIDING UPON SEATS; NUMBER OF PERSONS.
   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11-3) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.23 ATTACHING BICYCLE OR SLED TO VEHICLE.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, skateboard, roller skates, sled
or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon
a roadway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11-4) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.24 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing
a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. Persons riding
bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or
parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11-5) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.25 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11-6) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.26 LIGHTS AND REFLECTOR ON BICYCLE; SIGNAL DEVICE; BRAKES.
   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
by the Department of Motor Vehicles which shall be visible from all distances
from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible
from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red
reflector.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use
upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11-7) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.27 RECKLESS OPERATION; CONTROL, COURSE AND SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle:
   (A)   Without due regard for the safety and rights of pedestrians and
drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, and so as to endanger the life,
limb or property of any person while in the lawful use of the streets or
sidewalks or any other public or private property;
   (B)   Without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such bicycle;
   (C)   In a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is
necessary for safe operation in compliance with law;
   (D)   Without both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give
the required hand and arm signals, or as provided in §
75.25; or
   (E)   At a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions
then existing.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.28 PARENTAL DUTIES.
   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this subchapter.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 75.29 IMPOUNDING.
   In case of violation of any provision of this subchapter, the court may, in
lieu of or in addition to the penalties provided, impound a bicycle involved in
such violation of any person for a period of not more than 30 days.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 75.30 RIDING ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED.
   No person shall ride any bicycle upon any sidewalk within the town.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.31 BICYCLE HELMETS FOR CHILDREN.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BICYCLE. A human-powered vehicle with wheels designed to transport, by
the action of pedaling, one or more persons seated on one or more saddle seats
on its frame. Such term also includes a human-powered vehicle, and any
attachment to such vehicle designed to transport by pedaling when the vehicle
is used on a public roadway, public bicycle path or other public right-of-way,
but does not include a tricycle.
      OPERATOR. A person who travels on a bicycle seated on a saddle seat from
which that person is intended to and can pedal the bicycle.
      OTHER PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any right-of-way other than a public roadway
or public bicycle path that is under the jurisdiction and control of this state
or the municipality and is designed for use and used by vehicular or pedestrian
traffic.
      PASSENGER. Any person who travels on a bicycle in any manner except as an
operator.
      PROTECTIVE BICYCLE HELMET. A piece of headgear which meets or exceeds the
impact standards for protective bicycle helmets set by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) or the Snell Memorial Foundation’s standards for
protective headgear or American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) for
use in bicycling.
      PUBLIC BICYCLE PATH. A right-of-way under the jurisdiction and control of
this state or the municipality for use primarily by bicycles and pedestrians.
      PUBLIC ROADWAY. A right-of-way under the jurisdiction and control of this
state or the municipality for use primarily by motor vehicles.
      TRICYCLE. A three-wheeled human-powered vehicle designed for use as a toy
by a single child under the age of six years, the seat of which is no more than
two feet from ground level.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11A-3)
   (B)   Requirements for helmet use.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person under 15 years of age to operate or
be a passenger on a bicycle or any attachment to a bicycle used on a public
roadway, public bicycle path or other public right-of-way unless at all times
when the person is so engaged he or she wears a protective bicycle helmet of
good fit, fastened securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of a person under
15 years of age to knowingly permit such person to operate or be a passenger on
a bicycle or on any attachment to a bicycle used on a public roadway, public
bicycle path or other public right-of-way unless at all times when the person
is so engaged he or she wears a protective bicycle helmet of good fit, fastened
securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11A-4)
   (C)   Sale of bicycle helmets. Any helmet sold or offered for sale for use
by operators and passengers of bicycles shall be conspicuously labeled in
accordance with the standard described in the definition for protective bicycle
helmet in §
75.31 above, which shall constitute the manufacturer’s certification that the
helmet conforms to the applicable safety standards.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11A-5)
   (D)   Civil actions. A violation of division (B) above is not admissible as
evidence of negligence or contributory negligence or comparative negligence in
any civil action or proceeding for damages, and shall not be admissible in
mitigation of damages.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11A-6)
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
75.99
MOTORCYCLES
§ 75.45 MOTORCYCLE RIDING.
   Any person, or persons operating a motorcycle, or motor-driven vehicles
shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto. Operators
shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on such a
vehicle unless the vehicle is designed to carry more than one person, in which
event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for
two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of such
vehicle.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.46 MOTORCYCLE MUFFLER NOISE.
   Every motorcycle shall be operated as quietly as possible at all times
within the town, and when so operated, shall be equipped with a muffler
designed with baffles, resonator cylinder and other factory-made noise
reducers. The muffler shall not be altered, changed or designed in any manner
which would tend to increase the noise-producing effects above that of the
manufacturer’s design in the original equipment. A driver, operator or
controller of any motorcycle shall not use the cutout of a motor while
operating the same within the municipality, or operate a motor vehicle without
a proper muffler functioning in good order, or race the motor of any vehicle,
above described, so as to cause a backfire or other loud noise. The provisions
of this section shall apply to the operator or operators or controllers of any
motor vehicle whether on a street or within private property and in addition to
other prescribed penalties, the operators of such motor vehicle in violation of
this section shall be hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.47 MOTORCYCLE PACKS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Generally. Any driver, drivers, operators or controllers of a
motorcycle, motor bike or any two wheeled motor driven vehicle is hereby
prohibited from banding together with other driver, drivers, operators or
controllers of motorcycles, motor bikes or any two wheeled motor driven
vehicles for the purpose of forming a “pack”, (not more than two abreast and
with at least 25 feet between following motorcycles) and operating such
vehicles upon the streets and alleys of the town whereby the pack or number of
such two wheeled motor driven vehicles shall cause an excessive amount of noise
or create a menace or hazard to the safe flow of traffic within the town, and
if pack or grouping of the vehicles shall occur, they shall be deemed to be in
violation of this section.
   (B)   Requirements for helmet use.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person under 15 years of age to operate or
be a passenger on a bicycle or any attachment to a bicycle used on a public
roadway, public bicycle path or other public right-of-way unless at all times
when the person is so engaged he or she wears a protective bicycle helmet of
good fit, fastened securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of a person under
15 years of age to knowingly permit such person to operate or be a passenger on
a bicycle or on any attachment to a bicycle used on a public roadway, public
bicycle path or other public right-of-way unless at all times when the person
is so engaged he or she wears a protective bicycle helmet of good fit, fastened
securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11A-4)
   (C)   Sale of bicycle helmets. Any helmet sold or offered for sale for use
by operators and passengers of bicycles shall be conspicuously labeled in
accordance with the standard described in described in the definition for
protective bicycle helmet in §
75.31 above, which shall constitute the manufacturer’s certification that the
helmet conforms to the applicable safety standards.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11A-5)
   (D)   Civil actions. A violation of division (B) above is not admissible as
evidence of negligence or contributory negligence or comparative negligence in
any civil action or proceeding for damages, and shall not be admissible in
mitigation of damages.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11A-6)
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
75.99
SKATE BOARDS, RAZOR SCOOTER OR ROLLER BLADE SKATES
§ 75.60 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a skate board,
razor scooter or roller blade skates or any item in the same family of
recreational toys in the business district of the town. This includes the
streets, avenues, alley’s, sidewalks and private parking lots unless designated
skate board parks.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park or rest any such skate board, razor
scooter or roller blade skates, or any item in the same family or recreational
toys upon the streets, alleys, avenues, sidewalk, private parking lots in the
town in a manner that would impede the free access to said streets, avenues,
alleys or sidewalks.
(Ord. passed 4-6-2004) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   See §
70.99 for general traffic code penalty.
   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
70.99, any parent or legal guardian violating any requirement set forth in §
75.47(B) shall be fined in an amount set by Council from time to time or be
required to perform two hours in community service related to a child injury
prevention program which includes injury prevention education or both fined and
required to perform such community service. Notwithstanding the provisions of
W. Va. Code § 8-11-1, no court costs may be assessed to any person violating
the requirements of §
75.47(B).
      (2)   In the case of a first violation of §
75.47(B), the court may waive the fine upon receipt of satisfactory proof that
the person has a helmet or within a reasonable time from the date of the
violation, purchased or otherwise obtained, a protective bicycle helmet.
      (3)   It is an absolute defense to a charge for a violation of §
75.47 that a parent or legal guardian is unable to pay for the protective
bicycle helmet. Inability to pay may be demonstrated by the filing of a
financial affidavit in accordance with the provisions of W. Va. Code § 59-2-1
(c). Any person who demonstrates inability to pay shall be referred to the
Governor’s highway safety program for assistance in obtaining the appropriate
helmet or helmets.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-11A-7)
   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
75.45 through
75.47 for which no other penalty is provided shall be fined in an amount set by
Council from time to time; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter
shall be fined not more than set by Council from time to time; and upon a third
or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than set by Council from time
to time.
   (D)   For any violation of §
75.60 the person found guilty or pleading guilty shall be subject to a fine set
by Council from time to time for first offense. For second and subsequent
violations, there shall be a fine set by Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 4-6-2004; Res. passed 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 76: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
76.01   Compliance with traffic regulations
   
76.02   Right-of-way in crosswalk
   
76.03   Crossing road way outside cross walk
   
76.04   Drivers to exercise due care
   
76.05   Moving upon right half of crosswalk
   
76.06   Walking along streets and highways; soliciting rides
   
76.07   Persons working on streets and highways
   
76.08   Protection of blind pedestrians
   
76.09   Electric personal assistive mobility device
 
   
76.99   Penalty
§ 76.01 COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals at intersections as
provided in §
71.03, but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and
shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-10-1(a)) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 76.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALK.
   (A)   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave
a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle
which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. This provision
shall not apply under the conditions stated in §
76.03(B).
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-10-2) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.03 CROSSING ROAD WAY OUTSIDE CROSS WALK.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-10-3) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.04 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-10-4) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 76.05 MOVING UPON RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks,
(W. Va. Code § 17C-10-5) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 76.06 WALKING ALONG STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; SOLICITING RIDES.
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon
an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon
a street or highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction.
   (C)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-10-6) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.07 PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to persons engaged in
maintenance or construction work on a street or highway whenever he or she is
notified of their presence by an official traffic control device or flagger.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-10-8) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.08 PROTECTION OF BLIND PEDESTRIANS.
   The driver of a vehicle approaching a blind pedestrian who knows, or in the
exercise of reasonable care should know, that such pedestrian is blind because
such pedestrian is carrying a cane predominantly white or metallic in color
with or without a red tip, or is using a guide dog or otherwise, shall exercise
care commensurate with the situation to avoid injuring such pedestrian.
(W. Va. Code § 5-15-5) (Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 76.09 ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, the definition of an ELECTRIC PERSONAL
ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE is the same definition as previously set forth in §
70.01 and OPERATOR shall refer to the operator of an electric personal
assistive mobility device.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-10A-1)
   (B)   An electric personal assistive mobility device shall be equipped with:
front, rear and side reflectors, a braking system that enables the operator to
bring the device to a controlled stop; and if operated at any time from one-
half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, a lamp that emits a
white light that sufficiently illuminates the area in front of the device.
   (C)   An operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device
traveling on a sidewalk, roadway or bicycle path shall have the rights and
duties of a pedestrian and shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with
pedestrians. An operator shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians.
   (D)   Except as provided in this section, no other provisions of the motor
vehicle code shall apply to electric personal assistive mobility devices.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-10A-2) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be fined not more than $100; upon a second
conviction within one year thereafter shall be fined not more than $200; and
upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than $500.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-10-7)
   (B)   An operator who violates a provision of §
76.09 shall receive a warning for the first offense. For a second or subsequent
offense, the operator shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10 and not
greater than $100.
(W. Va. Code § 17C-10A-2)
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 77: PARKING
Section
Parking Generally
   
77.001   Prohibition against parking ons streets or highways
   
77.002   Police may remove illegally stopped vehicles
   
77.003   Prohibited stopping, standing or parking places
   
77.004   Vehicles parked on private property
   
77.005   Manner of angle and parallel parking
   
77.006   Handicapped parking
   
77.007   Abandoned and junk vehicles
   
77.008   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
77.009   Truck loading zones
   
77.010   Bus stops and taxi cab stands
   
77.011   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions
   
77.012   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking
Parking Spaces
   
77.025   Areas established
   
77.026   Hours of operation; holidays
   
77.027   Overtime parking
   
77.028   Violations
   
77.029   Restricted parking areas
General Provisions
   
77.040   Business District defined
   
77.041   Area One
   
77.042   Area Two
   
77.043   Parking prohibited
U.S. Route 219 Parking
   
77.055   Title
   
77.056   Obstruction
   
77.057   Regulation
Rights-of-Way
   
77.070   Title
   
77.071   Obstruction
   
77.072   Regulation applied equally; defenses
   
77.073   Exemptions
Truck Parking
   
77.085   Title
   
77.086   Regulation
   
77.087   Illegal parking
   
77.088   Rights
Hospital Zone
   
77.100   Parking in quiet zone
 
   
77.999   Penalty
PARKING GENERALLY
§ 77.001 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ONS STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Upon any street or highway outside of a business or residence district
no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, upon the paved or main-traveled part of the street or highway, but
in every event an unobstructed width of the street or highway opposite a
standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a
clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a distance of 200
feet in each direction upon such highway or street.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on paved or main-traveled portion of a street or highway in suck
a manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position.
(W.Va Code § 17C-13-1) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.002 POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any police office finds a vehicle standing upon a street or
highway in violation of §
77.001, such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle or require the
driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position
off the paved or main-traveled part of such street or highway.
   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge
or crossway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(W.Va Code § 17-C-13-2) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.003 PROHIBITED STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions
of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 15 feet of fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length os indicated by signs or markings;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
such entrance (when proper signs posted);
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or
highway or within a street or highway tunnel;
      (14)   At anyplace where signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking, or
where the curbing of street is painted yellow or red, or at any place in excess
of the maximum time limited by signs;
      (15)   Within 20 feet of any mail receptacle served regularly by a
carrier using a motor vehicle for daily deliveries, if such parking interferes
with or causes delay in the carrier’s schedule;
      (16)   Upon any controlled-access highway;
      (17)   At any place on any street or highway where the safety and
convenience of the traveling public is thereby endangered; and
      (18)   Over or across any lines or marks established by the municipality
to indicate parking spaces.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from the curb such distance is unlawful.
(W.Va Code § 17C-13-3) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.004 VEHICLES PARKED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No drivers of a vehicle shall stop, park or leave standing unattended any
vehicle on a private road or driveway or on private property without having
express or implied permission from the owner, tenant or lessee of such land.
The owner, tenant or lessee of such private road or driveway or private
property may more, or have moved, any vehicle stopped, parked or left standing
unattended on his or her private road, driveway or private property as above
prohibited without any liability for the cost of moving any vehicle, nor shall
he or she be liable to the owner of the vehicle for any damage done to such
vehicle in moving it, unless the owner, tenant or lessee of such private road
or driveway or private property was negligent in removing or authorizing the
removal of the vehicle. The owner of such vehicle shall be responsible to the
person removing such vehicle for paying all removal costs. Any person who
removes any vehicle under the provisions of this section shall notify the State
Department of Public Safety of such action, and, in addition notify the Police
Department.
(W.Va Code § 17C-14-13) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.005 MANNER OF ANGLE AND PARALLEL PARKING.
   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the curb-side wheels of such
vehicle parallel with and not more than 18 inches from the curb, unless it is
impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop shall be as
close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary to discharge and
receive passengers or to lad or unload merchandise.
   (B)   This section does not apply to streets or parts thereof where angle
parking is lawfully permitted. However, no angle parking shall be permitted on
a state or federal-aid route unless approved by the State Commissioner of
Highways.
   (C)   Upon streets where angle parking is permitted, no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the
roadway as is indicated by appropriate signs or marks.
   (D)   No vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or street with the
vehicle facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side
of the road or street.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.006 HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON. Any person who has sustained a temporary
disability rendering it unduly difficulty and burdensome for him or her to
walk.
      PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSON WITH LIMITED MOBILITY. Any person who
suffers from permanent physical condition making it unduly difficulty and
burdensome for such person to walk.
   (B)   (1)   Free stopping, standing or parking placed marked “reserved for
disabled persons” shall be designated on close proximity to all state, county
and municipal buildings and other public facilities. Such places shall be
reserved solely for physically disabled and handicapped persons during the
hours that such buildings are open for business.
      (2)   Any person whose vehicle properly displays a valid special
registration plate, mobile windshield place card or decal, may park the vehicle
for unlimited periods of time in parking zones unrestricted as to length of
parking time permitted; provided, that this privilege does not mean that the
vehicle may park in any zone where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited
or which creates parking zones for special types of vehicle or which prohibits
parking during heavy traffic periods during specified rush hours or where
parking would clearly present a traffic hazard. To extent any provision of any
ordinance of the municipality is contrary to the provisions of the section, the
provisions of the section shall take precedence and shall apply.
      (3)   The privileges provided for in this division (B) shall apply only
during those times when the vehicle is being used for the transportation of a
physically handicapped or disabled person. No person shall knowingly exercise,
or attempt to exercise, such privileges at a time when the vehicle is not being
used for the transportation of a physically handicapped or disabled person.
   (C)   No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in an area
designated, zoned or marked for the handicapped or physically disabled, when
such person is not physically disabled or handicapped and does not have
displayed upon his or her vehicle a distinguishing insignia for the handicapped
issued by the Commissioner of Highways; provided, that any person in the act of
transporting a handicapped or physically disabled person, as defined by this
section, may stop, stand or park a motor vehicle not displaying a
distinguishing insignia for the handicapped or physically disabled, for the
limited purposes of providing, however, that such vehicle shall be promptly
moved after the completion of such limited purposes.
(W.Va Code § 17C-13-6) (Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.007 ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, or major part thereof, which
is inoperative and which has been abandoned on public or private property for
any period of time over five days, other than in an enclosed building or in a
licensed salvage yard or at the business establishment of a demolisher, or any
motor vehicle, or major part thereof, which has remained illegally on public or
private property for any period of time over five days, or any motor vehicle,
or major part thereof, which is unattended, discarded, deserted and unlicensed
and is not in an enclosed building, a licensed salvage yard or the actual
possession of a demolisher.
      JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle or any part thereof, other than an
on-premises farm utility vehicle, which:
         (a)   Is discarded, wrecked, ruined, scrapped or dismantled;
         (b)   Cannot pass the state inspection required by W. Va. Code §§ 17C-
16-1 et seq.; and
         (c)   Is either not serving a functional purpose or use or is not in
an enclosed building, a licensed salvage yard or the actual possession of a
demolisher.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which is or was self-propelled, including, but
not limited to, automobiles, truck, buses and motorcycles.
(W.Va Code § 17-24-2)
   (B)   Abandoning or depositing prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall abandon a motor vehicle upon the right-of-way of
any public street or highway, upon any other public property, or upon any
private property which he or she does not own, lease, rent or otherwise control
unless it is at a licensed salvage yard or at the business establishment of a
demolisher.
(W.Va Code § 17-24-3)
      (2)   No person shall place or deposit any junked motor vehicle upon the
right-of-way of any public street or highway or upon any other public property;
nor shall any person place or deposit any junked motor vehicle upon any private
property which he or she does not own, lease, rent or otherwise control unless
it be at a licensed salvage yard or at the business establishment of a
demolisher.
(W.Va Code § 17-24-4)
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.008 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park any vehicle upon any street within the municipality for
the principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale;
   (B)   Displaying advertising;
   (C)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs made
necessary by an emergency; or
   (D)   Relieving the crowded condition of any parking lot, used car lot,
automobile sales lot, repair garage, automobile sales agency or used car sales
agency.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.009 TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop stand or park a vehicle for any purpose for any length
of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivering or pickup and
unloading materials in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unlading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.010 BUS STOPS AND TAXI CAB STANDS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxi cab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
such stopping is not prohibited therein by posed signs.
   (B)   The operator of a bus shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle upon
any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or
their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted as such, except
in case of an emergency.
   (C)   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop on a public street in
such manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage
shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further
than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so
as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
   (D)   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon
any street at any place other than in a taxi cab so designated and posted as
such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking provisions at
any loading place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.011 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of width of roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic,
except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic
control signal.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading,
then only for a person not to exceed 30 minutes.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.012 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license place was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of the traffic code and further testimony that the
records of the Department of Motor Vehicles shows that the license place was
issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle which
was unlawfully parked was so parked by the defendant. A certified copy of
registration from the Department of Motor Vehicles shall be proof of such
ownership.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
PARKING SPACES
§ 77.025 AREAS ESTABLISHED.
   In areas which it shall indicated upon the Traffic Control Map, Council may
cause parking spaces to be marked by lines on the curb or pavement or by other
appropriate markings, or on the sidewalks adjacent to each such parking space
may cause to be erected a sign indicating that parking can be made by vehicle
in this space for a period not to exceed two hours; and there shall be no fee
charged for parking therein. However, this vehicle parked within this parking
space must not remain for a period of more than two hours; and in the event
this term is exceeded the owner of such vehicle or operator of such vehicle
becomes subject to the provisions in §
77.999.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.026 HOURS OF OPERATION; HOLIDAYS.
   These parking regulations set out above as to parking only in spaces for a
period not to exceed two hours shall not operate on Sundays and the following
holidays, namely: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
§ 77.027 OVERTIME PARKING.
   If any vehicle remains parked in any parking space for a length of time in
excess of two hours, and a police officer notes that the parking time in this
parking space has expired, such vehicle in such parking space for a period of
over two hours shall be considered a violation of this subchapter.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.028 VIOLATIONS.
   No owner of operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle shall permit his
or her vehicle to be parked in a parking space for a period of time in excess
of time allocated to that parking space by the rules and regulations
promulgated by Council and described at each particular parking space.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.029 RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS.
   Council may also cause certain spaces to be marked indicated on the Traffic
Control Map as non-parking areas, loading and unloading areas or restricted
parking areas limited to five minute parking, 30 minute parking, one hour
parking or other time limit parking. These parking areas shall be marked by
paint or shall have such limitations indicated on a sign erected at such area.
Council may further change these regulations from time to time as needed in
order to facilitate traffic parking, loading and unloading and the like.
(Res. passed 6-3-2019)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 77.040 BUSINESS DISTRICT DEFINED.
   The Council has designated the following streets and avenues as the business
district within the town and has designated said district for free parking:
Eighth (Main) Street from the bridge to Fifth Avenue; Ninth Street from First
Avenue to Fifth Avenue; First Avenue from Eighth Street to Ninth Street; Second
Avenue and Third Avenue from Seventh Street to Ninth Street; Fourth Avenue from
the North end of the Marlinton Depot to Ninth Street; and Tenth Avenue from
Judge Street to Jury Street.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2012)
§ 77.041 AREA ONE.
   (A)   The following place shall be designated as “Area One” and shall be
used only for permit parking: on Third Avenue along the Southern States’ fence.
   (B)   Each permit shall cost the sum set by Council from time to time per
month and shall be purchased at intervals covering at least six months each
time.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2012)
§ 77.042 AREA TWO.
   (A)   The following place shall be designated as “Area Two” and shall be
used only for permit parking: the vacant lot between the Flower Garden and the
Pocahontas Times.
   (B)   Each permit shall cost the sum set by Council from time to time per
month and shall be purchased at intervals covering at least six months each
time.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2012)
§ 77.043 PARKING PROHIBITED.
   The Council finds that it is necessary to limit the free parking of vehicles
on Eighth (Main) Street to a reasonable amount of time, during the normal 6:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m. business hours. The Council further finds that it is
necessary to restrict business owners, business employees and residents who
live on Eighth (Main) Street to no parking during these normal business hours
on Eighth Street. The Council also finds that the purpose of free parking on
Eighth (Main) Street is to encourage and facilitate business in the town.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2012)
U.S. ROUTE 219 PARKING
§ 77.055 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “U.S. Route 219 Parking Ordinance”.
(Ord. passed 1-4-1992)
§ 77.056 OBSTRUCTION.
   The Council is concerned about the flow of traffic in the newly annexed
portion of the town reaching from the southern end of Burns Motor Freight to
the southern end of the also newly annexed Community of Riverside. There are
numerous businesses in this area on the eastern side of U.S. Route 219 which
requires much of the traffic which utilizes these businesses to cross a lane of
traffic entering these businesses and exiting these businesses. The amount of
traffic which uses these businesses is sufficiently great that the potential
exists for problems in this area. The Council specifically finds that vehicles
parking near Route 219 obstructs the view of drivers entering and exiting these
businesses and that it is imperative for a regulation to be passed to minimize
the possibility of accidents in this area due to vision being obscured by
parked vehicles.
(Ord. passed 1-4-1992)
§ 77.057 REGULATION.
   From and after the effective date of this subchapter it shall be illegal for
any person to park a vehicle along U.S. Route 219 from the southern edge of the
fence of Burns Motor Freight as it adjoins the right- of-way of U.S. Route 219
northward to the southern end of the Community of Riverside so that any part of
the vehicle is within eight feet of the paved portion of the roadway. The
southernmost point of the Community of Riverside shall be determined by
extending a line along the fence which divides the real estate currently owned
by Tom Burns and the Community of Riverside to the edge of the right-of-way of
U.S. Route 219.
(Ord. passed 1-4-1992) Penalty, see §
77.999
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 77.070 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Right-of-Way Obstruction Ordinance”.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1984)
§ 77.071 OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to obstruct the free
passage of traffic on any public right-of-way within the town. The term RIGHT-
OF-WAY shall include, but shall not be limited to, streets, avenues, alleyways,
but includes all passageways used by the public or by public conveyances such
as vehicles owned by the town and used on property owned by the town.
   (B)   It shall be sufficient to support a conviction under this section if
the accused shall:
      (1)   Block a right-of-way with a vehicle or other obstruction to prevent
the free flow of traffic through the right-of-way;
      (2)   Block a lane of traffic on a street or avenue so that it would be
necessary for another vehicle to cross the centerline of the street or avenue
or leave the paved portion of the street or avenue or to drive in an area
customarily reserved for parked vehicles in order to pass the obstruction; or
      (3)   Block the free flow of traffic to and from property owned by the
town.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1984) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.072 REGULATION APPLIED EQUALLY; DEFENSES.
   This subchapter applies equally to situations involving an intentional
obstruction and to situations in which traffic is blocked by persons allowing
their vehicles to remain in the right-of-way. It shall not be a defense to
assert that the accused or another person remained in the vehicle during the
period of obstruction, nor shall it be a defense for the accused to assert that
the engine in the vehicle was still running.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1984)
§ 77.073 EXEMPTIONS.
   Specifically exempted from this subchapter are the following:
   (A)   The breaking down of a vehicle in the public right-of-way, provided
that the owner or driver of the vehicle remains with the vehicle; and
   (B)   Delivery vehicles making actual deliveries to businesses, provided
that such delivery vehicles do not park on State Route 39 and do not obstruct
the public right-of-way for more than one-half hour.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1984)
TRUCK PARKING
§ 77.085 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Marlinton Truck Regulation
Ordinance”.
(Ord. passed 2-3-1986)
§ 77.086 REGULATION.
   The Town Council finds that it is in the best interests of the people of the
town to regulate the movement and parking of trucks within the town limits.
This action is necessitated by the noise created by the unnecessary or
excessive use of such vehicles at night and by the added stress such vehicles
place on certain streets within the town. Streets other than Route 39 are not
constructed to withstand heavy traffic or heavy vehicles and the underlying
natural foundation is not conducive to road building.
(Ord. passed 2-3-1986)
§ 77.087 ILLEGAL PARKING.
   (A)   From and after the effective date of this subchapter, it shall be
unlawful to park trucks of greater than two-ton capacity on public property in
residential areas within the town.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for drivers of trucks of over two-ton capacity to
drive upon or park upon any public roadway or public property within the town
except for Route 39 and further except for local deliveries.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park any truck of a capacity of two tons or
over on any public property within the town.
(Ord. passed 2-3-1986) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.088 RIGHTS.
   Nothing herein shall limit the rights of individuals or businesses to park
their trucks on their own property, to drive to their homes or places of
business from Route 39 or to drive to Route 39 from their homes or places of
business while engaged in the actual pursuit of business. Nothing herein shall
limit the rights of the town or other public county, state or federal agency to
operate trucks in the town.
(Ord. passed 2-3-1986)
HOSPITAL ZONE
§ 77.100 PARKING IN QUIET ZONE.
   (A)   Statement of policy. The Town Council finds that there are problems
now existing on Main Street (Eighth Street) which need correction. Within the
Hospital Zone, extending from the eastern most corner of the Bank of Marlinton
to the Greenbrier River, there are congregations of people in the evening hours
and these people make loud and unnecessary noise, thereby disturbing the
patients in the Pocahontas Memorial Hospital. The Council further finds that as
a further complication of this matter that people will impede the flow of
traffic through the town by standing in the street and talk to others in cars
or on the sidewalk. These people in the street endanger themselves and increase
the likelihood of automobile accidents. The Town Council finds that they have
not just the right, but the responsibility to do what is necessary to correct
these problems in order to maintain proper quiet in the Hospital Zone and to
maintain the safety of people congregating lawfully within the town.
   (B)   From and after the effective date of this section, it shall be
unlawful for anyone to park his or her vehicle within the Hospital Zone in the
town between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Exceptions to this general
rule are those people parking in order to attend services at the Marlinton
Presbyterian Church, those people going to the Hospital, or those people
parking in order to participate in some legitimate business activity with any
business located in the Hospital Zone. However, it shall remain unlawful for
these people parking lawfully to create any type of disturbance while they are
so lawfully parked in the Hospital Zone. The police authority shall have the
right to inform any such offending person of his or her violation and inform
him or her of what is necessary to correct that violation. Thereafter, any
person continuing to violate this section shall be subject to the penalty
provisions in §
77.999 and shall be further subject to having his or her vehicle towed from the
Hospital Zone at the offender’s expense. If the town places small signs on the
parking meters, then it shall not be incumbent upon the police authority to
inform the violator first before taking any action under this section. If the
police authority informs any person of his or her violation of this section
once, then the officer shall have no further requirement under this section to
inform the violator on subsequent occasions concerning subsequent violations.
(Ord. passed 8-14-1987) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   See §
70.99 for general traffic code penalty.
   (B)   (1)   The fines for the following traffic violations shall be as set
by Council from time to time.
      (2)   The Police Department is directed to prepare and have produced an
envelope type violation ticket setting forth on the face thereof, the fines
listed out in the division (B)(1) above, and the Police Department is
authorized to purchase such numbers of such envelope-type tickets or summonses
may be necessary in the proper administration of the Department.
   (C)   Whoever violates §§
77.025 through
77.029 shall be fined an amount set by Council from time to time for each
offense.
   (D)   Vehicles in violation of §§
77.040 through
77.043 can be towed at the owner’s expense. A violation of §§
77.040 through
77.043 can be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time plus court
cost, per each citation.
   (E)   The penalty for a violation of §§
77.055 through
77.057 shall be either incarceration in the county jail for a period not to
exceed 30 days or a fine set by Council from time to time or both such fine and
imprisonment.
   (F)   The penalty for a violation of §§
77.070 through
77.073 shall be a fine set by Council from time to time.
   (G)   The penalty for a violation of any of §
77.087 above shall be a fine set by Council from time to time.
   (H)   For any violation under §
77.100, any person found guilty or pleading guilty shall be subject to a fine
set by Council from time to time, plus mandatory costs. For second and
subsequent violations, there shall be a fine set by Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1984; Ord. passed 2-3-1986; Ord. passed 8-14-1987; Ord. passed
1-4-1992; Ord. passed 5-7-2012; Res. passed 6-3-2019)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS AND FOWL
      
91.   FIRE PROTECTION
      
92.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
93.   HELIPORT
      
94.   TREES
      
95.   STREETS AND DRIVEWAYS
      
96.   PIONEER DAYS
      
97.   TOWN CEMETERY
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS AND FOWL
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Definitions
   
90.002   Administration and enforcement of chapter; interference with officers
   
90.003   Poisoning of animals
   
90.004   Cruelty to animals
   
90.005   Tethering/restraining of animals
   
90.006   Procedures; fines
   
90.007   Animal nuisances
   
90.008   Animal owner responsibility for removal of animal excrement; fines
   
90.009   Dead animals and fowl; disposition of carcasses
   
90.010   Responsibility for removal of carcasses
   
90.011   Keeping of certain animals
   
90.012   Maintenance of pens, coops, other enclosures, places
   
90.013   Immunization of dogs, cats and ferrets; fines
   
90.014   Control of rabies and other diseases generally
   
90.015   Animal bites; quarantine
   
90.016   Releasing impounded animals
Animals at Public Gatherings
   
90.030   Public gatherings, shows, parades
   
90.031   Riding of animals in the town
Dogs and Cats
   
90.045   Seizing or enticing dog; bringing dog into town for impounding or
killing
   
90.046   Dangerous dogs; definition
   
90.047   Dangerous dogs; procedure for the determination of a dangerous dog
   
90.048   Dangerous dogs; control of dangerous dog; registration and confinement
   
90.049   Dangerous dogs; violation of requirements for dangerous dog; fines
   
90.050   Dangerous dogs; threats to public safety
   
90.051   Actions under proclamation by Health Department or Mayor
   
90.052   Restriction on number of dogs and cats
   
90.053   Restriction on number of dogs and/or cats; special permits
   
90.054   Annual head tax (dog tax)
   
90.055   Dogs prohibited to run at large
   
90.056   Aggressive dog at large defined; fines
   
90.057   Impounding, redemption and disposition
Feeding of Wild Mammals
   
90.070   Short title
   
90.071   Covered area
   
90.072   Definitions
   
90.073   Prohibitions
   
90.074   Exceptions
 
   
90.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
90.001 through
90.016,
90.030,
90.031 and
90.045 through
90.057, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURE ANIMAL(S). Any cows, swine, sheep, horses, mules or goats, or
any chickens, ducks, geese, turkey or other domestic fowl, cattle or livestock
commonly referred to as farm animal(s).
   AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL. The Pocahontas County Health Officer or Animal Control
Officer, any police officer, the Mayor of the town or any agent of the town as
appointed by the Mayor, or an event officer.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL(S). Any dog, cat, rabbit, guinea pig, hamster or any other
common house pet as recognized by the general public.
   DOMESTIC REPTILE(S). Any turtle, frog, toad, lizard or newt commonly found
in West Virginia except for snakes.
   ENCLOSURE. A fence or structure of sufficient size, forming or causing an
enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and suitable to
confine a dangerous animal. An ENCLOSURE shall be securely enclosed and locked
and designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. If such
ENCLOSURE has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into
the ground no less than one foot.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL(S) AND REPTILE(S). Any animal, snake or any reptile not native
to West Virginia or commonly found in the continental United States.
   OWNER. An individual who has lawful title to an animal, or is the keeper or
harborer of an animal. A parent or legal guardian shall be deemed to be the
OWNER of an animal maintained by or on behalf of a minor upon the premises of
the parent or legal guardian.
   SERVICE ANIMAL. Any animal used by a physically impaired person in order to
function in a normal way of life.
   WILD ANIMAL(S). Any snake, wildcat, bobcat, bear, deer, skunk, opossum,
raccoon, ferret, beaver, wild game birds, wild water fowl or any other animal
or fowl/bird commonly considered to be wild by the general public.
(Prior Code, § 3-101) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011)
§ 90.002 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER; INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any authorized personnel pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, with the cooperation of any police agency and/or
the County Health Department, to administer and enforce the provisions of the
chapter.
   (B)   All authorized personnel shall be readily identifiable or uniformed in
accordance with the standards recommended by the Town Council and approved by
the Mayor.
   (C)   Any authorized personnel may pursue and capture any animal found to be
running at large as defined in this chapter. The authorized personnel shall
have the authority to enter upon private property to effectuate capture.
However, the authorized personnel shall not enter into any secured fenced area
or structure located upon private property unless necessary to prevent harm to
persons or animals, or unless consent is obtained from the person in possession
of the real property.
   (D)   No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with any person authorized
or empowered to perform any duty under this chapter; nor shall any person
hinder, delay or obstruct the authorized personnel in driving or transporting
to the public pound any animal to be impounded under the provisions of this
chapter.
   (E)   Violators of any section of this chapter may be summoned to the
municipal court by authorized personnel.
(Prior Code, § 3-102) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.003 POISONING OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   No poisoned meat or any poisonous substance shall be cast into any of
the streets, public places, lots, buildings or private property in the town for
the purpose of destroying animals; provided that it is not the intent of this
section to prohibit the use of poisonous substances for the control of vermin
of significance to the public health.
   (B)   Violations of this section shall be subject to the enforcement,
adjudication and penalty provisions of §
90.999.
(Prior Code, § 3-103) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
Statutory reference:
   Malicious killing of animals, see W. Va. Code § 61-3-27
§ 90.004 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   Cruel acts and conditions enumerate. It shall be unlawful for any
person:
      (1)   To willfully and maliciously kill, maim, disfigure or torture any
animal, or beat any animal with a stick, board, chain, club or other object,
mutilate, burn, or scale any animal with any substance, or purposefully drive
over any animal, or otherwise cruelly set an animal upon another animal;
provided that reasonable force may be employed to drive off vicious or
trespassing animals;
      (2)   To make accessible to any animal by any means, with the intent to
cause harm or death, any substance which has in any manner been treated or
prepared with harmful or poisonous substances; provided that it is not the
intent of this division (A)(2) to prohibit the use of poisonous substances for
the control of vermin of significance to the public health;
      (3)   To cause, instigate, stage or train any animal to fight or permit
any fight between any animal and another animal or human;
      (4)   To fail, refuse or neglect to provide any animal in his or her
charge or custody as owner or otherwise with proper food, drink, shade, care or
shelter; provided that for purposes of this division (A)(4) any animal kept
outside shall be provided with structurally sound weatherproof enclosure, large
enough to accommodate the animal;
      (5)   To drive or work any animal cruelly;
      (6)   To abandon any animal within the town limits (for the purposes of
this section, ABANDON means for the owner or keeper to leave an animal
unattended without demonstrating the apparent intent to recover or resume
custody, to leave an animal for more than 12 hours without providing adequate
food, water and shelter for the duration of the absence, or to turn out or
release an animal for the purpose of causing it to be impounded;
      (7)   To leave an animal confined in a closed vehicle without adequate
ventilation or heat;
      (8)   To transport an animal in the trunk of a vehicle;
      (9)   To transport an animal in the open bed of a truck unless said
animal is restrained in a cage or on a leash that will prevent the animal from
jumping or falling from the vehicle;
      (10)   To crop animal ears or dock animal tails, except when performed by
a licensed veterinarian; or
      (11)   To strike an animal while operating a motor vehicle and to fail to
report such injury or death to the animal’s owner, if any; provided that in the
event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once
report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
   (B)   Exceptions. Nothing in division (A) above shall be deemed or
interpreted to prohibit:
      (1)   Any action by a licensed veterinarian done in accordance with
accepted standards or veterinary medicine;
      (2)   Any action taken by a police officer pursuant to the interests of
public health and safety; or
      (3)   Any act done in self-defense of done to defend another person or
animal, while or owner’s property.
   (C)   Violations. Violations of this shall be subject to the enforcement,
adjudication and penalty provisions of §
90.999.
(Prior Code, § 3-104) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.005 TETHERING/RESTRAINING OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   A dog or puppy shall not be restrained by a fixed point chain or
tether for more than 12 consecutive hours in a 24-hour period. This chain shall
be at least 15 feet long.
   (B)   A dog or puppy may be exclusively restrained by a chain or tether
provided that it is at least 15 feet in length and attached to a pulley or
trolley mounted on a cable which is also at least 15 feet in length and mounted
no more than seven feet above ground level.
   (C)   Any tethering system employed shall not allow the dog or puppy to
leave the owner’s property.
   (D)   No chain or tether shall weigh more than one-eighth of the dog or
puppy’s weight.
   (E)   Any chain or tether shall be at least 15 feet in length and have
swivels on both ends.
   (F)   Any chain or tether shall be attached to a properly fitting collar (no
choke chain collars) or harness worn by the animal.
(Prior Code, § 3-105) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.006 PROCEDURES; FINES.
   (A)   Any authorized personnel may take into custody any animal, upon either
private or public property, which clearly shows evidence of cruelty to the
animal as set forth in §§
90.003,
90.004 and
90.005. Such authorized personnel may:
      (1)   Inspect, care for or treat such animal or place such animal in the
care of an animal welfare organization or licensed veterinarian for treatment,
boarding or other care; or
      (2)   Designate such animal for humane destruction if an officer of an
animal welfare organization or licensed veterinarian determines that the animal
appears to be diseased or disabled beyond recovery for any useful purpose.
   (B)   The owner or keeper of an animal that is destroyed pursuant to
division (A) above shall not be entitled to recover damages for the destruction
of such animal unless the owner or keeper proves by clear and convincing
evidence that such destruction was unreasonable and unwarranted.
   (C)   In addition to the fines and/or imprisonment imposed by this section,
any defendant convicted of a violation of §§
90.003, 90.004 and 90.005 shall pay to the municipal court a penalty of all
reasonable expenses incurred for the care, treatment and boarding of any animal
taken into custody pursuant to division (A) above. Upon payment of such
penalty, the municipal court shall remit such payment to an animal welfare
organization or other animal care provider.
   (D)   If a person is adjudicated guilty of a violation of §§
90.003,
90.004 and
90.005, the municipal court judge may in his or her discretion order that such
person be deemed to have forfeited all interest in the animal at issue in the
violation and may vest all interest to an animal welfare organization for
adoption or other disposition. If the person is adjudicated not guilty of a
violation of §§
90.003,
90.004 and
90.005, or the charge(s) otherwise be dismissed, and the animal at issue has
been taken into custody pursuant to this section, then the defendant shall have
ten days from the date of the entry of the finding of not guilty or of
dismissal to appear and claim said animal. The defendant shall be responsible
for all reasonable expenses incurred for the care, treatment and boarding from
the date of the entry of the disposition of the case until redemption of the
animal; provided that if the animal is not claimed within ten days from the
date of entry of the finding of not guilty or of dismissal, then the owner
shall be deemed to have forfeited interest in the animal, the animal shall be
deemed abandoned, and all interest in the animal shall vest to an animal
welfare organization for adoption or other disposition.
(Prior Code, § 3-106) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to impose fines, forfeiture and confinement, see W. Va. Code § 8-
11-1
§ 90.007 ANIMAL NUISANCES.
   It shall be unlawful to own any animal, including a dog or cat, in a
residential area, which by frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the
comfort or repose of persons within the vicinity of such animal, or shall by
the nature of their maintenance or by the numbers of the same shall create an
offensive odor so as to be objectionable to surrounding residences. All dogs
and cats in season shall be confined in a secure and sufficiently enclosed area
throughout the period of estrus. In any event, dogs and cats in season shall be
so confined for no less than 25 days during the period of estrus. No person
shall own on his or her premises more than three dogs or cats, ten weeks in age
or older, unless such premises is licensed as a commercial kennel or the owner
has a permit from the town allowing more than three dogs or cats, as provided
in §
90.008. The provisions of this section are to be interpreted consistently with
the town’s noise regulations in §
132.06 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 3-107) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.008 ANIMAL OWNER RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL OF ANIMAL EXCREMENT; FINES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to appear with an animal upon the
public right-of-way, within public places or upon the property of another,
absent that person’s consent, without some means for removal of excrement that
may be deposited by the animal.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is an owner or possessor of an
animal in his or her care to fail to remove any excrement deposited by the
animal upon any public or private property, other than the property of the
owner of the animal.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons who have a
physical disability or visual impairment, are using service dogs, and can
provide upon demand by an authorized personnel adequate documentation that the
service dog is an animal trained by an accredited institution which trains dogs
for service work for the physically disabled or visually impaired.
   (D)   Violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in §
90.999(C). The municipal court judge shall have no authority to suspend the
fine or any portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-108) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.009 DEAD ANIMALS AND FOWL; DISPOSITION OF CARCASSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or bury in any of the
streets, parks, public squares, or places, the carcass or part of any carcass
of any animal, fowl or bird within the limits of the town, but all such
carcasses shall immediately after death be disposed of in a manner consistent
with §
90.010.
   (B)   Violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in §
90.999(C). The municipal court judge shall have no authority to suspend the
fine or any portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-109) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.010 RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL OF CARCASSES.
   (A)   When any dead animal, fowl or bird is found in the streets, public
places or private lots in the town, upon notice to the owner, such owner shall
remove the carcass and dispose of it in a lawful and sanitary manner; failure
to do so shall be a violation of this code. If the owner refuses or fails to do
so within a reasonable time not to exceed 24 hours after such notice, the town
may send a proper vehicle to obtain such carcass and have it removed and
disposed of, and render a bill for such removal and disposal to the owner, if
known.
   (B)   Violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in §
90.999(C). The municipal court judge shall have no authority to suspend the
fine or any portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-110) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.011 KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep any agriculture
animal or fowl within the corporate limits of the town, except those kept for
sale by lawful businesses for agricultural purposes only and those which are
currently grandfathered in.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to keep in one’s possession a poisonous snake.
   (C)   Violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in §
90.999(C). The municipal court judge shall have no authority to suspend the
fine or any portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-111) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.012 MAINTENANCE OF PENS, COOPS, OTHER ENCLOSURES, PLACES.
   (A)   Each stable, pen, coop and other enclosure or place where any animal
or fowl is kept shall be so located and of such construction as to have
sufficient sanitary drainage to keep it dry at all times; and it shall be the
duty of each person owning, harboring or keeping any animal or fowl to maintain
such enclosure or other place where such animal or fowl is kept in a clean and
sanitary condition at all times, free of any unwholesome or offensive
substance, liquid or odor and so as not to constitute, in the opinion of an
authorized personnel, a nuisance.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall be applicable with the town
limits.
   (C)   Violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in §
90.999(C). The municipal court judge shall have no authority to suspend the
fine or any portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-112) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.013 IMMUNIZATION OF DOGS, CATS AND FERRETS; FINES.
   (A)   No person shall own any dog, cat or ferret, six months of age or
older, within the town limits if such animal is not currently vaccinated
against rabies. Any person owning a dog or cat within the town shall cause such
animal to wear a collar or harness at all times to which shall be attached a
current tag reflecting that the animal is vaccinated against rabies. The tag
shall be situated on the collar or harness in such a manner that it may be
easily visible at all times. Owners of ferrets may retain proof of current
rabies vaccination on their person or premises.
   (B)   Any dog or cat without rabies tag affixed is deemed a stray and is
susceptible to impoundment.
   (C)   Violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in §
90.999(C). The municipal court judge shall have no authority to suspend the
fine or any portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-113) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011)
§ 90.014 CONTROL OF RABIES AND OTHER DISEASES GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of each owner or person in charge of an animal
known to have or suspected of having rabies or any other communicable disease,
or known to have been bitten by another animal having or suspected of having
any such disease, to forthwith take such animal to a veterinarian for
confinement and observation or to securely confine such animal on his or her
own premises, and, in either case, to notify the Pocahontas County Health
Department. Any animal so confined shall be destroyed in a humane manner upon a
finding by a licensed veterinarian that the animal has rabies or some other
incurable communicable disease. No animal shall be released from such
confinement until it is determined by a licensed veterinarian that the animal
is free of rabies or any other communicable disease.
   (B)   Rabid animals found at large within the town shall be humanely
euthanized forthwith by any authorized personnel. It shall be the duty of the
authorized personnel to immediately notify the Pocahontas County Health
Department upon killing any animal of having exhibited signs of rabies and to
comply with instruction of the Pocahontas County Health Department as to making
the carcass or any portion of the carcass available to the Health Department
for examination.
   (C)   Any person having knowledge of an animal known to have or suspected of
having rabies or any other communicable disease shall forthwith notify
authorized personnel. If the owner or person in charge of such animal can be
found without undue delay, he or she shall be notified by the humane officer or
police officer to comply with the provisions of division (A) above forthwith;
otherwise, such animal shall be destroyed in a humane manner.
(Prior Code, § 3-114) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.015 ANIMAL BITES; QUARANTINE.
   (A)   Owner known. Upon receipt of credible information that an animal bite
incident has occurred, authorized personnel shall make reasonable effort to
contact the owner of the animal involved in the incident and advise the owner
to place the animal immediately with a licensed and practicing veterinarian of
the owner’s choice for a confinement and observation period of a minimum of ten
days from the time of the occurrence of the bite. The exact period of
confinement and observation may be longer than ten days in the discretion of
the veterinarian selected and the owner shall be liable for all such costs
incurred.
   (B)   Failure to comply. Any owner who shall fail to comply with the
provisions of this section, within 24 hours of notification, shall be deemed in
violation of this section and, if reasonable to do so under the circumstances,
the authorized personnel shall take such animal into custody and place it for
the above described confinement period with a licensed and practicing
veterinarian of the owner’s choice. The owner shall be liable for all cost
incurred. If the owner fails or refuses to make such choice or if it is
unreasonable under the circumstances for the authorized personnel to place the
animal with a veterinarian chosen by the owner as described herein, the
authorized personnel will take the animal into custody and place it with an
animal welfare organization to be quarantined at the owner’s expense in
accordance with division (C) below.
   (C)   Owner unknown. Upon receipt of credible information that an animal
bite incident has occurred, and when the owner cannot be located, authorized
personnel shall take the animal into custody and place it with an animal
welfare organization for a confinement and observation period of a minimum of
ten days from the time of the occurrence of the bite. If, however, at any time
during the confinement and observation period the dog becomes dangerous as
defined in this chapter, and/or it is determined by a licensed veterinarian
that the animal has rabies or some other incurable communicable disease, then
the animal may be euthanized at the discretion of an animal welfare
organization. If the owner appears and seeks to claim the animal, the
provisions of division (A) above shall govern the confinement of the animal. If
the owner does not appear to claim the animal within the ten-day period, then
the owner shall be deemed to have forfeited all interest in the animal, the
animal shall be deemed abandoned, and all interest in the animal shall vest to
an animal welfare organization for adoption or other disposition. Should such
animal become ill or die within the confinement period, the bite victim or
victim’s representative shall be notified by authorized personnel. If the
animal is alive and well at the end of the confinement period, the bite victim
or victim’s representative shall be notified by authorized personnel.
   (D)   State law. State law shall be followed concerning the isolation of
biting animals for the observation, examination and quarantine, unless the
provisions of this chapter require more stringent procedures.
(Prior Code, § 3-115) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
Statutory reference:
   Quarantine of biting dogs, see W.Va Code § 19-20-9a
§ 90.016 RELEASING IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   No person shall break open or in any manner directly or indirectly aid or
assist in breaking open the impoundment enclosure established by the town or an
animal welfare organization or take or let any animal out of an impoundment
enclosure without the consent of the person in charge of such enclosure.
(Prior Code, § 3-116) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
ANIMALS AT PUBLIC GATHERINGS
§ 90.030 PUBLIC GATHERINGS, SHOWS, PARADES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, a PUBLIC GATHERING is defined as any
festival, parade or event where the general public is welcome. All animals
participating in such events must have all vaccinations as required by the
state.
   (B)   For the health, safety, welfare and enjoyment of all persons attending
a public gathering; it shall be mandatory for dogs to be on a leash of not more
than five feet and under full control of the owner. At the discretion of
authorized personnel, a person with a dog may be asked to remove said dog from
the premises. Failure to obey this provision shall result in the owner being
cited and upon conviction, shall be fined as set forth in §
90.999.
   (C)   If the public gathering includes an animal, pet or dog show; or if a
parade is held in conjunction with a festival or event then the following
restrictions shall be enforced
      (1)   Animal, pet or dog shows.
         (a)   Domestic animals may be escorted to and from said show either on
a leash, tether or in a cage, and shall remain on the leash, tether or in the
cage while waiting to be presented or the awarding of prizes.
         (b)   Exotic reptiles must remain caged at all times.
         (c)   Domestic reptiles need not be caged.
         (d)   Agriculture animals must be tethered during such events.
      (2)   Parades and festivals. Horses, mules and other agriculture animals
that normally would be ridden in a parade must have a diaper attached or the
owner/rider must immediately clean up any excrement from such animals. This
also includes animals attached to drawn conveyances. Other animals need only be
leashed, tethered or in a carrier.
(Prior Code, § 3-201) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.031 RIDING OF ANIMALS IN THE TOWN.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to ride any horse, mule, or other agriculture
animal (except as described in §
90.030(C)) within the town. All such animals are riders needing to transverse
the town from U.S. Route 219 to 10th Avenue and from 1st Street to 12th Street
must be walked. All excrement of such animals must be cleaned up immediately.
This section also applies to animals attached to drawn conveyances.
   (B)   This section does not apply to animals being ridden on the Greenbrier
River Trail, as long as they remain on the Greenbrier River Trail.
(Prior Code, § 3-202) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
DOGS AND CATS
§ 90.045 SEIZING OR ENTICING DOG; BRINGING DOG INTO TOWN FOR IMPOUNDING OR
KILLING.
   (A)   No person shall, except with the consent of the owner, entice any
properly licensed dog into any enclosure, or decoy or entice any dog out of the
enclosure or house of its owner or possessor for the purpose of removing its
collar or tag.
   (B)   No person shall bring any dog into the town for the purpose of
unlawfully abandoning, impounding or killing of the dog.
(Prior Code, § 3-301) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011)
§ 90.046 DANGEROUS DOGS; DEFINITION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DANGEROUS DOG.
         (a)   Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack, to cause injury, or otherwise threaten the safety of
human beings or other domestic animals;
         (b)   Any dog which, in a vicious or threatening manner, approaches
any person or another domestic animal in an apparent attack upon the person or
the domestic animal;
         (c)   Any dog which attacks or bites, or has attacked or bitten a
human being or domestic animal;
         (d)   Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose
of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting; or
         (e)   Any dog already determined to be an aggressive dog at large as
defined in this chapter.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the definition of a dangerous dog above, no dog may be
declared dangerous if any injury or damage is sustained by a person or animal
who at the time of such injury or damage was sustained, was committing or
attempting to commit a willful trespass or other crime or tort upon the
premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing
or assaulting the dog. Further, no dog may be declared dangerous if the dog was
protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog
from an unjustified attack or assault.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to regulate or prohibit the
lawful maintenance of dogs by law enforcement agencies.
(Prior Code, § 3-302) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.047 DANGEROUS DOGS; PROCEDURE FOR THE DETERMINATION OF A DANGEROUS DOG.
   (A)   In the event that authorized authority has probable cause to believe
that a dog is dangerous, as defined in this subchapter, the municipal court
judge may convene a hearing for the purpose of determining whether the dog in
question should be declared dangerous as defined by §
90.046. Pending the determination, the authorized authority may order the dog
to be impounded at a licensed veterinary clinic or an animal welfare agency or
other county facility. Consistent with §
90.057, the owner of the dog shall be liable for the reasonable costs incurred
for the care, treatment and boarding of the dog.
   (B)   Notice shall be provided to the owner of the dog that a hearing will
be held before the municipal court to determine whether the dog is dangerous as
defined in this subchapter; such notice shall provide in writing, the date,
time and place of the hearing. The failure of the owner to attend or
participate in the hearing shall not preclude the municipal court judge from
the making the appropriate determination concerning the dog. The hearing shall
be held no less than five nor more than 20 days after service of notice upon
the owner of the dog. The town shall have the burden of proof to show that the
dog is dangerous pursuant to §
90.046.
   (C)   The municipal court judge shall issue such order in writing as is
appropriate. Upon entry, the Town Recorder shall serve copies of such order
upon all parties to the action. If a determination is made by the municipal
court judge that the dog is dangerous, the owner shall comply with the
provisions of §
90.048 within 15 days of entry of the order. If the owner fails to comply with
the provisions of §
90.048 within the time provided, the dog shall be euthanized; and the owner
shall be responsible for all reasonable costs related thereto.
(Prior Code, § 3-303) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011)
§ 90.048 DANGEROUS DOGS; CONTROL OF DANGEROUS DOG; REGISTRATION AND
CONFINEMENT.
   If the municipal court judge determines that a dog is dangerous, the owner
of such dog shall comply with the following.
   (A)   Registration. The owner shall:
      (1)   Have a microchip inserted into the dog by a veterinarian, which
microchip shall detail the dangerous dog designation and such other information
as may be appropriate to determine ownership of the dog. The owner shall be
responsible for all cost associated with the microchip procedure;
      (2)   Maintain an insurance policy in a minimum amount set by Council
from time to time to cover any injuries to persons or property which may be
caused by the dangerous dog; and
      (3)   Annually register the dangerous dog with the town, on forms
designated by the town, which registration shall include proof of installation
and maintenance of the microchip and the required insurance. The owner shall
pay an annual registration fee set by Council from time to time. All
registration fees are due at the beginning of the fiscal year or at the time of
registration. The owner shall be responsible for maintaining with the town, the
address of the owner of the dangerous dog. Upon any change of address of the
owner, or any change in the place of residence of the dangerous dog, or any
change in ownership of the dangerous dog, the owner shall within seven days of
the such change notify the town.
   (B)   Confinement. At all times, except as otherwise provided in this
division (B), all dangerous dogs shall be confined inside the dwelling of the
owner or inside a securely locked enclosure. It shall be unlawful for any owner
to allow a dangerous dog to be outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside
the enclosure unless it is necessary for the owner to obtain veterinary care
for the dangerous dog or for the limited purposes of allowing said dangerous
dog to urinate or defecate or to sell or give away the dangerous dog, or to
respond to such orders of law enforcement officials as may be required. In such
event, the dangerous dog shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a leash
not exceeding five feet in length, and shall be under the direct control and
supervision of the owner of the dangerous dog. The muzzle shall be made and
used in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its
vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any human or other
animal.
(Prior Code, § 3-304) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.049 DANGEROUS DOGS; VIOLATION OF REQUIREMENTS FOR DANGEROUS DOG; FINES.
   Any person found guilty of violating the requirements of §
90.048 shall be assessed, fined and the animal disposed of, as follows.
   (A)   Any dangerous dog that is not confined or registered pursuant to §
90.048 shall be impounded by authorized personnel in accordance with the
provisions of §
90.057.
   (B)   Any dangerous dog which, without provocation attacks, assaults,
wounds, bites, or otherwise injures, or assists in injuring a human being shall
be impounded by authorized personnel in accordance with the provisions of §
90.057.
   (C)   Any dangerous dog which, without provocation attacks, assaults,
wounds, bites or otherwise injures, or assists in injuring any domestic animal
shall be impounded by authorized personnel in accordance with the provisions of
§
90.057.
   (D)   Upon conviction under divisions (B) or (C) above, the municipal court
judge shall order that the owner be deemed to have forfeited all interest in
the dog and that the dog be humanely euthanized; provided that upon
presentation of evidence satisfactory to the municipal court judge that the
dangerous dog should not be euthanized in this case, then such dog may be
released to the custody of the owner upon the payment of the fees and expenses
as set forth in §
90.057 for the redemption of the dog by the owner.
(Prior Code, § 3-305) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.050 DANGEROUS DOGS; THREATS TO PUBLIC SAFETY.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary and
irrespective of whether the dog has been declared dangerous pursuant to this
subchapter, no person shall harbor, own, or possess a dog that is an immediate
threat to public health and safety.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary and
irrespective of whether the dog has been declared dangerous pursuant to this
subchapter, the municipal court judge may order any dog be destroyed if the
municipal court judge determines that the dog is an immediate threat to public
health, safety and welfare and that confinement and registration of the dog by
the owner of the dog as provided in this subchapter will not adequately protect
public health, safety and welfare. In making such determination the municipal
court judge shall consider the severity of any attack and any other relevant
information.
(Prior Code, § 3-306) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
Statutory reference:
   Vicious dogs, see W.Va Code §§ 8-12-5(26), 19-20-20, 19-20-21
§ 90.051 ACTIONS UNDER PROCLAMATION BY HEALTH DEPARTMENT OR MAYOR.
   Whenever it shall be made to appear to the satisfaction of the County Health
Department or the Mayor of the town that any dog within the town has rabies or
any other dangerous and communicable disease, that department may issue a
proclamation requiring any actions, consistent with state law, necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(Prior Code, § 3-307) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 19-9-2
§ 90.052 RESTRICTION ON NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep or harbor more than three dogs and/or cats
on any lot, premises, dwelling, building, structure, boat or living
accommodation.
   (B)   This would include a breeding pair and one litter (puppies/kittens
less than eight weeks old are considered one unit) or any combination of three
dogs and/or cats unless:
      (1)   Properly licensed as a commercial kennel in compliance with all
county and state laws;
      (2)   Approved for a special permit under the provisions of §
90.053;
      (3)   Previously granted a variance for the keeping of more than three
dogs and/or cats from the Town Council. The variance shall remain in effect
until such time as the property is no longer in compliance with conditions set
forth in said variance; and
      (4)   Any owner with more than three dogs and/or cats at the time of
adoption of this chapter shall be grandfathered and not required to relinquish
any dogs or cats. However, at any time thereafter as loss of a dog and/or cat
may occur, no person shall be permitted to replace said animal and will be
subject to the above restrictions.
(Prior Code, § 3-308) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.053 RESTRICTION ON NUMBER OF DOGS AND/OR CATS; SPECIAL PERMITS.
   (A)   The intent of the special permit application is to allow responsible
pet owners to keep or harbor more than three dogs and/or cats if adequate
conditions exist in which the animals will not cause damage, hazard, nuisance
or be a detriment to any persons or property.
   (B)   Any person desiring to keep or harbor more than three dogs and/or cats
shall submit a written request for a special permit to the Town Council. The
special permit request shall include a copy of a site plan of the subject
property showing all structures, fences and open space.
   (C)   The Town Council may grant a special permit if the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The subject property is larger than 9,600 square feet. If less than
9,600 square feet, dogs and/or cats must be kept indoors;
      (2)   The dogs and/or cats must be kept indoors; or in a secure area with
a fence of sufficient height and durability to prohibit the dogs and/or cats
from escaping; or in a secure area effectively controlled by a electronic
device; and
      (3)   Adequate shelter as defined in this chapter.
   (D)   Applicants shall not be eligible for a special permit if they are
known in the neighborhood or community for causing disruptions related to dogs
and/or cats.
   (E)   Special permits are non-transferable. A change in the number or type
of dogs and/or cats, or changes in the residence or ownership of the dogs and/
or cats shall require a new special permit.
   (F)   The fee for a special permit shall be set by Council from time to
time. The special permit fee shall be allocated for animal welfare by the Town
Council.
   (G)   A previously approved special permit may be rejected or revoked at any
time if the Town Council determines the issuance of a special permit has caused
damage, hazard, nuisance, dangerous conditions, or is a detriment to any person
or property.
   (H)   Any person aggrieved by the denial or granting of a special permit
shall have the right to appeal to the Town Council.
   (I)   Special permits will not be required for verifiable members of an
animal welfare agency providing temporary “foster care” for stray/abandoned
dogs and/or cats until appropriate disposition can be determined.
(Prior Code, § 3-309) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.054 ANNUAL HEAD TAX (DOG TAX).
   (A)   There is hereby imposed upon each person owning or harboring within
the town, a dog above the age of six months an annual head tax on each dog so
kept, in the amount set by Council from time to time for each dog kept. The tag
shall be situated on the collar or harness in such a manner that it may be
easily visible at all times.
   (B)   Shall be the duty of each person who owns or harbors any dog within
the town at the time of the annual assessment of personal property to report to
the county assessor and pay the head tax on said dog.
   (C)   The head tax collected by the town shall be used for animal welfare.
   (D)   This section does not apply to dogs in a licensed kennel or veterinary
hospital.
(Prior Code, § 3-310) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, W.Va Code §§ 8-13-10 and 19-20-1
§ 90.055 DOGS PROHIBITED TO RUN AT LARGE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a dog which
runs at large in the town. Knowledge or acquiescence by the owner is not an
element of the offense. An animal shall not be deemed to be running at large
if:
         (a)   The dog is firmly attached to a leash or chain under the
physical control of its owner;
         (b)   The dog is within a structure or within a fence enclosure with
the permission of the owner of the structure; or
         (c)   The dog has an operating electronic collar and is under the
charge or control of its owner who is operating an electronic pet containment
system or electronic training system for the animal.
      (2)   Notwithstanding this division (A), all dogs on the public right-of-
way in the central business district (8th Street) must be kept on a leash or
chain under the physical control of its owner.
      (3)   Notwithstanding this division (A), Stillwell Park is not included
but owner is subject to Pocahontas County Parks and Recreation rules for that
facility.
   (B)   Any dog on property without permission of the property owner shall be
deemed to be a dog at large, and the owner of such animal shall be in violation
of this section.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to service animals.
   (D)   Any person found guilty of a dog at large as defined herein shall be
punished by a fine as set forth in §
90.999. If the owner agrees to forfeit ownership of the animal, all interest in
the animal shall vest to an animal welfare organization for appropriate
disposition.
(Prior Code, § 3-311) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.056 AGGRESSIVE DOG AT LARGE DEFINED; FINES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep an aggressive dog
which runs at large in the town. Knowledge or acquiescence by the owner is not
an element of the offense. An aggressive dog at large as defined in this
section is that without provocation, exhibits aggressive or combative behavior
toward a person or another domestic animal, whether said person or domestic
animal is physically attacked or bitten.
   (B)   Any person found guilty of an aggressive dog at large shall be
punished by a fine as set forth in §
90.999. The municipal court judge shall have no authority to suspend the fine.
   (C)   If the owner agrees to forfeit ownership of the animal, all interest
in the animal shall vest to an animal welfare organization.
(Prior Code, § 3-312) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.057 IMPOUNDING, REDEMPTION AND DISPOSITION.
   (A)   A dog and/or cat found running at large within the corporate limits of
the town contrary to the provisions of §
90.056 may be impounded by any authorized personnel. The authorized personnel
shall make a record of all dogs and/or cats so impounded with their
description, date of impoundment and rabies vaccination number.
   (B)   (1)   The owner of any animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter must appear and claim the said animal within ten days from the
date the animal is impounded. If the animal is not claimed within ten days of
impoundment, then the owner shall be deemed to have forfeited all interest in
the animal and the animal shall be deemed abandoned. All interest in such
animal shall vest to an animal welfare organization for adoption or other
disposition.
      (2)   If the owner appears to claim the dog within the ten-day period,
said animal may be released to him or her upon the following conditions:
         (a)   Proof that the animal is currently immunized against rabies, or,
in absence of such proof, reimbursement to the animal welfare organization for
a rabies vaccine or voucher for a rabies vaccine;
         (b)   Reimbursement to the animal welfare organization for all
reasonable expense for necessary medical care; and
         (c)   Payment of the following fees to the animal welfare
organization:
            1.   Impoundment and initial board fee for the first 24-hour period
or any part thereof of an amount set by Council from time to time; and
            2.   An additional fee set by Council from time to time for each
additional 24-hour period up to a maximum of ten days.
(Prior Code, § 3-313) (Ord. passed 11-7-2011)
FEEDING OF WILD MAMMALS
§ 90.070 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Marlinton Prohibiting the Feeding of
Certain Species of Wild Mammals Ordinance”.
(Ord. passed 6-2-2014)
§ 90.071 COVERED AREA.
   This subchapter applies only to Marlinton proper, which is all the corporate
lands east of the Greenbrier River and north of Knapp Creek.
(Ord. passed 6-2-2014)
§ 90.072 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTRACTANT. Any substance which could reasonably be expected to attract a
wild mammal or does attract a wild mammal, including, but not limited to, human
food scraps, pet food, agricultural feed, grain, salt/mineral blocks, fruit or
vegetables. ATTRACTANT does not include shrubs, live crops, plants, flowers,
vegetation, gardens, trees and fruit or nuts that have fallen from trees to the
ground
   FEEDING. The intentional providing of an attractant that is accessible to a
wild mammal.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, organization, trade or
professional association, firm, limited liability company, joint venture,
association, trust, estate or any other legal entity, and any officer, member,
shareholder, director employee, agent or representative thereof.
   WILD MAMMAL. Any mammal which is not normally domesticated in this state,
including, but not limited to: coyotes; foxes; deer; bear; opossums; raccoons;
skunks; and bobcats. Avian species are excluded from this definition.
(Ord. passed 6-2-2014)
§ 90.073 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall intentionally make an attractant available for
consumption by wild mammals on private or public property within the town. A
person shall be presumed to have intentionally fed wild mammals, or made an
attractant available for consumption by wild mammals, if the person places an
attractant, or causes an attractant to be placed on the ground or on any
outdoor platform that stands fewer than five feet above the ground.
   (B)   No person shall leave, store or maintain any attractant in a manner,
area, or location accessible to any wild mammal within the corporate limits of
the town.
(Ord. passed 6-2-2014) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.074 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Any person who is the legal owner of a wild mammal and the wild mammal
is kept in compliance with all applicable DNR and state regulations/laws;
   (B)   A wildlife rehabilitator, licensed pursuant to the DNR and the state’s
rules and regulations governing wildlife rehabilitation;
   (C)   Any person who feeds or provides food to a trapped, injured or
unweaned wild mammal between the time that the agency in charge of mammal
control or its designated agent is notified of the wild mammal and the wild
mammal is picked up by the agency or designated agent; and
   (D)   Any person with a wild bird feeder provided that the feeder is
properly mounted and the area below the feeder is kept free from the
accumulation of seed and seed debris.
(Ord. passed 6-2-2014)
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law or §§
90.001 through
90.016,
90.030,
90.031 and
90.045 through
90.057, a person convicted of violation of §§
90.001 through
90.016,
90.030,
90.031 and
90.045 through
90.057 for which no specific penalty is prescribed, shall be punished by a fine
as set forth in division (C) below. In addition to any penalty prescribed in
these animal control provisions, the municipal court judge may award an
additional penalty in the form of restitution for damages which maybe caused as
a result of any violation of these animal control provisions. Additionally, the
municipal court judge shall in all cases order a defendant convicted of any
violation of these animal control provisions to reimburse the animal welfare
organization, veterinarian, animal clinic or hospital, or other animal care and
treatment provider for all such reasonable expenses as may have been incurred
by the animal welfare organization, veterinarian, animal clinic or hospital, or
other animal care and treatment provider with respect to the animal at issue in
the violation. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect
to the violations of this code that are continuous with respect to time each
day that the violation continues is a separate offense. The imposition of a
penalty does not preclude suspension or revocation of any license, permit or
franchise, or other administrative sanctions. Violations of this code that are
continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by
injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not
preclude injunctive relief.
(Prior Code, § 3-401)
   (C)   (1)   A violation of any section of §§
90.001 through
90.016,
90.030,
90.031 and
90.045 through
90.057, not otherwise designated, shall be punishable by a fine set by Council
from time to time, for each separate violation.
      (2)   With each additional violation after the third offense, the fine
shall be set by Council from time to time, plus court cost, food, medications,
lodging.
(Prior Code, § 3-402)
   (D)   Subject to the exceptions contained in §
90.006(A) and (B), a person convicted of a violation of §§
90.003,
90.004 and
90.005 shall be punished by a fine set by Council from time to time for each
separate violation arising under §§
90.003,
90.004 and
90.005. For violations of §
90.004(A)(1) though (A)(3), and in addition to the fines set forth herein, the
municipal court judge may, in his or her discretion, order that the defendant
be sentenced to a jail term of not more than 30 days for each separate
violation arising under §
90.004(A)(1) though (A)(3).
      (1)   Except for violation of §
90.004(A)(1) though (A)(3), in the case of the first offense of §§
90.004 and
90.005, if the defendant enters a plea of guilty or no contest and voluntarily
forfeits his or her right to own any animal within the town limits for one
year, the municipal court judge may, in his or her discretion, reduce or
suspend the fine; provided, that if the defendant violates the terms of the
plea regarding forfeiture, then the full amount of the fine shall be reinstated
upon proper findings and conclusions of the court.
      (2)   Except for violation of §
90.004(A)(1) though (A)(3), the municipal court judge shall have the authority,
on one occasion only per defendant, to withhold for a reasonable time not to
exceed 180 days the entry of judgment of conviction for violations under §§
90.004 and
90.005 so that the defendant may attend an animal training program established
or certified by an animal welfare organization. If the defendant attends said
course, the municipal court judge, if satisfied with the defendant’s
participation in and proof of payment for the course, shall without entering a
judgment of conviction, dismiss the proceeding against the defendant. It shall
be a condition of this alternative disposition that the defendant pay the
regular court costs required for misdemeanor offenses by this code where a
person is convicted of such a misdemeanor offense. Any such court cost
collected by the municipal court shall be allocated and transmitted by the
municipal court as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 3-106)
   (E)   Any person convicted of the violation of §
90.015 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined an amount set by Council from
time to time and that upon any second or subsequent violation shall be fined an
amount set by Council from time to time. Each consecutive day’s violation shall
constitute a separate punishable offense.
(Prior Code, § 3-115)
   (F)   (1)   Upon a first conviction of a violation of §
90.049(A), in addition to all costs for impoundment, the owner shall be
punished by a fine set by Council from time to time. Upon conviction of a
second offense within 24 months of any prior conviction, in addition to all
costs for impoundment, the owner shall be punished by a fine set by Council
from time to time and said dog shall be euthanized. Pending the adjudication of
a second offense under this section, the redemption provision of §
90.057 is suspended. The municipal court judge shall have no authority to
suspend the fine or any portion thereof.
      (2)   Upon conviction of §
90.049(B), in addition to all reasonable costs of impoundment, the owner shall
be punished by a fine set by Council from time to time. The municipal court
judge shall have no authority to suspend the fine or any portion thereof.
      (3)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
90.049(C), in addition to all reasonable costs of impoundment, the owner shall
be punished by a fine set by Council from time to time. The municipal court
judge shall have no authority to suspend the fine or any portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-305)
   (G)   (1)   The municipal court judge shall have the authority to order any
such person convicted of violating §
90.050(A) to pay a fine set by Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 3-305)
   (H)   Violation of §§
90.070 through
90.074 will be considered a misdemeanor, with a fine set by Council from time
to time per violation.
(Ord. passed 11-7-2011; Ord. passed 6-2-2014)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Short title
   
91.02   Fire limits
Fire Code
   
91.15   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
   
91.16   Enforcement
   
91.17   Municipality defined
   
91.18   Gasoline trucks
   
91.19   Modifications
Fire Department
   
91.30   Fire Department
   
91.31   Authority
   
91.32   Equipment protected
   
91.33   Right-of-way
   
91.34   Prohibited conduct
   
91.35   Fire fee
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Marlinton Fire Protection Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 6-100) (Ord. passed 8-1-2016)
§ 91.02 FIRE LIMITS.
   The corporate fire limits shall be as follows: all of block markers 19, 20,
21, 22, 23, 32, 33, 34, 35, 42, 44 and 45 as shown on the proper plat of the
Town of Marlinton.
(Prior Code, § 6-101) (Ord. passed 8-1-2016)
FIRE CODE
§ 91.15 ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   There is hereby adopted by the governing body for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code recommended by
the American Insurance Association, being particularly the 1970 edition thereof
and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter
deleted, modified or amended (by § 91.19), of which code not less than three
copies have been and now are filed in the office of the Recorder and the same
are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein,
and from the date on which this subchapter shall take effect, the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 6-201) (Ord. passed 8-1-2016)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town council to adopt a fire prevention code by reference, see
W. Va. Code § 8-11-4(b)
§ 91.16 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Fire Prevention Code herein adopted by reference shall be enforced by
the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-202) (Ord. passed 8-1-2016)
§ 91.17 MUNICIPALITY DEFINED.
   Whenever the word MUNICIPALITY is used in the Fire Prevention Code herein
adopted, it shall be held to mean the Town of Marlinton, West Virginia.
(Prior Code, § 6-203) (Ord. passed 8-1-2016)
§ 91.18 GASOLINE TRUCKS.
   No person shall operate or park any gasoline truck within the central
business district or within any residential area at any time except for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious delivery of gasoline.
(Prior Code, § 6-204) (Ord. passed 8-1-2016) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.19 MODIFICATIONS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department may recommend to the governing body
modifications of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in
writing by any property owner or lessee, or the duly authorized agent of
either, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the
strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be
observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars
of such modifications when granted or allowed shall be contained in an
amendment to this code or a resolution of the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 6-205) (Ord. passed 8-1-2016)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 91.30 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The official fire department of the town is the Marlinton Volunteer Fire
Department, Inc.
(Prior Code, § 6-301) (Ord. passed 8-1-2016)
§ 91.31 AUTHORITY.
   At any time in case of fire within the town, or when the Fire Department has
responded to an alarm of fire, and is in attendance thereon, or when any of the
town, or any volunteers fighting such fire on behalf of the town are in
attendance to fight such fire, the Fire Chief of such Department, or in his or
her absence, any such official of the town, the party in charge of such
volunteer forces shall have charge of the vicinity of such fire, including the
territory occupied by the fire hose, fire plugs or fire equipment, and shall
have the right and authority to prescribe regulations to keep persons and
vehicles away from the vicinity of such fire or the streets, avenues and alleys
in the vicinity thereof, when in his or her opinion it is advisable to do so.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such regulations or disobey
any such command or commands, or to interfere in any way with the parties so
have charge, or any such person or persons fighting such fire, or to encroach
on the territory in the vicinity of such fire, or any street, alley or avenue
in such vicinity, after having been instructed to the contrary by the person or
persons so having charge thereof, or to walk on, drive over or tamper in any
way with the fire hose or other equipment.
(Prior Code, § 6-302) (Ord. passed 8-1-2016) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.32 EQUIPMENT PROTECTED.
   No person shall remove from any house of the Fire Department of the town any
reel, hose nozzle, wrench, ladder or any part of the equipment of said Fire
Department, except in the regular line of duty in case of a fire or a fire
drill; nor shall any person tamper with, mislay, injure or destroy any part of
the equipment of said Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-303) (Ord. passed 8-1-2016) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.33 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   When a fire alarm has been given the equipment of the town’s Fire Department
shall have the right- of-way over all other traffic upon the streets, roads and
the alleys of this municipality, and all persons operating vehicles of any kind
upon the streets and alleys shall pull to the curb and give the right-of-way
upon the approach of the fire equipment and sounding of the siren.
(Prior Code, § 6-304) (Ord. passed 8-1-2016)
§ 91.34 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell, give away or otherwise dispose of,
within the corporate limits of the town any fireworks, including firecrackers,
Roman candles, skyrockets, squibs, torpedoes or other inflammable or
combustible articles commonly designated as fireworks, or to have the same in
possession with intent to do so.
   (B)   No person shall within the town, other than beyond Second Avenue and
Fifth Street and Third Avenue between Eighth Street and Fifth Street, store,
keep, manufacture or produce any flammable liquids or liquefied petroleum gases
in any outside above ground tanks with the exception of home heating oil and
bottled gas storage tanks attached to a residence.
   (C)   Transport any flammable, hazardous or explosive articles while on any
street of this town, other than on U.S. Route 219, State Route 39, 39A, upper
Second and Third Avenue above Eighth Street and below Second and Third Avenue
and Ninth Street in Marlinton. This in no way means that home delivery cannot
be done.
   (D)   Park in or block in any way, any street, avenue or alleyway used as a
fire line with the town.
(Prior Code, § 6-305) (Ord. passed 8-1-2016) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.35 FIRE FEE.
   (A)   There is hereby levied charges payable annually, semiannually or bi-
monthly, against the owner or owners of all residential, commercial, industrial
or other building or buildings of the very kind and nature, and regardless of
the type or types of construction within the town, and against the chattels
owned by tenants in said buildings in the town.
   (B)   Said charges shall be payable by the property owners and collected by
the Treasurer of the town to partially defray the expense of maintaining and
improving volunteer fire protection for such residential, commercial,
industrial or other type building or buildings, and chattels of tenants in the
same.
      (1)   The town may collect a service charge and all accrued penalties by
action against the owner of property against whom the service charge has been
assessed by action brought before any of the magistrates of the county, or by
action or other appropriate proceedings in the circuit court of the county. A
service charge due under this subchapter may be a debt to the town.
      (2)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to churches or to
residential, industrial, commercial or other buildings owned by the town.
      (3)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to railroad
tracks or water, gas, electricity or telephone transmission lines, not within a
building, which are owned and operated by public utilities duly authorized by
the Public Service Commission of the state.
(Prior Code, § 6-306) (Ord. passed 8-1-2016)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions
of this chapter or the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted, or fail to comply
herewith, or violate or fail to comply with any order made hereunder, or to
build in violation of any detailed statement of specification or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and shall upon conviction be fined a sum set by Council from time
to time plus costs. The application of this penalty shall not be held to
prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Prior Code, § 6-206)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of §§
91.30 through
91.35 or fail to comply herewith, or violate or fail to comply with any order
made hereunder, and any person found in violation hereof shall be punished by a
fine set by Council from time to time and 30 days in jail, or both said fine
and imprisonment for each separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-307)
(Ord. passed 8-1-2016)
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.001   Health Officer
   
92.002   Adulterated food, drugs and cosmetics
   
92.003   Communicable diseases
   
92.004   House trailers and other movable structures
   
92.005   Smoke, soot, cinders and the like
   
92.006   Stagnant water
   
92.007   Weeds
   
92.008   Dead animals
   
92.009   Health and sanitation nuisances
Refuse and Garbage
   
92.020   Definitions
   
92.021   Premises to be kept clean
   
92.022   Storage
   
92.023   Location of containers
   
92.024   Disturbing containers
   
92.025   Collection
   
92.026   Collection vehicles
   
92.027   Disposal
   
92.028   Refuse pick-up
   
92.029   Special pick-ups
   
92.030   Dumpsters
   
92.031   Residential garbage fee
   
92.032   Multi-use and apartment garbage fee
   
92.033   Business garbage fees
Open Burning
   
92.045   Title
   
92.046   Violation
Abandoned and Junked Property
   
92.060   Title
   
92.061   Abandoned motor vehicles
   
92.062   Junked motor vehicles
   
92.063   Depositing on right-of-way prohibited
   
92.064   Administration of funds
   
92.065   Custody and possession
   
92.066   Notification
   
92.067   Reclamation
   
92.068   Application for injunction
Nuisances
   
92.080   Adoption
   
92.081   Supplemental to other regulations
   
92.082   Prohibited nuisances
   
92.083   Maintenance of premises
   
92.084   Abatement
   
92.085   Notice to owners prior to removal of an abandoned or junked motor
vehicle
 
   
92.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.001 HEALTH OFFICER.
   The Health Officer shall be such municipal, county or state officer as the
governing body shall appoint or designate to administer and enforce health and
sanitation regulations within the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 7-401)
§ 92.002 ADULTERATED FOOD, DRUGS AND COSMETICS.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to
violate within this municipality any provisions of the state, food, drug and
cosmetic laws.
(Prior Code, § 7-402) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.003 COMMUNICABLE DISEASES.
   When there exists or is suspected to exist in any household a communicable
disease other than a venereal disease or a common childhood disease it shall be
the duty of any attending physician and the head or other responsible persons
in such household possessing knowledge of the facts to immediately notify the
Health Officer. The Health Officer shall thereupon make such investigation and
issue such quarantine orders as may reasonably be necessary to protect the
public health. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such orders
of the Health Officer.
(Prior Code, § 7-403) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.004 HOUSE TRAILERS AND OTHER MOVABLE STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, locate or
occupy any house trailer or portable building of any type, kind or description
within the corporate limits of the town. Any violation of this provision shall
be punishable by a fine of $25 per day for every day that said structure is so
maintained.
   (B)   Variances. In determining the issuance of a variance to this section,
the following rules and regulations shall apply:
      (1)   Any and all requests for variance from this section shall be made
by proper application of property owner and filed with the town with the fee
therefore of $50 per site. The Town Building Inspector shall create a formal
application and make same available to the public;
      (2)   Each application shall be considered on a case by case basis and
the grant or refusal of any variance shall not have any effect whatsoever on
any other grant or refusal;
      (3)   Within ten calendar days from the date of filing of any
application, the Town Building Inspector shall make an inspection of the site
and shall review with the property owner the site plans;
      (4)   For purposes of any variance, a campground or R.V. park shall
consist of three or more sites for R.V. parking;
      (5)   For purposes of any variance, no R.V. shall be placed other than as
provided herein and no variance shall be granted for any R.V. to be placed upon
the same property address whereat there already exists a building or residence,
or another R.V.;
      (6)   For all purposes of any type of variance (i.e., campground, single
space and the like), there must be a designated space for each and every R.V.
measuring not less than 25 feet wide by 70 feet long and containing 1,750
square feet and with setback limits of ten feet from any road, street and/or
property line, building or structure;
      (7)   Parking for cars/trucks permitted; the purpose for the size and
dimensions of the spaces set forth above is for public safety and to allow for
off-street parking and R.V. owners shall park their personal vehicles upon
their rented space. No outbuilding of any kind shall be permitted on any R. V.
space;
      (8)   There must be properly installed and constructed water and sewer
lines with a hookup for both to each and every R.V. The sewer policy includes
the requirements that threaded caps be installed on each vacant campsite’s
sewer connection to prevent surface water inflow. The property owner must
provide a written certification as to the installation of each and every
electrical connection and each R.V. must have an individual electrical
connection for electrical power;
      (9)   Accounts for garbage collection must be arranged for all R.V.s
placed in town. The bi-monthly (every two months) rate shall be as follows:
         (a)   Residential rate for all single R.V.s placed in the town;
         (b)   The following schedule for multiple placements of R.V.s in the
town:
 
Up to 3 R.V. lots                      $94.50
4 to 6 R.V. lots                       $189
7 to 12 R.V. lots (dumpster rate)      $250
More than 12 R.V. lots (dumpster rate) $375
 
      (10)   Every property owner granted a variance hereunder and every owner
of an R.V. placed within the town limits shall execute a writing guaranteeing
the town that any and all R.V.s placed within the town limits shall be removed
to higher ground in the event of a high water/flood emergency within two hours
of notification. In the event the property owner or the R.V. owner shall fail
to remove any R.V. as provided herein and above, the town may arrange to have
same removed forthwith and the property owner and the R.V. owner shall be
responsible and liable to the town for all costs of such removal. The town
shall incur no liability whatsoever to the property owner or the R.V. owner for
such removal nor any damages therefore;
      (11)   These rules and regulations shall constitute the minimum
requirements for the issuance of a variance. All property owners and R.V.
owners shall also comply with all applicable ordinances of the town,
specifically including the town’s floodplain regulations. All property owners
and R.V. owners shall also comply with all applicable federal and state rules,
regulations and laws, especially State DNR and DEP rules and all federal FEMA
rules and regulations;
      (12)   Any variance granted by the Town Council shall be deemed revoked
and invalid upon the violation of any provision of this section and/or the
rules and regulations set out herein and upon such revocation any and all R.V.s
placed within the town pursuant to the revoked variance shall be forthwith
removed within 24 hours of such revocation. In the event the property owner or
the R.V. owner shall fail to remove any R.V. as provided herein and above, the
town may arrange to have same removed forthwith and the property owner and the
R.V. owner shall be responsible and liable to the town for all costs of such
removal. The town shall incur no liability whatsoever to the property owner or
the R.V. owner for such removal nor any damages therefore;
      (13)   The only notice of revocation necessary hereunder shall be the
posting of a revocation notice placed upon any and all R.V.s located upon
property for which the variance has been revoked;
      (14)   The Building Inspector shall provide a copy of this section to
each and every applicant for a variance hereunder;
      (15)   Effective upon adoption of application, any and all variances
granted hereunder shall be for one calendar year. Property owners must re-apply
every year for a variance; and
      (16)   Any and all variances granted hereunder shall be effective upon
passage by Council.
(Prior Code, § 7-404) (Ord. passed 9-10-2018)
§ 92.005 SMOKE, SOOT, CINDERS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause the escape of such
quantities of dense smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes or gases as to
be detrimental to or to endanger the health, comfort and safety of the public
or so as to cause or have a tendency to cause injury or damage to property or
business.
(Prior Code, § 7-405) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.006 STAGNANT WATER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly allow any pool of stagnant
water to accumulate and stand on his or her property.
(Prior Code, § 7-406) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.007 WEEDS.
   Every owner or tenant of property shall periodically cut the grass and other
vegetation commonly recognized as weeds on his or her property, and it shall be
unlawful for any such person to fail to comply with an order by the Recorder or
Chief of Police to cut such vegetation when it has reached a height of over one
foot.
(Prior Code, § 7-407) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.008 DEAD ANIMALS.
   Any person owning or having possession of any dead animals not intended for
use as food shall promptly bury the same or notify the Health Officer and
dispose of such animal in such manner as the Health Officer shall direct.
(Prior Code, § 7-408) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.009 HEALTH AND SANITATION NUISANCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any premises owned, occupied
or controlled by him or her to become or remain in a filthy condition, or
permit the use or occupation of same in such manner as to create noxious
offensive smells and odors in connection therewith, or to allow the
accumulation or creation of unwholesome and offensive matter or the breeding of
flies, rodents or other vermin on the premises to the menace of the public
health or the annoyance of people residing within the vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 7-409) Penalty, see §
92.999
REFUSE AND GARBAGE
§ 92.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Any spoiled or wasted food, as from a market, restaurant or kitchen
that is thrown away.
   REFUSE. Includes garbage, rubbish and trash; except that dead animals and
fowls, body waste, hot ashes, rocks, concrete, bricks and similar materials are
expressly excluded there from and shall not be stored therewith.
   REFUSE and RUBBISH. Anything thrown away or rejected as worthless or
useless.
   TRASH. Any plant trimmings or any broken, discarded, or worthless things or
matter.
(Prior Code, § 7-101) (Ord. passed 9-10-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town council to prohibit the accumulation and require the
disposal of garbage and refuse and to provide for the elimination of public
health and safety hazards and to abate nuisances, see W. Va. Code § 8-12-5(1),
(23)
§ 92.021 PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
   (A)   All persons within the municipality are hereby required to keep their
premises or property wherever situated within the town, in a clean and sanitary
condition, free from accumulations of refuse, except when stored as provided in
this subchapter.
   (B)   All businesses and residences shall be required to use either covered
containers (includes containers which the municipality handles mechanically) in
which to hold refuse until the same is picked up by the town or to use varmint-
proof and wind-proof areas until such refuse is picked up by the town. The
reason for such requirement is to prevent unsightly and/or unsanitary material
from being spread throughout the town. Each business and residence shall be
completely responsible for all refuse found outside such container and/or
holding area. Each business and residence shall be responsible for clear and
clean access to all holding areas: this includes snow removal and other debris
or refuse. Where containers, which the municipality handles mechanically, are
located in an enclosed area (privacy fence), the gate(s) of said areas shall be
wide enough and maintained in such a manner as to give easy access by the
garbage truck. If the holding areas are not easily accessible; the garbage will
not be picked up. It shall be the responsibility of each business and/or
residence to ensure that each container and or holding area is kept secure.
(Prior Code, § 7-102) (Ord. passed 9-10-2012)
§ 92.022 STORAGE.
   Each owner, occupant or other responsible person using or occupying any
building or other premises within the municipality where refuse accumulates or
is likely to accumulate, shall provide and keep covered an adequate number of
refuse containers. The refuse container shall be strong, durable, and rodent
and insect proof. They shall each have a capacity of not less than 20 or more
than 55 gallons, except that this maximum capacity shall not apply to larger
containers which the municipality handles mechanically. Furthermore, except for
containers which the municipality handles mechanically (dumpsters), the
combined weight of any refuse container and its contents shall not exceed 100
pounds. No refuse shall be placed in a refuse container until such refuse has
been drained of all free liquids. All refuse shall be bagged or wrapped in a
secure manner and securely tied and placed in said containers. Tree trimmings,
hedge clippings and similar materials shall be cut to a length not to exceed
four feet and shall be securely tied in individual bundles weighing not more
than 75 pounds each and being not more than two feet thick before being
deposited for collection.
(Prior Code, § 7-103) (Ord. passed 9-10-2012)
§ 92.023 LOCATION OF CONTAINERS.
   Where alleys are used by the municipal refuse collectors, containers or bags
on the day of collection shall be placed on or within six feet of the alley
line in such a position as not to intrude upon the traveled portion of the
alley. Where streets are used by the municipal refuse collectors, containers or
bags on the day of collection shall be placed adjacent to and back of the curb,
or adjacent to and back of the ditch or street line if there is no curb, at
such times as shall be scheduled by the municipality for the collection of
refuse there from. As soon as practicable after such containers have been
emptied they shall be removed by the owner within, or to the rear of his or her
premises and away from the street line until the next scheduled time for
collection.
(Prior Code, § 7-104) (Ord. passed 9-10-2012)
§ 92.024 DISTURBING CONTAINERS.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, ruffle, rifle, pilfer, dig into, turn
over or in any other manner disturb or use any refuse container belonging to
another. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of public
refuse containers for their intended use.
(Prior Code, § 7-105) (Ord. passed 9-10-2012) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.025 COLLECTION.
   All refuse accumulated within the corporate limits shall be connected,
conveyed and disposed of under the supervision of such officer as the governing
body shall designate. Collections shall be made regularly in accordance with an
announced schedule.
(Prior Code, § 7-106) (Ord. passed 9-10-2012)
§ 92.026 COLLECTION VEHICLES.
   The collection of refuse shall be by means of vehicles with beds constructed
of impervious materials which are easily cleanable and so constructed that
there will be no leakage of liquids draining from the refuse onto the streets
and alleys. Furthermore, all refuse collection vehicles shall utilize closed
beds or such coverings as will effectively prevent the scattering of refuse
over the streets or alleys.
(Prior Code, § 7-107) (Ord. passed 9-10-2012)
§ 92.027 DISPOSAL.
   The disposal of refuse in any quantity by any person in any place, public or
private, other than at the site or sites designated for refuse disposal by the
governing body is expressly prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 7-108) (Ord. passed 9-10-2012) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.028 REFUSE PICK-UP.
   (A)   Refuse pick-up shall be mandatory for all businesses and residences
within the town limits of the town, whether or not the garbage collection
services which are provided by the town are used by such residences or
businesses. Residences and businesses within the town limits may contract with
refuse collection services other than that provided by the town, however, such
contracting will not exempt any business or residence from the payment of the
garbage fee imposed by the town.
   (B)   The Town Council reserves the right, by majority vote, to exempt
certain businesses from mandatory refuse pick-up on the basis of the type or
types of refuse produced by such businesses.
(Prior Code, § 7-109) (Ord. passed 9-10-2012)
§ 92.029 SPECIAL PICK-UPS.
   (A)   The town will offer two special pick-ups per year; one the second week
in April and one the last week of October, for large items and rubbish that is
too large for the garbage truck. The home owner, renter or business will be
assessed an additional fee set by Council from time to time per pick-up based
on the quantity of rubbish.
   (B)   The town will furnish leaf bags to residents and businesses and pick
up the same, at no additional fee or cost.
(Prior Code, § 7-110) (Ord. passed 9-10-2012)
§ 92.030 DUMPSTERS.
   (A)   There may be times the town will place a dumpster at a location, at
its discretion, due to health reasons or safety factors of the citizens or
employees and will follow the guidelines of the classes of garbage for rates.
   (B)   At the Council’s discretion, the town may place a dumpster in certain
areas of the town to accommodate several businesses and/or residence from on
holding area. In these instances each business and/or residence will be
assessed individual fees based on their classification.
(Prior Code, § 7-111) (Ord. passed 9-10-2012)
§ 92.031 RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE FEE.
   From and after the effective date of this subchapter, the residential
garbage collection fee shall be $21.26 per monthly billing (once per month).
(Prior Code, § 7-112) (Ord. passed 9-10-2012; Ord. passed 6-9-2025)
§ 92.032 MULTI-USE AND APARTMENT GARBAGE FEE.
   Multi-use buildings will be assessed residential class times the units of
residence and the appropriate business class times the units of businesses,
unless individually assessed. Apartment buildings and complexes will be
assessed at residential class, times units of residence, unless individually
assessed. To be individually assessed, each unit must have an individual water
meter.
(Prior Code, § 7-113) (Ord. passed 9-10-2012)
§ 92.033 BUSINESS GARBAGE FEES.
   From and after the effective date of this subchapter, the business garbage
collection fee shall be by the following classes:
   (A)   (1)   Class I - $21.26 per monthly billing; and
      (2)   Class I is as follows: businesses in residence that also pays the
town a residential garbage rate; churches; fraternal organization; veterans’
organizations.
   (B)   (1)   Class II - $33.75 per monthly billing; and
      (2)   Class II is as follows: free standing beauty shops; barber shops;
lawyer offices; insurance offices; general business offices; dentist offices;
doctor offices; veterinary offices; car detail shops; craft/hobby stores;
computer stores; utility offices; fuel supplier offices; real estate offices;
architect/engineering offices; pawn shops; fortune telling; spiritualist;
tattoo parlors.
   (C)   (1)   Class III - $50.62 per monthly billing; and
      (2)   Class III is as follows: car body shops; muffler shops; bed/
breakfast with five to ten rooms; inns with five to ten rooms; flower shops;
funeral homes; animal/medical supply offices; coffee shops; rooming houses with
four or less rooms; restaurant with less than 25 seating; second-hand stores;
and indoor flea markets.
   (D)   (1)   Class IV - $75.94 per monthly billing; and
      (2)   Class IV is as follows: post offices; gasoline stations; auto part
stores; sporting good stores; auto dealers; liquor stores; medical suppliers;
car washes; contractors; fuel suppliers; bulk plants; parks; laundromats; dry
cleaners; clothing stores; taverns; pubs; glass repair shops; restaurants with
26 to 50 seating.
   (E)   (1)   Class V - $105.47 per monthly billing; and
      (2)   Class V is as follows: pre-schools; warehouses; construction
companies; variety stores; building supply stores; motels; hotels; convenience
stores; day care centers; drug stores; hardware stores; restaurants with 51 to
75 seating.
   (F)   (1)   Class VI - $147.65 per monthly billing; and
      (2)   Class VI is as follows: restaurants with more than 76 seating; fast
food with high take-out service; hotels with restaurant; motels with
restaurant.
   (G)   (1)   Class VII - $168.75 per monthly billing; and
      (2)   Class VII is as follows: grocery stores.
   (H)   (1)   Class VIII - $379.69 per monthly billing; and
      (2)   Class VIII is as follows: hospitals; nursing homes; industries;
manufacturing companies; public schools; government forest centers; maintenance
garages.
   (I)   R.V. park (monthly rates shall be as follows):
      (1)   Up to three R.V. lots - $63.79;
      (2)   Four to six R.V. lots - $127.57;
      (3)   Seven to 12 R.V. lots - $168.75; and
      (4)   More than 12 R.V. lots - $253.12.
   (J)   Class IX dumpster rates for special pick-ups (monthly rates) shall be
as follows:
      (1)   Four cubic yards - $169 with a limit of four pick-ups during the
month. If more than four pick-ups are needed within the month, each additional
pick-up will cost $42.25;
      (2)   Six cubic yards - $253.12 with a limit of four pick-ups during the
month. If more than four pick-ups are needed within the month, each additional
pick-up will cost $63.28; and
      (3)   Eight cubic yards - $337.50 with a limit of four pick-ups during
the month. If more than four pick-ups are needed within the month, each
additional pick-up will cost $84.37.
(Prior Code, § 7-114) (Ord. passed 9-10-2012; Ord. passed 6-9-2025)
OPEN BURNING
§ 92.045 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Marlinton Open Burning Ordinance”.
(Ord. passed 10-16-1986)
§ 92.046 VIOLATION.
   It shall be a violation of the regulations of the town for any person to
burn or cause to be burned any leaves, brush, trash or other combustible
material on any public property within the town.
(Ord. passed 10-16-1986) Penalty, see §
92.999
ABANDONED AND JUNKED PROPERTY
§ 92.060 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Abandoned and Junked Property
Ordinance”.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1984)
§ 92.061 ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person shall, in the town, abandon a motor vehicle upon the right-of-way
of any street, avenue, alley or other public right-of-way, upon any other
public property, or upon any private property which he or she does not own,
lease, rent or otherwise control unless it be at a licensed salvage yard or at
the business establishment of a demolisher.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1984) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.062 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall, within the town, place or deposit any junked motor
vehicle upon the right-of- way of any street, avenue, alley or other public
right-of-way, or upon any other public property, or upon any private property
within the town in view of the public, unless it be at a licensed salvage yard
or at the business of a demolisher.
   (B)   A JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE means a motor vehicle, or any part thereof
(other than an on-premise farm utility vehicle), which:
      (1)   Is discarded, wrecked, ruined, scrapped, dismantled;
      (2)   Cannot pass the state inspection required by W. Va. Code §§ 17C-16-
1 et seq.; and
      (3)   Is either not serving a functional purpose or use or is not in an
enclosed building, a licensed salvage yard or the actual possession of a
demolisher.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1984) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.063 DEPOSITING ON RIGHT-OF-WAY PROHIBITED.
   No person shall, within the town, place or deposit any old vehicle tire or
inoperative or abandoned household appliance upon the right-of-way of any
public highway or upon any other public property nor abandon the same upon any
private property which he or she does not own, lease, rent or otherwise
control, unless it be at a licensed salvage yard or at the business
establishment of a demolisher.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1984) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.064 ADMINISTRATION OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The Department of Highways shall administer all funds made available
to such Department for taking abandoned motor vehicles, junked motor vehicles,
old vehicle tires and inoperative and abandoned household appliances into
custody and possession.
   (B)   The Commissioner of the Department of Highways has been authorized by
the Legislature:
      (1) To promulgate reasonable rules and regulations deemed necessary to
implement the provisions of this subchapter; and
      (2)   To administer such funds through an existing division of such
department or create a new division thereof for such purpose, as he or she
deems appropriate.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1984)
§ 92.065 CUSTODY AND POSSESSION.
   Any enforcement agency which has knowledge of or discovers or finds any
abandoned motor vehicle, any junked motor vehicle, old vehicle tire or
inoperative or abandoned household appliance on either public or private
property shall take the same into his or her custody and possession. For that
purpose, the enforcement agency may employ its own personnel, equipment and
facilities or hire persons, equipment and facilities for the purpose of
removing, preserving and storing abandoned motor vehicles, junked motor
vehicles, old vehicle tires or inoperative or abandoned household appliances;
provided, that before taking any abandoned motor vehicle or junked motor
vehicle into custody and possession from private property, the enforcement
agency shall give the private property owner and the owner of said motor
vehicle, if ascertainable, 30 days’ notice by registered or certified mail that
such action will be taken unless the said motor vehicle is restored to a
functional use.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1984)
§ 92.066 NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   The enforcement agency which takes into custody and possession an
abandoned motor vehicle or junked motor vehicle shall, within seven days after
taking custody and possession thereof, notify the last known registered owner
of such motor vehicle and all lienholders of record that such motor vehicle has
been taken into custody and possession, such notification to be by registered
or certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain a
description of such motor vehicle, including the year, make, model,
manufacturer’s serial or identification number or any other number which may
have been assigned to such motor vehicle by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles
and any distinguishing marks; set forth the location of the facility where such
motor vehicle is being held and the location where such motor vehicle was taken
into custody and possession; inform the owner and any lienholders of record of
their right to reclaim such motor vehicle within ten days after the date notice
was received by the owner or lienholders, upon payment of all towing,
preservation and storage charges resulting from taking and placing such motor
vehicle into custody and possession, and state that the failure of the owner or
lienholders of record to exercise their right to reclaim such motor vehicle
within such ten-day period shall be deemed a waiver by the owner and all
lienholders of record of all right, title and interest in such motor vehicle
and of their consent to the sale or disposal of the abandoned motor vehicle or
junked motor vehicle at a public auction or to a licensed salvage yard or
demolisher.
   (B)   If the identity of the last registered owner of the abandoned motor
vehicle or junked motor vehicle cannot be determined, or if the certificate of
registration or certificate of title contains no address for the owner, or if
it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and
addresses of all lienholders, notice shall be published as a Class I legal
advertisement in compliance with the provisions of W. Va. Code § 59-3, and the
publication area for such publication shall be the county wherein such motor
vehicle was located at the time such enforcement agency took custody and
possession thereof, and such notice shall be sufficient to meet all
requirements of notice pursuant to this subchapter. Any notice by publication
may contain multiple listings of abandoned motor vehicles and junked motor
vehicles. The notice shall be published within seven days after such motor
vehicle is taken into custody and possession and shall have the same contents
required for a notice pursuant to division (A) above, except that the ten-day
period shall run from the date such notice is published as aforesaid.
   (C)   The consequences and effect of failure to reclaim an abandoned motor
vehicle or junked motor vehicle within the ten-day period after notice is
received by registered or certified mail or within ten days after the notice is
published in a newspaper as aforesaid shall be set forth in such notice.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1984)
§ 92.067 RECLAMATION.
   If an abandoned motor vehicle or junked motor vehicle is not reclaimed as
provided for in this section, the enforcement agency in possession of the
abandoned motor vehicle or junked motor vehicle shall sell it either at a
public auction or to a licensed salvage yard or demolisher. The purchaser of
such motor vehicle shall take title to such motor vehicle free and clear of all
liens and claims of ownership, and shall receive a sales receipt from the
enforcement agency which disposed of such motor vehicle. The sales receipt at
such sale shall be sufficient title only for purposes of transferring such
motor vehicle to a licensed salvage yard or to a demolisher for demolition,
wrecking or dismantling, and no further titling of such motor vehicle shall be
necessary by either the purchaser at the auction, the licensed salvage yard or
the demolisher, who shall be exempt from the payment of any fees and taxes
required under W. Va. Code § 17A-3; provided, that the purchaser at the auction
must place such motor vehicle in the possession of a licensed salvage yard or
demolisher within 20 days from the date he or she purchased such motor vehicle
and the licensed salvage yard or demolisher must demolish, wreck or dismantle
such motor vehicle within six months after taking possession of such motor
vehicle and if such licensed salvage yard or demolisher does not, such licensed
salvage yard or demolisher shall be required to pay all fees and taxes required
under W. Va. Code § 17A-3.
   (B)   When an enforcement agency has in its custody and possession old
vehicle tires or inoperative or abandoned household appliances collected in
accordance with §
92.065, it shall sell such property from time to time at public auction or to a
licensed salvage yard or demolisher.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1984)
§ 92.068 APPLICATION FOR INJUNCTION.
   (A)   From the proceeds of any such sale, the enforcement agency which sold
the abandoned motor vehicle, junked motor vehicle, old vehicle tire or
inoperative or abandoned household appliance shall reimburse itself for any
expenses it may have incurred in removing, towing, preserving and storing said
property and the expenses of conducting any auction and any notice and
publication expenses incurred pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   Any remainder from the proceeds of such sale shall be deposited in the
state treasury to be kept and maintained as a special revolving account
designated as the “Abandoned and Junked Property Fund”; provided, that any
remainder from the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle or junked
motor vehicle after payment of such expenses shall be held for the last
registered owner of such motor vehicle or any lienholder for 90 days, after
which time, if no owner or lienholder claims the remainder, it shall be
deposited in said special fund.
   (C)   Any monies so collected and deposited in said special fund shall be
used solely by the Department of Highways for the payment of auction, towing,
removing, preserving, storing, notice and publication costs which results from
taking other abandoned motor vehicles, junked motor vehicles, old vehicle tires
and inoperative or abandoned household appliances into custody and possession.
   (D)   In addition to all other remedies provided for in this subchapter, the
Attorney General of this state, the prosecuting attorney or any citizen,
resident or taxpayer may apply to the circuit court, or the judge thereof in
vacation, of the county, for an injunction to restrain, prevent or abate the
maintenance and storage of abandoned motor vehicles, junked motor vehicles, old
vehicle tires or inoperative or abandoned household appliances, in violation of
any provision of this subchapter, or the violation of any other provision of
this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1984)
NUISANCES
§ 92.080 ADOPTION.
   There is hereby adopted this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2014)
§ 92.081 SUPPLEMENTAL TO OTHER REGULATIONS.
   Various nuisances are defined and prohibited in other provisions of town
ordinances, and it is the intent of the Town Council in enacting this
subchapter to make it supplemental to those other provisions in which nuisances
are defined and prohibited; and the provisions of this chapter regarding the
abatement of nuisances shall be regarded as alternative methods and procedures
for the abatement of nuisances in those instances where other methods and
procedures for abatement are provided.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2014)
§ 92.082 PROHIBITED NUISANCES.
   (A)   No person shall cause, harbor, commit or maintain, or to suffer to be
caused, harbored, committed or maintained any nuisance as defined by the
statute or common law of this state or as defined by this subchapter or other
ordinances of the town at any place within the town, or at any place beyond the
town limits which is owned by the town or over which the town has a right-of-
way.
   (B)   The following acts when committed or conditions when existing, within
the town are hereby defined and declared to be nuisances:
      (1)   An act done or committed or aided or assisted to be done or
committed by any person, or any substance, being or thing kept, maintained,
placed or found in or upon any public or private place, which is injurious or
dangerous to the public health or safety;
      (2)   All buildings, bridges or other structures of whatever character
kept or maintained or which are permitted by any person owning or having
control thereof to be kept or maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous,
unhealthy, injurious or annoying to the public;
      (3)   All trees and other appendages of or to realty kept or maintained
or which are permitted by any person owning or having control thereof to be
kept or maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous, unhealthy, injurious or
annoying to the public;
      (4)   All ponds or pools or stagnant water, and all foul or dirty water
or liquid when discharged through any drain, pipe or spout or thrown into or
upon any street, public place or lot to the injury or annoyance of public;
      (5)   All obstructions caused or permitted on any street or sidewalk to
the danger or annoyance of the public, and all stones, rubbish, dirt, filth,
slops, vegetable matter or other article thrown or placed by any person on or
in any street, sidewalk or other public place which in any way may cause any
injury or annoyance to the public;
      (6)   All sidewalks, gutters or curbstones permitted to remain in an
unsafe condition or out of repair; whether on the owner’s property or adjacent
to the owner’s property and owned by the town;
      (7)   All pens or other places where animals are kept and permitted by
the owner thereof or the person responsible therefore to be in such a condition
that they become offensive, annoying or injurious to the public;
      (8)   All houses, buildings, structures or enclosures used for special
storage of powder, dynamite or other explosive or highly flammable substances
or gases, except those maintained pursuant to permit issued by competent
authority;
      (9)   Any litter, trash, garbage, general junk, inoperable household
appliances, refuse or any abandoned unlicensed motor vehicle or any part
thereof, which is or may be offensive to the neighborhood or citizens
generally; and
      (10)   Any offensive or unwholesome substance or growth of grass, weeds
or brush upon any lot or parcel of ground.
   (C)   The nuisances described in this section shall not be construed as
exclusive, and any act of commission or omission and any condition which
constitutes a nuisance by statute or common law of the state is, when
committed, omitted or existing within the town are hereby declared to
constitute a nuisance.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2014) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.083 MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES.
   (A)   No person owning or in possession of any lot, house, building or
enclosure shall allow or suffer to exist in or upon such premises any stagnant
water, animal or vegetable matter, dead animal or other substance liable to
become putrid, offensive, annoying or unhealthy. Persons owning or in
possession of any real estate shall provide proper and adequate drainage
therefore so that no offensive, baneful or disagreeable liquids shall flow or
seep into any street. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
   (B)   No person who, being the owner, lessee or occupant of any lot or
parcel of land, shall knowingly permit to remain thereon any structure, tree,
machine or appliance, combustible materials, tires or any other materials or
combination of materials which create a fire hazard or a hazard to adjoining
public or private property or to persons using or occupying such adjoining
public or private property, or to neglect or refuse to remove or abate the
nuisance occasioned thereby within 24 hours after such person has knowledge of
the existence of such nuisance upon any of the above described premises, owned,
leased or occupied by him or her. Any violation of this section is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
   (C)   For purposes of this section the following word, OWNER shall have the
following meaning: an owner of the freehold of the premises or any lesser
estate therein, a mortgagee, a vendee-in-possession, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent, a realtor when acting as an
consignee for a parcel of real estate, or any other person, firm or corporation
that is directly or indirectly in control of a parcel of land or real estate
subject to the provisions of this chapter, as set forth.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2014)
§ 92.084 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Inspections, investigations, and complaints.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the town’s Building Maintenance Board to
cause inspections to be made from time to time within the town, to determine
whether any condition exists or activity is being practiced which constitutes a
nuisance; and the Building Maintenance Board shall cause an investigation to be
made upon each written complaint made by any responsible person.
      (2) The Building Inspector/Building Maintenance Officer shall be
designated as the enforcement officer.
   (B)   Right to enter private premises. Members of Marlinton’s Building
Maintenance Board and/or the Building Inspector/Building Maintenance Officer
shall have the right to enter upon private premises for the purposes specified
in division (A) above, upon proper identification and in compliance with all
applicable provisions of law. Unless it appears probable that advance warning
would defeat the purpose of such entry, occupants of premises to be entered
shall be given reasonable notice in advance, and in any case it shall be
unlawful for any owner or occupant to prevent such entry which is sought to be
made in compliance with law.
   (C)   Notice to cease and desist. If at any time the Marlinton Building
Maintenance Board or the Building Inspector/Building Maintenance Officer finds
that an activity or practice which constitutes a nuisance is occurring within
the town, it or he or she shall promptly and by the most expeditious means
notify the violator to cease and desist forthwith.
   (D)   Notice to abate; appeal. If at any time the Building Maintenance Board
or the Building Inspector/Building Maintenance Officer finds that a condition
which constitutes a nuisance exists within the town, it or he or she shall give
notice in writing to the owner, occupant or person in charge of the premises
upon which such condition exists, stating therein the condition which
constitutes a nuisance and directing such addressee to remedy the condition
within the time stated in such notice, which shall be not more than ten days;
and it shall be unlawful for any such owner, occupant or person in charge to
fail to comply with the terms of such notice; provided, that any owner,
occupant or person in charge may, within two day from the expiration of the
notice thereof, appeal to the Town Council of the town, in which case the terms
of such notice shall be stayed pending actions of the Town Council of the town,
which shall be final; provided further, that if the Building Maintenance Board
or the Building Inspector/Building Maintenance Officer states in such notice
that the condition which constitutes a nuisance is such regarding be an
imminent hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the public or any person
within or near the premises upon which such nuisance exists, then the addressee
shall comply with the terms of such notice.
   (E)   Failure to abate.
      (1)   Upon the failure of any person to whom notice has been given
pursuant to division (D) above to comply with the terms of such notice, or with
the terms imposed by the Town Council on appeal, as the case may be, the Mayor
shall forthwith direct the appropriate town employees, or shall retain a
private contractor to remedy the condition which is the subject of such notice,
and the expense incurred by the town in so doing shall be charged to the
addressee of such notice, as well regarding the owner of the premises which is
the subject of such notice, jointly and severally, to be collected as town fees
or in any other manner authorized by law for the collection of money due the
town.
      (2)   Abatement by the town of any condition which constitutes a nuisance
and reimbursement to the town of expenses incurred thereby shall not bar
prosecution for maintenance of a nuisance.
   (F)   Arrest for committing or maintaining nuisance. Nothing is this chapter
shall be considered to prohibit any police officer from arresting and/or citing
any person for committing or maintaining a nuisance when such arrest and/or
citation is made pursuant to law.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2014)
§ 92.085 NOTICE TO OWNERS PRIOR TO REMOVAL OF AN ABANDONED OR JUNKED MOTOR
VEHICLE.
   (A)   Prior to taking any abandoned or junked motor vehicle into custody and
possession from private property, the town shall give the private property
owner and the owner of said motor vehicle, if ascertainable, 30 days’ notice by
registered or certified mail that such action will be taken.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter or section shall be construed to prevent
the town from removing a junked or abandoned motor vehicle from public property
owned by the town.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2014)
§ 92.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   A violation of any section of §§
92.001 through
92.009 shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time for each
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 7-410)
   (C)   A violation of any section of §§
92.020 through
92.033 shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time for each
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 7-116)
   (D)   For a violation of §
92.046, there shall be a fine set by Council from time to time or a confinement
in the county jail not to exceed 30 days or both such fine and imprisonment.
   (E)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §
92.061 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined set by Council from time to time or imprisoned in the county jail not
more than 30 days, or both fined and imprisoned.
      (2)   Any person who violates §
92.062 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined set by Council from time to time, or confined in the county jail for a
term not to exceed 30 days, or both fined and imprisoned.
      (3)   Any person who violates any provision of §
92.063 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined set by Council from time to time or imprisoned in the county jail for not
more than 30 days, or both fined and imprisoned.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1984; Ord. passed 10-16-1986; Ord. passed 9-10-2012)
CHAPTER 93: HELIPORT
Section
   
93.01   Construction
   
93.02   No obligation
§ 93.01 CONSTRUCTION.
   A heliport, as the same is defined by the Federal Aviation Administration
and the West Virginia Aeronautics Commission, is hereby authorized to be
constructed within the corporate limits of the town as the same are defined
upon the proper recorded plat of the town in the office of the Clerk of the
Clerk of the County Commission of Pocahontas County, and as may hereafter be
modified.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1985)
§ 93.02 NO OBLIGATION.
   (A)   Any such facility so constructed, shall be constructed in accordance
with the plans, specifications, rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration as well as the West Virginia Aeronautics Commission, and where a
conflict may exist between the said agencies, then the rules and regulations as
required by the Federal Aviation Administration shall be those adopted by the
Town Council for the construction of such a facility.
   (B)   The town by the authorization of construction of such a facility, in
no way obligates itself to the responsible for the construction or operation of
such a facility, and that this chapter is merely enacted for the purposes of
enabling such agency or agencies as may desire to build such a facility within
the corporate limits to so do.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1985)
CHAPTER 94: TREES
Section
   
94.01   Short title
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Statement of objective
   
94.04   Creation of Town Council Tree Committee
   
94.05   Terms of office
   
94.06   Compensation
   
94.07   Duties and responsibilities
   
94.08   Operation
   
94.09   Street trees and park trees species to be planted
   
94.10   Spacing
   
94.11   Distance from curbs and sidewalks
   
94.12   Utilities
   
94.13   Public tree care
   
94.14   Improper planting
   
94.15   Removal, replanting and replacement
   
94.16   Tree topping
   
94.17   Pruning of trees and shrubs obstructing views
   
94.18   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property
   
94.19   Abuse or mutilation of trees
   
94.20   Placing materials on public property
   
94.21   Removal of stumps
   
94.22   Interference with the Tree Committee
   
94.23   Requirement for license and bond
   
94.24   Review by Town Council
   
94.25   Official tree species list
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Marlinton Tree
Ordinance”.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on or in
public parks and all areas owned by the town, or to which the public has free
access as a park.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways
within the town.
   STREETS, AVENUES and WAYS. The entire width of every public way or right-of-
way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and extending from
property line to property line.
   YARD TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation now or
hereafter growing on any private property in the town.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.03 STATEMENT OF OBJECTIVE.
   The objective of this chapter is to manage removal and replacement of trees
within the town. To monitor species, to provide for the aesthetic quality of
the townscape and to provide for citizen protection by controlling tree growth,
size and condition within the limits of the town.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.04 CREATION OF TOWN COUNCIL TREE COMMITTEE.
   There is hereby created and established a Marlinton Tree Committee for the
town, which shall consist of three members from the standing Town Council,
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Council.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.05 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The term of Committee members shall be for the current administration. In
the event of a vacancy during any member’s term, his or her successor shall be
appointed by the Mayor to serve the unexpired portion of the term.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.06 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Marlinton Tree Committee shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.07 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Marlinton Tree Committee to
study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually and administer a
written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal
or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public
areas.
   (B)   Such a plan will be presented annually, the first week in February, to
the Town Council and upon its acceptance and approval shall constitute the
official Comprehensive Town Tree Plan for the town.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.08 OPERATION.
   (A)   The Committee shall choose its own officers. They should consist of a
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary and other officers as may be needed.
   (B)   The Committee shall make its own rules and regulations and keep a
journal of its proceedings. A majority of members present shall be a quorum for
the transaction of business.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.09 STREET TREES AND PARK TREES SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
   (A)   The list in §
94.25 is the current recommended official street tree and park tree species of
the town, and may be modified as additional appropriate species become
available.
   (B)   Trees other than those included on this list may be planted as street
trees or park trees, if they meet the designated guidelines, with written
permission of the Marlinton Tree Committee.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.10 SPACING.
   (A)   The spacing of street trees will be in acceptance with the three
species size classes on the official street tree species list in §
94.25, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following:
 
Small trees  20 to 30 feet
Medium trees 30 to 40 feet
Large trees  40 to 50 feet
 
   (B)   Exception to this rule may be approved in special planting designed or
approved by a landscape architect for the Marlinton Tree Committee.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.11 DISTANCE FROM CURBS AND SIDEWALKS.
   No street tree shall be planted, or an existing tree maintained at, or near
an intersection that does not permit a clear view for vehicular traffic down a
side street, or alley from said intersection measured along the curb line. No
street trees shall be planted closer than 15 feet from any fire hydrant.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.12 UTILITIES.
   No street trees other than those species listed as small trees on the
official street tree list in §
94.25 may be planted within 15 lateral feet of any known underground water
line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.13 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   (A)   The town or the Marlinton Tree Committee shall have the right to
plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of
all streets, avenues, alleys, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be
necessary to ensure public safety, to preserve or enhance the symmetry and
beauty of such public grounds.
   (B)   The Marlinton Tree Committee may remove or cause or order to be
removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by
reason of its own nature is injurious to sewers, gas lines, electric power
lines, water lines, telephone lines, cable and television lines or other public
improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
This section does not prohibit planting of street trees by adjacent property
owners, providing that the selection and location of said trees are in
accordance with the official street tree list and §§
94.09 through
94.12.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.14 IMPROPER PLANTING.
   Whenever any tree shall be planted or transplanted in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter; it shall be lawful for the town or the Marlinton
Tree Committee to remove or cause removal of the same, and the exact cost
thereof may be assessed to and paid by the person responsible for the improper
planting of such tree.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.15 REMOVAL, REPLANTING AND REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever it is necessary to remove a tree or trees in connection with
the paving of a sidewalk, or paving or widening of a portion of a street used
for vehicular traffic, the town will replant such trees or replace them. If it
is impractical to replant in the same area, the Marlinton Tree Committee will
designate an appropriate location for planting the replacement tree or trees.
   (B)   No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the town right-
of-way for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason, without prior
approval from the Marlinton Tree Committee and must replace the removed tree or
trees in accordance with the adopted comprehensive town tree plan. Such
replacement shall meet the standards of size, species and placement as provided
by the Marlinton Tree Committee. The person or property owner shall bear the
cost of removal and replacement of all trees to be removed and replaced.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.16 TREE TOPPING.
   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person or firm, to top any
street tree or other tree on public property. TOPPING is defined as the severe
cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches within the tree’s crown
to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under
utility lines or other obstructions where pruning practices are impractical may
be exempted from this section by determination of the Marlinton Tree Committee.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.17 PRUNING OF TREES AND SHRUBS OBSTRUCTING VIEWS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real
property abutting on any street, avenue or alley way upon whose property there
are yard trees or shrubs, to prune those trees or shrubs in such a manner that
they will not shade or obstruct the street lamps, obstruct the passage of
pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, obstruct vehicular
traffic or obstruct the view of any intersection. The minimum clearance of any
overhanging portion thereof shall be ten feet over sidewalks and 16 feet over
all streets, avenues and alleyways.
   (B)   Said owners shall remove all dead, decayed or dangerous trees or
broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public.
The town shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property
where it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a
street lamp or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or
sign.
   (C)   This section shall not be construed to require private property owners
to prune, remove or otherwise maintain trees located on town owned property or
easements.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.18 DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The Marlinton Tree Committee or the town shall have the right to cause the
removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the limits of
the town, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbors
insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within
the limits of the town. The Marlinton Tree Committee or the town will notify in
writing the owners of such trees. Removal may be done by said owners at their
personal expense within 30 days after the date of service of notice. In the
event of failure of the owner to comply with such provisions, the town shall
have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal to the
owner.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.19 ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF TREES.
   Unless specifically authorized by the Marlinton Tree Committee or the town,
no person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any street trees or
park trees; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other
contrivance to any tree, allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is
harmful to such trees, to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any
fire to burn when such fire or heat thereof will injure any portion of said
tree.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.20 PLACING MATERIALS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public property
of the municipality, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which
may impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any
tree growing therein, except by written permit to the Marlinton Tree Committee
or the town.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.21 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
   At the discretion of the Marlinton Tree Committee or the town, stumps of
street trees and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so
that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground.
Eight inches is the recommended depth.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.22 INTERFERENCE WITH THE TREE COMMITTEE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Marlinton Tree Committee, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street
trees, park trees or yard trees as authorized in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.23 REQUIREMENT FOR LICENSE AND BOND.
   Contact the town for current town policy on license and bond.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.24 REVIEW BY TOWN COUNCIL.
   The Town Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the Marlinton Tree Committee. Any person may appeal from any
ruling or order of the Marlinton Tree Committee to the Town Council who may
hear the matter and make the final decision.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.25 OFFICIAL TREE SPECIES LIST.
   (A)   (1)   Street and park trees are suitable for planting under or near
overhead utility lines.
      (2)   Most of these species are approved by your local power company as
part of its tree replacement program.
   (B)   Park and yard trees are intended to be planted well away from utility
lines and at least 25 feet away from buildings.
   (C)   (1)   Many of these trees are native to West Virginia, but trees that
are not native are known to perform quite well in this area.
      (2)   However, all trees do have limitations and cannot survive without
proper planting and maintenance.
      (3)   Many problems can be avoided by planting the proper tree species in
the correct growing sites.
Official Street Tree and Park Tree Species List
Street and Park Trees (Less than 30 Ft. Mature Height)
Common Name Shape
Official Street Tree and Park Tree Species List
Street and Park Trees (Less than 30 Ft. Mature Height)
Common Name                Shape
Azboritae                  P
Cherry, Oriental           U
Cherry, Sargent            C
Cherry Schubert            O
Cherry, Yoshino
Crabapple, Flowering       V
Dogwood, Flowering         W
Dogwood, Korean            W
Golden-rain Tree           R
Hawthorne, Crimson Cloud   R
Hawthorne, Lavalle         R
Hawthorne, Washington      R
Hawthorne, Winter King     R
Holly, China Girl and Boy
Holly, Foster              P
Holly, Nellie Stevens      P
Lilac, Japanese Tree       R
Magnolia, Jane             R/O
Magnolia, Saucer           R/O
Magnolia, Star             R/O
Maple, Amur                V
Maple, Hedge               O
Maple, Japanese            O
Maple, Paperbark           P
Pear, Silver Frost Weeping R
Pine, Japanese Black       O
Plum, Flowering            R
Redbud                     R
Serviceberry               R
Silverbell                 C
Smoke Tree                 V
Snowball, Japanese         C
Spruce, Dwarf Alberta      P
White Fringe Tree          R
Yew, Hicks                 P
Official Street Tree and Park Tree Species List
Park and Yard Trees (30 Ft. to 50 Ft. Mature Height)
Common Name Shape
Official Street Tree and Park Tree Species List
Park and Yard Trees (30 Ft. to 50 Ft. Mature Height)
Common Name            Shape
Ash, European Mountain P
Ash, Green             O/U
Corktree, Amur         O
Ginko (males only)     P
Holly, American        P
Honeylocust, Thornless U
Hornbeam, American     P
Maple, Norway          O
Maple, Red             C/O
Oak, Post              R
Pear, Callery          P/U
Sourwood               P
 
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum set by Council from time to time and/
or imprisoned for up to a maximum of 30 days in the county jail.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2016)
CHAPTER 95: STREETS AND DRIVEWAYS
Section
   
95.01   Owner’s duty
   
95.02   Notification
   
95.03   Lien
   
95.04   Service of notice
   
95.05   Town to make repairs
§ 95.01 OWNER’S DUTY.
   It shall be the duty of the owners of real estate within the town abutting
on any sidewalk, or the agent of such owner, or the occupant of such property,
to keep the sidewalk and driveway entrance or apron adjacent to their
properties in good repair. Any property owner, agent of the owner or occupant
failing to keep the sidewalk or driveway area adjacent to his or her property
in repair shall be liable to reimburse the town for all loss that it may
sustain, or any damage, cost, or expenses that may be imposed upon it by reason
of the property owner, agent to occupant to perform such duty.
(Ord. 139, passed 6-6-1985) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.02 NOTIFICATION.
   In the event any sidewalk or driveway entrance shall become out of repair,
and the property owner, agent or occupant has not upon his or her own
initiative repaired it, the town may serve a notice upon the owner of the
property adjacent to the sidewalk or driveway entrance so out of repair, if he
or she be a resident, or upon his or her agents or the occupant if the owner is
a nonresident, requiring the owner, agent or occupant to repair or rebuild,
where necessary, any such sidewalk or driveway entrance within a time stated in
the notice. In the event of the failure of the property owner, or his or her
agent or the occupant to rebuild or repair the sidewalk or driveway entrance
within the specified time, the town may have the work done and may assess the
cost thereof against the abutting land owner, and the cost thereof may be
collected by the Recorder to Treasurer as hereinafter provided. Except where a
dangerous condition exists in such sidewalk or driveway, the property owner,
agent or occupant shall not be required to begin repair or rebuilding within
less than ten days from the date of the receipt of such notice.
(Ord. 139, passed 6-6-1985)
§ 95.03 LIEN.
   The town shall be entitled to have a lien upon the abutting real estate for
any work done by the town in repairing or rebuilding any sidewalk or driveway
entrance in the town, as compensation for work done in §
95.02. But the lien so created shall be discharged from and after 90 days from
the completion of the work so done by the town, unless within such respective
period, the town shall, within the stated 90 days after the completion of said
work, cause to be recorded in the office of the Clerk of the County Commission
of Pocahontas County, a notice of such lien, which notice shall be sufficient
in form and effect as follows:
NOTICE OF LIEN AND ASSESSMENT
To: ______________________________________:
Notice is hereby given, in accordance with the ordinances of the Town of
Marlinton and the laws of the State of West Virginia, to-wit, W. Va. Code §§ 8-
18-1 et seq., as amended that the undersigned claims a lien to secure the payment
of the sum of $_______ upon your interest in and to lot number______ of block
number _____ as shown upon the official map of the Town of Marlinton, and upon
the following buildings, structures and improvements thereon:
Total Street frontage: _____ feet.
   Given under my hand this _________ day of ______________________, 20___.
                        TOWN OF MARLINTON
                        BY:_______________________________
                        MAYOR OF TOWN OF MARLINTON
ATTEST:__________________________
      TOWN RECORDER
STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA
COUNTY OF POCAHONTAS, to-wit:
   ___________________, Mayor of the Town of Marlinton and
________________________, Recorder of the Town of Marlinton, being first duly
sworn, upon their oath says that the statements contained in the foregoing notice
of lien are true, as they verily believe, and that their signatures on the
foregoing notice constitutes the deed and act of the Town of Marlinton.
   Taken, sworn to and subscribed before me this the _________ day of
__________________, 20___.
   My commission expires _________________________________
                  NOTARY PUBLIC
 
(Ord. 139, passed 6-6-1985)
§ 95.04 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   In the event that any owner, upon whose real estate it is desired to take a
lien hereunder, should be a nonresident of this state, or in the event that any
officer of this state authorized by law to execute legal process should make
return “not found” upon any notice of a lien which may be presented to him or
her for service, then it shall be sufficient service of any such notice of lien
upon such nonresident owner, or upon such owner as to whom any such return, of
“not found” shall be made by such officer, to publish a copy of such notice for
two consecutive weeks in some newspaper of general circulation in Pocahontas
County, and to post a copy of such notice in a conspicuous place upon the
property sought to be charged hereunder, which posting and publishing shall be
sufficient, if commenced within the aforementioned 90-day period for the filing
of such notice. The costs of such publication may be added to the account for
which the lien is claimed, and, if included in the amount mentioned in the
recorded notice, the lien shall cover such costs.
(Ord. 139, passed 6-6-1985)
§ 95.05 TOWN TO MAKE REPAIRS.
   The town is hereby authorized, when the Council deems it necessary, to make
street repairs, to pave all or any portion of a street, or to pave all the
streets in the town, or to enter into contracts with other persons,
partnerships, associations or corporations, for the repair of streets, the
paving of part or all of any street or the paving of all the streets in the
town. A STREET within the context of this chapter shall mean any public right-
of-way within the town. In the event the town or one in contract with the town,
makes repairs to any street or paves part or all of any street, the town may
assess the cost thereof to the owners, agents of the owner or the occupants of
the property abutting the street upon which repairs or paving shall have been
done. The assessment to the owner, agent of the owner or the occupant shall be
on a cost per linear foot of frontage to the centerline of the street upon
which repairs or paving shall have been made. It shall be the duty of the owner
of such property, the agent of such owner or the occupant on such property, to
reimburse the town for the cost so expended. In the event that such owner,
agent of the owner or the occupant does not reimburse the town for such cost
expended, the town shall be entitled to proceed with the collection by lien and
enforcement of such lien by the same method as hereinbefore provided for
perfection of liens and enforcement of liens for sidewalk repairs and driveway
repairs.
(Ord. 139, passed 6-6-1985)
CHAPTER 96: PIONEER DAYS
Section
   
96.01   Title
   
96.02   General
   
96.03   Designated area
   
96.04   Police patrol
§ 96.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Pioneer Days Street Control Ordinance”.
(Ord. passed 6-29-1988)
§ 96.02 GENERAL.
   The Town Council finds that Pioneer Days has become an outstanding event in
Pocahontas County, and that this event is beneficial to the town. The Town
Council finds that certain controls are needed which will be beneficial both to
the town and to Pioneer Days itself.
(Ord. passed 6-29-1988)
§ 96.03 DESIGNATED AREA.
   The town has created a “designated area” for the holding of musical and
other events during Pioneer Days. It extends from the Greenbrier Building to
the end of the Southern States lot on Third Avenue and from the railroad tracks
to Seneca Floral on Main Street. The town shall have the right to close off
this area or any part thereof during any time during Pioneer Days for the
purpose of holding Pioneer Days events. The town and Pioneer Days shall have
the right to restrict attendance in this area at any time during Pioneer Days
and by using such identification and admittance means as agreed upon by the
town and Pioneer Days. Such admittance means may include, but shall not be
limited to, the purchase of current Pioneer Days badges.
(Ord. passed 6-29-1988)
§ 96.04 POLICE PATROL.
   The town police, the Pocahontas County Sheriff’s Department, the state’s
Department of Public Safety, Conservation officers, and all other proper police
officials shall be entitled to patrol the designated area and shall have the
authority to require the removal of any person within the designated area. If
any individual must be removed a second time for entering the designated area
without the proper admittance shall entitle the person to be ticketed or
arrested for trespassing and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined or
sentenced or both according to existing ordinances of the town.
(Ord. passed 6-29-1988)
CHAPTER 97: TOWN CEMETERY
Section
   
97.01   Purpose
   
97.02   Definitions
   
97.03   Fee for plots, crypts, interment, entombment and other services
   
97.04   Rules and regulations
   
97.05   Burial, entombment or interment of human remains outside of cemetery
§ 97.01 PURPOSE.
   The following rules/regulations have been formulated with the fixed purpose
of protecting the rights and interests of all the lot/plot owners, of securing
good order within the Mountain View Cemetery, herewith identified as the
cemetery. By safeguarding the interests of the cemetery as a whole, the
interests of each lot/plot owner are safeguarded. All persons are required to
comply with these rules/regulations, copies of which, revised and corrected to
date, may be obtained at any time upon request to the representative of
Mountain View Cemetery, herewith identified as manager.
(Ord. passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BURIAL/INTERMENT. Placing a casket in the ground.
   BURIAL VAULT. A sturdy container that a casket will be placed in before
interment.
   CEMETERY. (Where authority is implied) means the Town Council of Marlinton.
   CEMETERY WORKER. The person who is responsible for the up-keep of the
cemetery.
   CRYPT. One cubical in the mausoleum.
   ENTOMBMENT. Placing a casket in a crypt.
   LOT. Twelve or more grave sites.
   MANAGER/LIAISON. The person, appointed by the Town Council, to oversee and
have the control of the “day to day” operations of the cemetery.
   OPENING/CLOSING. The digging and covering of a grave.
   PERPETUAL CARE. A one-time fee that is charged upon the purchasing of a lot/
plot or crypt for the up-keep of the cemetery forever.
   PLOT. One grave site.
(Ord. passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.03 FEES FOR PLOTS, CRYPTS, INTERMENT, ENTOMBMENT AND OTHER SERVICES.
   (A)   Fees.
 Fees
                    Fees
Plots               $550 ($350 per plot plus $200 perpetual care per lot)
Mausoleum/crypts
   Row A         $3,250
   Row B         $3,500
   Row C         $3,750
   Row D         $2,750
   Niche         $500 (non-available)
   Entombment is included in cost
Burial and other
services
   Adults        $450
   Infants       $250
   Extremity     $250
   Cremated remai$250
   Disinterment  $2,500
   Disentombment $1,500
   1.   Vaults are mandatory with all burials except for cremated remains and
sections of the cemetery, where a vault will not fit, due to space.
   2.   An additional fee of $200 if service is provided on weekends or
holidays.
 
   (B)   Payment.
      (1)   Plots, crypts and niches must be paid in full on day of sale.
      (2)   All opening/closing fees must be paid in full by the funeral home
or family before grave will be opened.
      (3)   Burial and disinterment services shall be paid in full prior to
services rendered.
   (C)   Deed transfer. $70 plus the recording fee at the court house.
(Ord. passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No lot/plot will be used for any purpose other than the burial of
human remains.
   (B)   The name and address of every lot/plot owner shall be on record at the
town office. Such records, together with a deed, shall be sufficient warrant to
the cemetery in all matters pertaining to the ownership of a lot/plot. In the
event of a change of address, the town should be notified at once.
   (C)   Upon the death of a lot/plot owner, his or her heirs or devisees
should immediately file with the town proof of the new ownership. This is
important as no interments can be permitted until such proof is given. Because
of the difficulties in determining the persons who may inherit the rights of a
lot/plot owner in his or her lot/plot and in order to avoid serious disputes
and inconveniences that may arise subsequent to the decease of a lot/plot
owner, it is recommended that the lot/plot owner make provision for the
definite disposition of his or her lot during his or her lifetime. He or she
may, by will, devise the lot/plot to a named person or persons, or he or she
may, either by will or deed, convey the lot/plots to the town in trust,
designating the person or persons who may be buried therein.
   (D)   In order to keep the cemetery’s records up-to-date and accurate, no
sale or transfer of assignment of any lots/plot/crypt or interest therein shall
be valid without the prior written consent of the cemetery (town), endorsed
upon the conveyance and entered upon the cemetery records.
   (E)   The cemetery reserves the right to refuse interment/entombment in any
lot/crypt except on the written authority of the owner. In case the lot/crypt
is jointly owned, the interment/entombment of any member of the immediate
family of any one of the owners may be made upon his or her sole written
authorization. No person outside the immediate family of the lot/crypt owner
may be interred in a lot or entombed in a crypt without the written consent of
the owner or owners who, under no circumstances, shall allow interment/
entombments to be made in any lot/crypt for remuneration. No protest of
interment/entombment will be recognized by the cemetery unless it is in writing
and filed with the town office, and the cemetery shall in no way be liable for
any delay in any interment/entombment from such protest or from noncompliance
with these rules.
   (F)   Whenever instructions regarding the location of an interment/
entombment space cannot be obtained or are indefinite or if, for any reason,
the grave/crypt cannot be opened in the location specified, the manager/liaison
may open it at such location as may seem best under the circumstances so as not
to delay the funeral services. In order to avoid misunderstandings, it is urged
that the lot/crypt owner or some member of the family come to the cemetery and
locate the grave/crypt and orders for location of graves/crypt or for any other
work be made in writing. The cemetery cannot be held responsible for mistakes
made when such orders are given by telephone.
   (G)   All interment/entombment spaces shall be opened and closed only by
cemetery employees for whom charges fixed by the cemetery will be made and
shall either be paid for in advance or assumed by a funeral director. Notice
for opening an interment/entombment space must be given at least 24 hours in
advance of the funeral service. No disinterment/disentombment, except as
provided under division (H) below, shall be made without the written consent of
all of the next of kin of the person whose body is to be removed.
   (H)   No interment/entombment shall be permitted until the purchase price of
the lot/crypt has been fully paid. In the event there is default under an
installment purchase agreement, then the cemetery shall have the right at any
time after 20 days’ notice mailed to the owner of the lot/crypt as shown on the
cemetery records, to remove to a single grave chosen by the manager each of the
remains interred in said lot. The cemetery shall also have the right to remove
any memorials that may have been placed thereon.
   (I)   All grading, landscape and maintenance work, and improvements on lots
shall be done under the directions of the manager/liaison and only by employees
of the cemetery, except when the manager/liaison otherwise grants permission.
Visitors and lot owners are requested not to offer money to cemetery employees
since they are forbidden to accept any fee or gratuity except from the cemetery
and may be dismissed for violation of this rule.
   (J)   If any lot owner desires special work to be done on his or her lot,
such as special planting; repairing and cleaning of monuments; placing and
removing of cut flowers, potted plants, wreaths, decorations and the like, the
manager/liaison will be glad to give estimates of the cost of such work either
upon an annual basis or for a particular service. All charges for such special
work are payable in advance.
   (K)   In the future, no fences, copings, hedges, flower borers, trellises or
other enclosures of any kind, and no benches, settees or other similar articles
shall be placed upon any lot, and if so placed, or in the event present ones
become unsightly or detrimental to the uniform beauty of the cemetery, then the
manager/liaison shall have the right to remove them.
   (L)   No trees, shrubs, plants, vines or flowers shall be planted on or
removed from any lot except with the permission and under the direction of the
manager/liaison, who shall have the right to plant, prune, remove or transplant
any trees, shrubs, plants, vines or flowers upon any lot when he or she deems
it necessary or advisable.
   (M)   No glass flower receptacles may be placed on any lot. All baskets,
potted plants, cut flowers, perishable plants, emblems and the like placed on
lots shall be removed as soon as they become unsightly or faded.
   (N)   No grave mounds will be permitted and the established grade of any lot
cannot be changed without permission of the manager/liaison.
   (O)   Although the cemetery has no desire to interfere with the individual
taste of lot owners concerning monumental objects, in the interest of the
cemetery as a whole the cemetery reserves the right to prevent the erection of
any monument, memorial, marker or other structure, which the manager/liaison
considers objectionable to the cemetery. It also reserves the right to refuse
to permit the erection of any monumental object on a plot whose owner is in
arrears in payment of any indebtedness to the cemetery. Therefore, in order to
avoid misunderstandings, no monument shall be erected without the written
consent of the manager/liaison. It is very important that lot owners consult
with the manager/liaison before selecting monuments or closing a purchase of
the same so as to avoid expensive mistakes or serious disappointments.
   (P)   Granite is the only kind of stone recommended for monumental objects.
Marble, limestone, sandstone, terra cotta and others composed of soft material
are not durable in this climate and, therefore, their use is not recommended.
   (Q)   No tomb or vault built partially or entirely above ground shall be
permitted on any lot unless the plans therefor have been approved by the
manager/liaison and cemetery and unless there has been a deposit made to the
cemetery a sum of money that, in the judgment of the cemetery, is sufficient
for the permanent maintenance of such structure.
   (R)   Foundations for all monumental objects must be prepared by the
cemetery and must be paid for in advance at a charge fixed by the cemetery. The
setting and erection of all monumental objects shall be under the supervision
of the manager/liaison.
   (S)   The cemetery reserves the right to care for and repair or to remove
any monument or structure which has, through decay, dilapidation or for any
other reason, become unsightly or dangerous.
   (T)   All work in the cemetery in the proximity or vicinity of a funeral
must be stopped during the interment services. No traffic of any kind shall
pass the section where services are being held. No strangers will be permitted
to gather at a grave where an interment is being held.
   (U)   The cemetery will take every reasonable precaution to protect all
private property of lot owners in the cemetery from loss or damage, but it
distinctly disclaims all responsibility for loss or damage from causes beyond
its reasonable control and especially from the acts of thieves, vandals,
rioters and malicious mischief-makers.
   (V)   The cemetery reserves the right to enlarge, reduce, replant and change
the boundaries or grading of the cemetery or a section, including the right to
modify and change the location of, or remove and re-grade, roads, walks, paths
or drives. The right to lay, maintain, operate or change water lines, sanitary
or storm water drains, sprinkling systems, gutters, lakes and the like is also
reserved, as well as the right to use cemetery property not sold to individual
lot owners for cemetery purposes or for anything necessary or incidental
thereto. The cemetery reserves to itself a perpetual right of ingress and
egress over lots for the purpose of passing to or from other lots.
   (W)   The cemetery reserves the rights to change these rules and regulations
from time to time without notice.
   (X)   All persons are reminded that the cemetery grounds are sacredly
devoted to the interment of the dead and that strict observance of the
proprieties due such a place is required whether or not they are specifically
embraced in these rules. The manager/liaison is charged with the enforcement of
these rules and with the general welfare of the cemetery, and he or she is
authorized to take such steps as may be necessary to preserve the peace and
dignity thereof.
   (Y)   If new sections are added to the cemetery, they will be governed by
these same rules and regulations.
(Ord. passed 7-7-2025)
§ 97.05 BURIAL, ENTOMBMENT OR INTERMENT OF HUMAN REMAINS OUTSIDE OF CEMETERY.
   The burial, entombment or interment of any person, except in an authorized
cemetery, is hereby prohibited within the corporate limits of the town.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2023)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   LICENSES AND BUSINESS TAXES
      
111.   MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS ACTIVITIES
      
112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
113.   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
      
114.   OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT
CHAPTER 110: LICENSES AND BUSINESS TAXES
Section
   
110.01   Title
   
110.02   Severability
   
110.03   Date of passage
   
110.04   Conditions precedent to doing business
   
110.05   Application for and issuance of license; payment of tax and fees;
Recorder to maintain records
   
110.06   False statements prohibited
   
110.07   Confidential nature of returns; limitation on divulging information
   
110.08   Separate license required for each fixed place of business and each
class of business
   
110.09   License year; expiration date; annual renewal; minimum tax; proration
of tax upon beginning business
   
110.10   Display of license
   
110.11   License does not legalize unlawful acts; generally
   
110.12   Collection by proceedings in court
   
110.13   Prosecution for violations; recourse of town to seek injunctions
   
110.14   Suspension and revocation of licenses, and public hearings upon appeal
from revocation
   
110.15   Reducing business and occupation tax
 
   
110.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to impose business and occupation tax on businesses and
occupations taxed by the state, see W. Va. Code § 8-13-5
   Authority of town to levy and collect an admission or amusement tax on any
public amusement or entertainment held within the town, see W. Va. Code § 8-13-
6
   Authority of town to require a town license for anything for which a state
license is required, unless prohibited by general law, and to impose a
reasonable tax thereon not in excess of the state law, see W. Va. Code § 8-13-4
§ 110.01 TITLE.
   Chapters
110 and
111 of this code of ordinances shall be known as the “Marlinton Business
License Tax Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 5-101)
§ 110.02 SEVERABILITY.
   If any portion of Chapters
110 and
111 of this code of ordinances should be declared unconstitutional, unlawful or
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, then the balance shall not be
affected thereby, and the balance shall remain in full force and effect as
though the portion that was declared unconstitutional, unlawful or invalid had
not been enacted.
(Prior Code, § 5-102)
§ 110.03 DATE OF PASSAGE.
   Chapters
110 and
111 of this code of ordinances shall take effect immediately upon passage.
(Prior Code, § 5-103)
§ 110.04 CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO DOING BUSINESS.
   Payment in full of the proper tax or fee as required by the town, the
issuance of a town license certificate and the fulfillment of all terms and
conditions of such grant shall be conditions precedent to the transaction of
any business profession, calling, vocation, activity, trade or employment, for
which a license is required.
(Prior Code, § 5-104)
§ 110.05 APPLICATION FOR AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; PAYMENT OF TAX AND FEES;
RECORDER TO MAINTAIN RECORDS.
   (A)   Each applicant for a town license shall make application to the
Recorder on a form to be provided by the town, and holders of business
franchise certificates or other forms of state licenses authorizing them to do
business within the town shall display such state certificates or licenses to
the Recorder at the time of making application to the town license.
   (B)   Upon payment of such license tax or fee as may be imposed by this
chapter or elsewhere in the code or other ordinance, upon the town license for
which application is made, the Recorder shall issue the license applied for,
provided, that the application is in proper form, and that all conditions
precedent to the issuance of such license appear to the date of filing thereof,
and he or she shall not issue any such license until authorized so to do by the
Town Council, and in any case the payment of any license tax or fee shall be
deferred until such application has been approved by the Town Council.
   (C)   The Recorder shall maintain on file all applications for town licenses
and a record of each license issued, which shall set forth the name and
business address of the licensee, the date of issuance and the term for which
issued, the type of license, the amount of license tax to be paid, the number
of the license, and such additional information as may be pertinent to
establish that all requirements of law and ordinances have been complied with.
(Prior Code, § 5-105)
Statutory reference:
   Required issuance of town license upon application therefor and payment of
town license tax by holder of corresponding state license, see W. Va. Code § 8-
13-4
§ 110.06 FALSE STATEMENTS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement in
any application for a town license, or in any tax return by the town and which
is required to be made to any town officer or agency.
(Prior Code, § 5-106) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 CONFIDENTIAL NATURE OF RETURNS; LIMITATION ON DIVULGING INFORMATION.
   All returns and tax statements made by taxpayers to town officers shall be
regarded as confidential and, except in compliance with judicial order, or as
may be required by the proper administration hereof, the Recorder, his or her
agents and employees, and former Recorders, agents and employees, shall not
divulge facts or information obtained in the administration of this code.
(Prior Code, § 5-107)
§ 110.08 SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS AND EACH
CLASS OF BUSINESS.
   Except as may be provided otherwise in this code or other ordinance, any
person who, at more than one fixed place of business within the town engages in
or prosecutes any business, profession, calling or vocation for which a town
license is required shall obtain a separate license and pay the prescribed tax
or fee therefor and for each such fixed place of business, profession, calling
or vocation.
(Prior Code, § 5-108)
Statutory reference:
   Requirement for separate business franchise registration certificate for
each location where business is transacted, see W. Va. Code § 11-12-3
§ 110.09 LICENSE YEAR; EXPIRATION DATE; ANNUAL RENEWAL; MINIMUM TAX; PRORATION
OF TAX UPON BEGINNING BUSINESS.
   (A)   A license year shall begin on July 1 of each calendar year and shall
expire with the expiration of the next ensuing June 30, and licenses shall
expire at midnight on the last day of June subsequent to the date of issuance
and shall be renewable annually, except such licenses for which the tax or fee
is by the day, week, month or other period less than a year, and except as may
be provided otherwise by this code or other ordinance.
   (B)   The license tax or fee for an initial license upon the commencement of
business shall be in proportion to the duration of such license to the annual
tax or fee; provided, that no license for any purpose for any length of time
shall be issued for an amount set by Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 5-109)
Statutory reference:
   Expiration date of state business franchise registration certificates, see
W. Va. Code § 11-12-5
§ 110.10 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Each person to whom a town license has been issued shall keep such license
conspicuously posted upon or within the premises to which such license relates.
Each licensee having no fixed place of business shall carry his or her license
upon his or her person at all times while engaging the licensed business or any
transaction incidental thereto, and shall display such license upon request of
any person with whom he or she is transacting business or any law enforcement
officer.
(Prior Code, § 5-110)
§ 110.11 LICENSE DOES NOT LEGALIZE UNLAWFUL ACTS; GENERALLY.
   Nothing in this chapter and no payment for or issuance of any town license
under the provision hereof, shall be deemed to legalize any act which otherwise
may be in violation of law, or to exempt any person from any penalty prescribed
for such violation.
(Prior Code, § 5-111)
§ 110.12 COLLECTION BY PROCEEDINGS IN COURT.
   The Recorder may collect any license tax, fee or penalty unpaid under the
provisions of this chapter by appropriate proceedings in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 5-113)
§ 110.13 PROSECUTION FOR VIOLATIONS; RECOURSE OF TOWN TO SEEK INJUNCTIONS.
   If any person engages in or prosecutes any business, profession, calling or
vocation contrary to any of the provisions of this code, whether without first
obtaining a license therefor of by continuing the same after termination of the
effective period of any such license, he or she shall be subject to immediate
prosecution in the municipal court and, in addition, the Town Attorney may, in
the name of the town, seek such injunctive relief as maybe appropriate in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 5-115)
§ 110.14 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES, AND PUBLIC HEARINGS UPON APPEAL
FROM REVOCATION.
   The Recorder, upon reasonable notice to the licensee, may summarily revoke
any license issued by him or her pursuant to the provisions of this code for
any reason which would have been grounds for denial of such license when first
issued, for violation of any term or condition of such license, for violation
of any pertinent provision of state law, this code or other ordinance, or for
the perpetration or attempted perpetration of fraud, malpractice or malfeasance
by the licensee, without prejudice to prosecution of such licensee by the town.
Any person having an interest in any license so revoked and who feels aggrieved
thereby may request the Recorder to further investigate the grounds for
revocation and to consider his or her action, and if the Recorder accedes to
such request, he or she may suspend or reinstate the license pending his or her
final decision. If the Recorder refuses to accede to such request, or if, upon
reconsideration, he or she affirms his or her revocation of the license, the
party so aggrieved may appeal to the Town Council, appear in person or by
counsel, and may have the attendance of witnesses, books and papers in his or
her behalf, and may testify in person. The decision of Town Council following
such hearing shall be final, subject to only such judicial review as may be
provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 5-116)
§ 110.15 REDUCING BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX.
   The business and occupation tax will be eliminated on the following business
classifications: 8 manufactured or prepared for sale products; 9 retailers; 10
wholesalers; 11 public service or utility: street and electric railways; 18
amusement; 19 service and all other business; and 20 rentals, royalties or
fees.
(Ord. passed 10-7-2024)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil penalty. Any person engaging in or prosecuting any business,
profession, calling or vocation contrary to the provisions of this chapter,
whether without obtaining a town license therefor before commencing the same,
or by continuing the same after the termination of the effective period of any
such town license, may, in addition to paying the prescribed license tax or
fee, be liable for a penalty set by Council from time to time for each month or
fraction thereof during which he or she has been in default of such payment.
(Prior Code, § 5-112)
   (B)   Criminal violations and penalties. Except as may herein be expressly
provided otherwise, any person violation any provisions under this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof be fined an amount set by Council from time to
time and each day or part thereof that any violation shall continue shall be
deemed to constitute a distinct and separate offense and be punishable
accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 5-114)
Statutory reference:
   Relating to state business franchise registration tax, see W. Va. Code § 11-
12-9
CHAPTER 111: MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS ACTIVITIES
Section
   
111.01   License required and license taxes imposed
   
111.02   Home solicitations
   
111.03   Bowling lanes and billiard, pool and bagatelle tables
   
111.04   Coin-operated merchandise, service, music amusements and the like
   
111.05   Hawkers and peddlers
   
111.06   Municipal license tax on professionals
   
111.07   Laundromats and car washes
   
111.08   Nonintoxicating beer and wine licenses
   
111.09   Collection agencies
   
111.10   Employment agency
   
111.11   Gasoline sales
   
111.12   Public shows
   
111.13   Game room
 
   
111.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to require town license for anything requiring a state
license and to impose town license not excluding amount of state license tax,
see W. Va. Code § 8-13-4
   Effect of state business registration certificates within municipalities,
and further authority of municipalities under W. Va. Code § 8-13-4, see W. Va.
Code § 11-12-4
   State business franchise and registration tax, and business registration
certificates issued pursuant thereto, see W. Va. Code §§ 11-12-1 et seq.
§ 111.01 LICENSE REQUIRED AND LICENSE TAXES IMPOSED.
   No person shall, with a currently valid town license, engage in or prosecute
within the town any of the businesses, activities, trades or employments named
in the following sections of this chapter. The license taxes hereinafter
specified are hereby levied on every person engaging in or prosecuting, within
this town, any such businesses, activities, trades or employments.
(Prior Code, § 5-201)
§ 111.02 HOME SOLICITATIONS.
   No person shall, without a currently valid town license, engage in any form
of door to door or telephone or other home solicitations sales therefore,
within the town, excepting therefrom non-profit charitable organizations and
schools. Any license fee charged shall be in accordance with that which is
required by the state.
(Prior Code, § 5-202)
§ 111.03 BOWLING LANES AND BILLIARD, POOL AND BAGATELLE TABLES.
   (A)   The annual license fee to keep or maintain a bowling lane, a billiard,
pool or bagatelle table, or table of like kind, for public use, where any
charge is made for the use thereof, shall be $25; but, if more than one such
lanes or tables be kept or maintained in the same building by the same person,
the fee shall be set by Council from time to time.
   (B)   The licensee, his or her agents or employees shall not permit any
person in any manner to bet or wager anything of value upon any game played
upon such lanes or tables. Such licensee, his or her agents or employees shall
not permit anyone to bring intoxicating liquors of any kind into such building
or other place where such lanes or tables are located.
   (C)   Persons keeping or maintaining billiard, pool or bagatelle tables, or
other tables of like kind in an establishment where intoxicating liquor or
nonintoxicating beer is sold shall not permit person under the age of 18 years
to play at such tables or to remain or loiter in the room where such tables are
located.
(Prior Code, § 5-203)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to license or for good cause refuse to license in
particular case, or to prohibit in all cases, the operation of pool and
billiard rooms and the like, and to make and enforce reasonable ordinances
regulating the licensing and operation of such business, see W. Va. Code § 8-
12-5(24)
   Corresponding state license see W. Va. Code § 11-12-4
§ 111.04 COIN-OPERATED MERCHANDISE, SERVICE, MUSIC AMUSEMENTS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Persons owning and operating coin-operated merchandise, service
amusement or music devices or vending machines shall obtain annual licenses and
pay the fees prescribed in this section on or before July 1 of each year.
   (B)   The liability for the licensee to operate any type of coin-operated
merchandise, service, amusement or music devices or vending machines shall be
upon the owner of the machine. The leasing of such a machine shall not be
considered as a transfer of ownership of the machine and where a lessor-lessee
relationship exists, the lessor shall be liable for the applicable license and
fee.
   (C)   The annual license fee to own and operate a coin-operated baggage or
parcel checking machine or device which is used for storage of baggage or
parcels of any character, shall be set by Council from time to time for each
section of any such device which is operated on the coin-in-the-slot principle;
the annual license fee to own and operate any coin-operated toilet locker or
device, sanitary napkin device or bed vibrator device shall be set by Council
from time to time for each such locker or device. The owner shall identify each
machine by installing on each device an identification label, plainly legible
and visible, in such a manner that the machine need not be moved to observe the
identification label, and the identification label shall contain the name of
the owner, his or her license number and his or her street address within the
town.
   (D)   The annual license fee to own and operate a total of 20 or more coin-
operated amusement or music devices of the following types shall be set by
Council from time to time: one cent devices; five cent devices; ten cent
devices; over ten cent devices. The operator of more than one type of such
devices shall pay the highest fee prescribed. The annual license fee to own and
operate fewer than 20 amusement or music devices shall be upon a per device
basis: one cent devices; five cent devices; ten cent devices; over ten cent
devices. Any device taking more than one denomination of coin shall be licensed
on the basis of the largest denomination of coin taken or the total of the
coins necessary to make the device function or operate.
   (E)   The fees herein prescribed are on an annual basis, commencing July 1
of each year, expiring on the following June 30, and are not proratable if
taken out during the license year nor shall fees paid be refundable if a
license is revoked, suspended or business ceased during the license year.
   (F)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any pay
telephone, postage stamp vending machines or currency changing machines
operated on the coin-in-the-slot principle.
   (G)   Except where the principal business of the operation of the store is
the operation of such machines or devices, no license fee shall be required of
persons keeping or maintaining such machines or devices owned by them in their
own licensed stores; provided, that any person exempt from such license shall
obtain from the Recorder a license receipt, at a cost set by Council from time
to time, showing that he or she is so exempt, which shall be effective for the
period as provided for annual licenses in this chapter, but to obtain such
license receipt or other evidence as to the fact entitling him or her to such
exemption as the Recorder in his or her discretion, may require, which shall be
on a form to be prescribed by the Recorder.
   (H)   The proprietor or owner of the business conducted in the place where
any such machine is kept or maintained is liable for the payment of such
license fee and upon his or her refusal or failure to pay such fee the Recorder
or his or her agents may take such machine or device into possession and
deliver it to the Chief of Police, or the Chief of Police on his or her own
initiative or upon order or discretion of the Recorder of his or her agents,
may take such machine or device into possession, and in either event such
machine or device shall be impounded until such license fee is paid; in the
event the license fee and penalties are not paid to the Chief of Police within
ten days and after the date of such impounding, then the Chief of Police shall
sell such machine or device in the manner provided by law for the sale of
personal property for taxes, and from the proceeds thereof shall discharge and
pay the license fee due on such machine or device and his or her costs,
including costs of impounding, storage, penalties and other fees due the town
and the Chief of Police, and the balance, if any there be, shall be forfeited
to the town.
(Prior Code, § 5-204)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding state license see W. Va. Code § 11-12-3
§ 111.05 HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS.
   (A)   (1)   When used in this section the term HAWKER AND PEDDLER shall mean
and include all persons who engage or conduct, within this town, in traveling
from place to place, a temporary or transient business of selling goods, wares
or merchandise for delivery at the time of sale; and who, for the purpose of
carrying on such business may use, lease or occupy either in whole or part, a
shed, open ground, streets, roads or highways, a room, building or other
structure, or who use, lease or occupy for such purposes a room in any motel,
hotel or lodging house, for the exhibition and sale of goods, wares and
merchandise to sell, for delivery at the same time, any such goods, wares or
merchandise; or any person who shall carry goods, wares or merchandise from
place to place on foot or with a vehicle, either in person or by agent or
employee, and sell, for delivery at the same time, any such goods, wares or
merchandise to any purchaser at wholesale or retail, and any person who shall
solicit for the purpose of rendering any service shall be deemed a hawker and
peddler under this section. The person so engaged shall not be relieved from
the provisions of this section by reason of association temporarily with any
local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such temporary
or transient business in connection with or as part of the business of, or in
the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer.
      (2)   The annual license fee to act as a hawker or peddler, if the person
licensed travels without a vehicle; if he or she travels with a vehicle of not
more than one-half ton capacity; if he or she travels with a vehicle of more
than one-half ton capacity, but not exceeding one ton capacity; if he or she
travels with a vehicle of more than one ton capacity, but not exceeding two
tons capacity, plus for each additional ton or fraction thereof over two tons
capacity shall be set by Council from time to time; and the person licensed
shall pay at the same rate for each and every vehicle so used. Such person
shall carry his or her license in some conspicuous place in his or her vehicle
or about his or her pack.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who sells
any goods, wares or merchandise to be delivered in the future; or to any of the
following who offer immediate delivery of the goods, wares or merchandise being
sold:
      (1)   Any person or persons engaged within this state in the business or
calling of agriculture, horticulture or grazing, who sells or sell individually
or collectively, one or more for the other or others, the products derived from
his, her or their business or calling aforesaid;
      (2) Any retail or wholesale business concern, established and operating
continuously for one year or more within this town in the sale of any product
or products over regular routes who are licensed under other provisions of this
chapter;
      (3)   Any wholesaler of jobber selling soft drinks or non intoxicating
beer for which he or she is duly licensed under other provisions of this or
another chapter of this code;
      (4)   Any person who sells petroleum products, ice, wood, meat, ice
cream, dairy products, bread, cakes, pies and other bakery products, butter and
eggs, manufactured, grown or produced by any such person and not purchased by
him or her for sale;
      (5)   Sales made by persons by commercial travelers, or selling agents in
the usual course of business, nor to bona fide sales of goods, wares or
merchandise by sample for future delivery; nor to any sales of goods, wares or
merchandise on the grounds of any agricultural association during the
continuance of any annual fair held by such association; nor to any sales by
organizations acting for charitable, religious, or benevolent purposes; nor to
annual showings or street exhibits, which may include sales of their showings
or exhibits by members of antique associations; numismatic or philatelic
societies, are associations or societies when such showing or exhibit does not
continue for more than one week each calender year; nor to judicial sales
directed by law, or under the orders of any court;
      (6)   Any agent or salesperson selling manufactured products produced by
his or her employer, and who sells the same to retail dealers for the purpose
of resale;
      (7)   Any firm, corporation or individual having a stock of goods, or
merchandise, or manufacturing or processing plant or plants kept or operating
at a fixed situs in the state, and declared for taxation in the county where
located, and using a vehicle or vehicles over a fixed route or routes for the
purpose of selling or distributing, at wholesale, their, his, her or its said
merchandise, stock of goods or plant products; and
      (8)   Any person exempt from license as provided by this section shall
obtain from the Recorder a license receipt, without cost, showing that he or
she is so exempt, which shall be effective for the period as provided for
annual licenses in this chapter; but to obtain such license receipt, he or she
shall make an affidavit and produce such other evidence as to the fact
entitling him or her to such exemption as the Recorder, in his or her
discretion, may require, which shall be on a form to be prescribed by the
Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 5-205)
§ 111.06 MUNICIPAL LICENSE TAX ON PROFESSIONALS.
   (A)   Architects shall be subject to an annual license tax set by Council
from time to time. Within the meaning of W. Va. Code §§ 30-12-1 et seq., the
term ARCHITECT shall include corporations, partnerships, associations or
individuals licensed by the state, or authorized by the state to conduct
business within this state, which preform the business of designing new
constructions or enlargements or alterations of existing buildings, or
supervising the construction, enlargement or alterations of such buildings. Not
included within the meaning of this section are draftsmen, students, clerks of
works, superintendents and other employees of licensed architects under the
provisions of this section, or engineers, mechanics, builders or any other
persons from making plans and specifications or supervising the erection,
enlargement or alteration of buildings, or any appurtenance thereto, for other
persons, firms or corporations, or for themselves, provided the plans and
specifications for such construction are signed by the authors thereof with the
true appellation of their actual occupations in life, such as, “engineer” or
“mechanic” or “builder” and the like, without the use in any form of the word
or title “architect” or “architects”. Specifically included are architects
whose offices are in the town or who are doing business in the town.
   (B)   Attorneys at law shall be subject to an annual license tax set by
Council from time to time. The term ATTORNEY shall mean all individuals,
partnerships, associations or legal corporations licensed by the state to
conduct the practice of law in the state.
   (C)   Barbers, beauticians or manicurists shall be subject to an annual
license tax set by Council from time to time. Within the meaning of W. Va. Code
§§ 30-27-1 et seq., the phrase BARBERS, BEAUTICIANS and MANICURISTS shall mean
those licensed individuals, partnerships, associations or corporations which
practice barbering, beauty culture or manicuring. Not included within the
meaning of this section are those individuals not licensed by the state who are
employees of barber, beauticians and manicurists.
   (D)   Barbers schools and beauticians schools shall be subject to an annual
license tax set by Council from time to time. Within the meaning of W. Va. Code
§§ 30-27-1 et seq., the phrase BARBERS AND BEAUTICIANS SCHOOLS shall mean those
schools licensed by the state which are situate in the town which teach
barbering and beauty culture.
   (E)   Dentists shall be subject to an annual license tax set by Council from
time to time. Within the meaning of W. Va. Code §§ 30-4-1 et seq., the term
DENTIST shall mean those individuals, partnerships or associations licensed by
the state who diagnose or treat any of the diseases, malformations or lesions
of the oral cavity, teeth, gums or maxillary bones, or shall, prepare or fill
cavities in human teeth, correct malposition of teeth or jaws or supply
artificial teeth as substitutes for natural teeth, or administer anesthetics,
general or local, in connection with any of said work, or shall make, produce,
reproduce, construct, repair, alter or restore any prosthetic denture, crown,
bridge or other prosthetic appliance to be used in, upon, in connection with,
or as a substitute for, any human tooth, or in, upon, or in connection with the
human jaw or associated structure or tissue of the human mouth, or to be used
in the treatment of any condition thereof, or perform any other work included
in the curriculum of recognized dental colleges.
   (F)   (1)   Embalmers and funeral directors shall be subject to an annual
license tax set by Council from time to time. Within the meaning of W. Va. Code
§ 30-6-3, the term FUNERAL DIRECTOR shall mean any person who is engaged in the
business of conducting funerals and who is licensed by the state as a funeral
director. A funeral, director may be an individual , partnership, association,
corporation or other organization, and may also be designated as “undertaker”
or “mortician”.
      (2)   EMBALMER shall mean any person engaged in the practice of
embalming, i.e., the practice of disinfecting or preserving of dead human
bodies before burial.
   (G)   Funeral establishments shall be subject to an annual license tax set
by Council from time to time. Within the meaning of W. Va. Code § 30-6-3, the
term FUNERAL ESTABLISHMENT shall mean any place of business within the town
which is devoted to such activities as are incident, convenient or related to
the preparation and arrangements, financial and otherwise, for the embalming,
funeral, transportation, burial or other disposition of dead human bodies.
   (H)   Insurance brokers shall be subject to an annual license tax set by
Council from time to time. Within the meaning of W. Va. Code §§ 33-2-12(f) et
seq., the term INSURANCE BROKER shall mean those who are licensed by the state
to solicit, negotiate, make or procure insurance contracts and whose offices
are within the town.
   (I)   Insurance companies shall be subject to an annual license tax set by
Council from time to time. Within the meaning of W. Va. Code §§ 33-1 and 33-3,
the term INSURANCE COMPANY shall mean any incorporated stock insurer,
incorporated mutual insurer or a reciprocal insurer which is licensed by the
state to transact insurance business, and whose offices, brokers or agents are
located within the town.
   (J)   Land surveyors shall, be subject to an annual license tax set by
Council from time to time. Within the W. Va. Code §§ 30-13A-1 et seq., the term
LAND SURVEYOR shall mean any person who engages in the practice of land
surveying. Only those licensed land surveyors whose offices are within the town
or who survey land, in whole or in part, shall be subject to this tax. Not
included in the meaning of this section are those employees of a land surveyor
who assists him or her in his or her work. There is exempt from this section
any land surveyor who is the duly elected surveyor of Pocahontas County and
whose sole land surveying business within the town is part of his or her duties
as surveyor.
   (K)   Nursing home administrators shall be subject to an annual license tax
set by Council from time to time. Within the meaning of W. Va. Code §§ 30-25-
1 et seq., the term NURSING HOME ADMINISTRATOR shall mean any individual who is
licensed by the state as a nursing home administrator and who is engaged in the
business of operating nursing homes.
   (L)   Nursing homes shall be subject to an annual license tax in the amount
set by Council from time to time per bed. Within the W. Va. Code §§ 16-5C-1 et
seq., the term NURSING HOME means any institution, residence or place, or any
part or unit thereof, however named, in this state which is advertised,
offered, maintained or operated by the ownership or management, whether for a
consideration or not, for the express or implied purpose of providing
accommodations and care, for a period of more than 24 hours, for four or more
persons who are ill or otherwise incapacitated and in need of nursing care due
to physical or mental impairment, or which provided services for the
rehabilitation of persons who are convalescing from illness or incapacitation.
   (M)   Physicians, surgeons and podiatrists shall be subject to a biennial
(every two years) license tax set by Council from time to time. Within the
meaning of W. Va. Code §§ 30-3-1 et seq., the terms PHYSICIANS AND SURGEONS
shall mean those persons licensed by the state to practice medicine and
surgery, i.e., the diagnosis or treatment of or operation or prescription for
any human disease, pain, injury, deformity or other physical or mental
conditions. This section does not apply to osteopathic physicians and surgeons.
The term PODIATRIST shall mean any licensed person engaged in the practice of
podiatry. The practice of podiatry means the examination, diagnosis treatment,
prevention and care of conditions and functions of the human foot by medical,
surgical and other scientific knowledge and methods; and medical and surgical
treatment of warts and other dermatological lesions of the hand which similarly
occur in the foot.
   (N)   Private detectives and investigators shall be subject to an annual
license tax set by Council from time to time. Within the meaning of W. Va. Code
§§ 30-18-1 et seq., the term PRIVATE DETECTIVES AND INVESTIGATORS shall mean
any person, firm, company, partnership or corporation shall engage in the
business of private detective or investigator or the business of watch, guard
or to protect persons or property or to prevent the theft or the unlawful
taking of goods, wares, merchandise, money, bonds, stocks, documents and other
articles of value, or in the business of furnishing or supplying information as
to the personal character or activities of any person, firm, company or
corporation, society or association or any person or group of persons, or as to
the character or kind of business and occupation of any person, firm, company
or as to the character or kind of business and occupation of any person, firm,
company or corporation, or own or conduct or maintain a bureau or agency for
the above mentioned purpose, except as hereinafter provided in this division
(N) for fee, hire or reward, or advertise his, her or their business to be that
of detective or of a detective agency or investigator, or watch, guard or
patrol notwithstanding the name or title used in describing such agency or
performed for fee, hire or reward, without having first obtained from the
office of the Secretary of State a license so to do, as hereinafter provided;
provided, however, that this division (N) shall not apply to any person who is
a duly qualified and acting police officer under the laws of the state, either
while acting in his or her official capacity or while working for a private
employer in his or her off-duty hours; nor to any person, corporation or agency
whose business is the furnishing of information to an employer concerning the
business activities of his or her employees while on the premises of such
employer.
   (O)   Real estate brokers shall be subject to an annual license tax set by
Council from time to time. Within the meaning of W. Va. Code § 30-40-1 et seq.,
the term REAL ESTATE BROKER shall mean any person, partnership, association or
corporation which is engaged in the business of brokering real estate sales.
Exempt from this section are salespersons and other employees of a broker who
assists the broker in such business.
   (P)   The annual retail license fee for a real estate salesperson license
shall be the sum set by Council from time to time. The annual real estate
salesperson license fee for the initial year of issuance shall be prorated
based upon the number of days remaining between the date of issuance and the
following June 30.
   (Q)   Dental corporations shall be subject to an annual license tax set by
Council from time to time. A dental corporation is a corporation formed for the
purpose of performing dental work as delineated in division (E) above by and
through licensed dentists. Such licensed dentists may be either employees of
the corporation or shareholders. One or more licensed dentists may form or be
the employee(s) of the dental corporation.
(Prior Code, § 5-206) (Ord. passed 12-2-1991)
§ 111.07 LAUNDROMATS AND CAR WASHES.
   (A)   Laundromats shall be subject to an annual municipal license tax set by
Council from time to time. For the purpose of this section, a LAUNDROMAT shall
be defined as a business in which the public may use self-service machines to
wash and dry clothes. A DEVICE shall be defined as either a washer or dryer.
   (B)   Car washes shall be subject to an annual municipal license tax set by
Council from time to time. For the purpose of this section, a CAR WASH shall be
defined as a business in which the public may use self-service machines to
clean and wash his or her vehicles. A DEVICE may be defined as either a vacuum
cleaner, washer, waxer or other similar machines.
(Prior Code, § 5-207)
§ 111.08 NONINTOXICATING BEER AND WINE LICENSES.
   Retail beer dealers shall be subject to an annual license tax set by Council
from time to time per year, which fee, if the license is granted for a period
less than the fiscal year, shall be computed quarterly in proportion to the
remainder of the fiscal year. Restaurants, bars and fraternal organizations
shall be required to obtain a Class A license. Grocery stores which sell
chilled and unchilled beer shall be required to purchase a Class B license.
Grocery stores which sell unchilled beer only shall be required to obtain a
Class B license. Beer distributors or wholesalers shall be required to obtain a
municipal license. Breweries shall be subject to an annual license tax. Wine
retailers, including grocery stores, shall be subject to an annual license tax.
Wine distributors or wholesalers shall be subject an annual license tax. For
the purpose of this section a RETAILER shall be defined as any business selling
directly to the public, and DISTRIBUTORS or WHOLESALERS shall be defined as
businesses selling to other businesses at less than retail prices which in turn
then sell to the public.
(Prior Code, § 5-208)
§ 111.09 COLLECTION AGENCIES.
   Collection agencies having offices within the town shall be subject to an
annual license tax set by Council from time to time. A COLLECTION AGENCY may be
defined as any person, partnership, association or corporation which derives
its income from commissions based upon the collection of debts of others.
Exempt from the provision of this section are attorneys at law who derive less
than half of their income from any collection practice they may have.
(Prior Code, § 5-209)
§ 111.10 EMPLOYMENT AGENCY.
   Any employment agency having offices within the town shall be subject to an
annual license tax set by Council from time to time. For the purpose of this
section an employment agency may be defined as any person, partnership
association or corporation which, for a fee, finds employees for operating
businesses or jobs for unemployed or under employed persons.
(Prior Code, § 5-210)
§ 111.11 GASOLINE SALES.
   (A)   Gasoline retailers within the town shall be subject to an annual
license tax set by Council from time to time. For the purpose of this section a
GASOLINE RETAILER may be defined as a person, partnership, association or
corporation which sells directly to the public.
   (B)   Gasoline wholesalers operating in or with offices in the town shall be
subject to an annual license tax set by Council from time to time. For the
purpose of this section GASOLINE WHOLESALER may be defined as any person,
partnership, association or corporation which sells gasoline to other
wholesalers or to gasoline retailers for sale to the public.
(Prior Code, § 5-211)
§ 111.12 PUBLIC SHOWS.
   (A)   Circuses operating within the town shall be subject to a special
license tax set by Council from time to time.
   (B)   Street or other carnivals shall be subject to a special license tax
set by Council from time to time. Each performance may be required to have a
separate license.
(Prior Code, § 5-212)
§ 111.13 GAME ROOM.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the “Marlinton Game Room Ordinance”.
   (B)   From and after the effective date of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated in the town a “game
room” or “arcade” or any business which derives a substantial portion of its
income from video games, pool games, pinball machines or other such machines,
and caters primarily or substantially to minors, unless there is present at all
times a responsible overseer or manager over the age of 21. No alcohol or drugs
or any other substance forbidden to minors shall be permitted on the premises
during business hours, and it shall be the affirmative duty of the manager and/
or owner to ensure compliance with this provision. No minor shall be permitted
outside the business building after the hour set by the Council for curfew. Any
minor found outside the business shall be subject to being taken into
protective custody until the minor is delivered into the custody of the parent
or guardian of the minor. The manager and/or owner shall keep proper control of
all persons in the business at all times and shall report all disturbances to
the county jail or to the Police Department of the town. The requirements of
this section are responsibilities of the owner or owners of the business, their
managers, employees and agents, and all sanctions provided for in this section
may be made against each one.
(Ord. passed 3-2-1992) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
110.99.
   (B)   Any violation of §
111.13 shall subject the offender to a fine set by Council from time to time
and costs or a jail sentence not to exceed 30 days or both such fine and
imprisonment. In addition to such criminal penalties, the business may be
ordered closed for the balance of the evening or the town’s business license
may be suspended or revoked for a period to be determined by Council order.
(Ord. passed 3-2-1992)
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
In General
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Tax imposed on purchase prices of intoxicating liquors sold at state
store
   
112.03   Intoxicating or drinking in public places; illegal possession of
alcoholic liquors
Private Clubs
   
112.15   License fee imposed in amounts specified
   
112.16   Duty of local holders of state licenses to report to Recorder at
stated times to display license and to pay town license fee; prohibited liquor
sales when town fee not paid
   
112.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Exclusion of nonintoxicating beer from regulations of State Alcohol Beverage
Control Act, see W. Va. Code § 60-1-7
   State Nonintoxicating Beer Act, see W. Va. Code Ch. 11, Art. 16
IN GENERAL
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Words and phrases defined in W. Va. Code §§ 11-16-3, 60-1-5 and 60-7-2 shall
have the same meanings as therein defined wherever, such words and phrases are
used in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-101)
§ 112.02 TAX IMPOSED ON PURCHASE PRICES OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS SOLD AT STATE
STORE.
   Pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code § 8-13-7, there is hereby imposed
a tax of 5% of the purchase price of any and all intoxicating liquors sold
within the town, provided, that such tax shall not apply to intoxicating
liquors sold by or purchased from holders of private club licenses issued under
the provisions of W. Va. Code Chapter 60, Article 7.
(Prior Code, § 2-102) (Ord. passed 6-26-1989)
§ 112.03 INTOXICATING OR DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES; ILLEGAL POSSESSION OF
ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Appear in a public place in an intoxicated condition;
   (B)   Drink alcoholic liquor in a public place;
   (C)   Drink alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle on any street or in a public
garage;
   (D)   Tender a drink of alcoholic liquor to another person in a public
place;
   (E)   Possess alcoholic liquor in the amount in excess of one gallon
containers not bearing stamps or seals of the West Virginia Alcohol Beverage
Control Commission, without first having obtained written authority from the
Commission therefor; or
   (f)   Possess any alcoholic liquor which was manufactured or acquired in
violation of the provisions of W. Va. Code Chapter 60.
(Prior Code, § 2-103) Penalty, see §
112.99
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding state law and penalties for violations, see W. Va. Code §
60-6-9
PRIVATE CLUBS
§ 112.15 LICENSE FEE IMPOSED IN AMOUNTS SPECIFIED.
   (A)   All private clubs as defined in W. Va. Code § 60-7-2, the premises of
which are situated within the corporate limits of the town and which are
operated for a profit inuring to the benefit of their owners, shall pay to the
town an annual license fee for a license issued under the provisions of W. Va.
Code Chapter 60, Article 7, as follows:
      (1) The annual license fee for a license issued to a private club other
than a private club of the type specified in this division (A) shall be set by
Council from time to time if such private club has 100 or more members; and
      (2)   The annual license fee for a license issued to a fraternal or
veterans’ organization or a nonprofit social club shall be set by Council from
time to time.
   (C)   The fee for any such license issued following January 1 of any year
and to expire on June 30 of such year shall be one-half of the annual license
fee prescribed by divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above.
(Prior Code, § 2-301)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to levy and collect a fee from any private club licensed
by the state, the premises of which are within the town, see W. Va. Code §§ 8-
13-7, 60-7-7
§ 112.16 DUTY OF LOCAL HOLDERS OF STATE LICENSES TO REPORT TO RECORDER AT
STATED TIMES TO DISPLAY LICENSE AND TO PAY TOWN LICENSE FEE; PROHIBITED LIQUOR
SALES WHEN TOWN FEE NOT PAID.
   (A)   Each licensee holding a state license issued under the provisions of
W. Va. Code Chapter 60, Article 7, for a private club the premises of which are
situated within the corporate limits of this town, shall, upon first obtaining
such license and at the time of each renewal thereof, report to the Recorder
and display such state license to him or her and pay the town license fee which
is imposed upon by him or her by this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for any
such licensee or any officer, member or employee of any private club so
licensed, the premises of which being situated within the corporate limits of
this town, to sell intoxicating liquor upon such premises unless all fees due
to the town, provided in this chapter have been paid.
   (B)   All such fees shall be paid in the Recorder’s office at the municipal
building on or before June 30 for the ensuing fiscal year, whereupon a license
shall be issued by the Recorder, which shall be on such form or forms as
prescribed by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 2-302)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   A violation of any section of §§
112.01 through 112.04 shall be punishable by fine set by Council from time to
time or ten days in the county jail or both such fine and imprisonment for each
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 2-104)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of § 112.19 shall, upon
conviction, be punished for each offense by a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $500, or imprisoned for not more than ten days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
(Prior Code, § 2-205)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to enact ordinances for enforcement of state
Nonintoxicating Beer Act, see W. Va. Code § 11-16-26
   Unlawful acts of holders of state nonintoxicating beer licenses, see W. Va.
Code § 11-16-18
CHAPTER 113: RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
113.01   Purpose and definitions
   
113.02   License required; where license obtainable; exemptions
   
113.03   Annual license tax
   
113.04   Expiration and renewal of license
   
113.05   General provisions
§ 113.01 PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXCLUDED. For the purpose of this chapter, no coin-operated device shall be
construed to be a store.
   GENERAL STORE. Includes any store or stores or any mercantile establishment
or establishments, in which goods, wares or merchandise of any kind are
purchased, ordered, sold or offered for sale either at retail or wholesale.
   PERSON. Includes any group or combination acting as a unit, individual,
committee, guardian, trustee, executor, administrator, partnership, co-
partnership, joint adventure, association, trust, firm or corporation, either
domestic or foreign, which is controlled or directed by one management or
association of ultimate management.
   SPECIAL STORE. Includes any store or stores of any mercantile establishment
or establishments, in which goods, wares or merchandise of any kind except
cigarettes, tobacco products and soft drinks are purchased, ordered, sold or
offered for sale, either at retain or wholesale and which contains no coin-
operated device, or devices, owned and operated by the store proprietor.
(Prior Code, § 5-301) (Ord. passed 8-6-2012)
Statutory reference:
   For corresponding definitions of state store licensing law, see W. Va. Code
§ 11-12-4(d)
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; WHERE LICENSE OBTAINABLE; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain
any general store or special store in the town without first having obtained a
license so to do from the office of the Recorder.
   (B)   The establishment, operation or maintenance of stores by the following
shall be exempt from the license tax imposed by this chapter:
      (1)   The United States of America, the State of West Virginia and its
political subdivisions;
      (2)   Religious and charitable organizations; and
      (3)   Any person or persons engaged within the town in the business of
producing agricultural products, who, individually or collectively, sell in
such store only agricultural products which he, she or they have produced.
(Prior Code, § 5-302) (Ord. passed 8-6-2012) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 113.03 ANNUAL LICENSE TAX.
   (A)   General stores. Every person establishing, operating or maintaining
one or more general stores within the town under the same general management,
supervision or ownership shall pay an annual license tax set by Council from
time to time for each store.
   (B)   Special stores. Every person establishing, operating maintaining one
or more special stores within the town under the same general management,
supervision or ownership shall pay an annual license tax set by Council from
time to time for each store.
(Prior Code, § 5-303) (Ord. passed 8-6-2012)
§ 113.04 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   All licenses shall be so issued as to expire on June 30 of each year. On or
before July 1 of each year, every person having a license shall apply to the
Recorder for a renewal for the license year next ensuing, unless such person
has ceased to operate such store or does not propose to continue operation of
the store during the year next ensuing. Each application for a renewal shall be
accompanied by a filing fee set by Council from time to time for each license
requested and by the license tax as prescribed in §
113.03.
(Prior Code, § 5-304) (Ord. passed 8-6-2012)
§ 113.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Any fee authorized under this chapter for payment to the Recorder of
the town shall be considered to be part of the license tax and not in addition
to the license tax.
   (B)   Having offices in or doing business in the town is a prerequisite for
any business to become subject to the fees imposed under this chapter.
   (C)   Generally exempt from the provisions of this chapter are any
governmental agencies either federal, state, county or municipal, which have
offices or carry on activities in the town, which would otherwise bring such
business activity within the scope of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-308) (Ord. passed 8-6-2012)
CHAPTER 114: OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT
Section
   
114.01   Title
   
114.02   Application for permit
   
114.03   Definition
   
114.04   Violation
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Marlinton Outdoor Entertainment
Ordinance”. It shall become effective immediately upon passage.
(Ord. passed 3-1-1993)
§ 114.02 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Due to insurance requirements, liabilities of the town and the Department of
Highways requirements, any outdoor entertainment throughout the year must
submit to the town and application for a permit, a certificate of liability
insurance in the amount set by Council from time to time and any other
applicable permits a 100 days in advance of the activity.
(Ord. passed 3-1-1993)
§ 114.03 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT. Includes, but is not limited to, dances, parades,
music groups or any other activity that could or may impede the normal flow of
traffic or pedestrian travel in the town.
(Ord. passed 3-1-1993)
§ 114.04 VIOLATION.
   If any person, group, association or corporation shall provide outdoor
entertainment with the town without first obtaining an approved permit and
showing proof of liability insurance coverage in the amount set by Council from
time to time, the person, group, association or corporation which sponsors the
outdoor entertainment (hereinafter referred to as the “sponsoring group”) shall
be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalty in §
114.99. There is a duty of the sponsoring group to ensure each activity
complies with the permit, liability insurance and Department of Highways
requirements imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-1-1993) Penalty, see § 143.99
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, group, association or corporation violating this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a
penalty set by Council from time to time.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty in division (A) above, there shall be the
right of the town to terminate immediately any outdoor entertainment in which
the sponsoring group has not first obtained the necessary permit and liability
insurance.
(Ord. passed 3-1-1993)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
      
135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
136.   WEAPONS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Adoption by reference
   
130.02   Exceptions
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The town shall adopt W. Va. Code Chapter 61, as amended, as its official set
of ordinances governing misdemeanors in the town.
(Ord. passed 4-4-1988)
§ 130.02 EXCEPTIONS.
   All provisions of W. Va. Code Chapter 61 which are felonies shall be deemed
not to have been adopted by the town in §
130.01. All misdemeanors in W. Va. Code Chapter 61 which have a minimum
mandatory jail sentence greater than 30 days shall also be deemed not to have
been adopted by the town in §
130.01. Any misdemeanor which provides for a possible incarceration time
greater than 30 days shall be included in §
130.01, but shall automatically be modified to state that the maximum
incarceration time be 30 days. Any provision in W. Va. Code Chapter 61 for
which the legislature, the state courts or the Supreme Court of Appeals of the
state states that the state has exclusive jurisdiction over the subject matter
shall also be deemed not to have been adopted and included in §
130.01. The adoption of W. Va. Code Chapter 61 shall be further limited by any
other provision of the West Virginia Code, or by decisions of competent courts
in this state which would further limit the jurisdiction of the town in these
matters.
(Ord. passed 4-4-1988)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to fines which may be imposed upon any violator of any of the
sections of the title, the municipal court may also impose costs which include,
but which shall not be limited to: a warrant cost in the amount set by Council
from time to time; daily jail costs at the rate which is set by the Pocahontas
County Commission; and state costs including the Crime Victims Reparation Fund
and the Law Enforcement Training Fund.
(Prior Code, § 9-121)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
   
131.01   Disturbing the peace
   
131.02   False emergency alarms
   
131.03   Loitering
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Disturb, tend to disturb or aid in disturbing the peace of others
by violent, tumultuous, loud or offensive conduct, and no person shall
knowingly permit such conduct upon any premises owned or controlled by him or
her;
      (2)   On any street, highway, public building, in or on a public or
private conveyance or public place, engage in conduct having a direct tendency
to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such
conduct is directed;
      (3)   Willfully, or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, disrupt
any meeting of the governing body of any political subdivision of this state or
a division or agency thereof, or of any school, literary society or place of
religious worship, or any other meeting open to the public, if such disruption
prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of such meeting or has a direct
tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom,
individually, such disruption is directed;
      (4)   Engage in fighting, or threaten to harm persons or property
unlawfully;
      (5)   Make offensively coarse utterance, gesture or display, or
communicate unwarranted and grossly abusive language to any person, which, by
its very utterance or usage, inflicts injury or tends to incite an immediate
breach of the peace;
      (6)   Insult, taunt or challenge another under circumstances in which
such conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (7)   Hinder or prevent the movement of persons or vehicles on a public
street, road, highway right-of-way or to, from, within or upon public or
private property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, by any act
which serves no lawful and reasonable purpose;
      (8)   Create a condition which presents a risk of physical harm to
persons or property; and
      (9)   Urinate or defecate in any public place or upon the property of any
other person, except this section shall not apply to the use of restrooms and/
or bathrooms.
   (B)   Nothing described herein shall be interpreted or construed to prevent
any constitutionally protected activity, including, but not necessarily limited
to, exercise of one’s constitutionally guaranteed rights of freedom of speech
or assembly. No person may be convicted under this section when his or her sole
intent for engaging in the activities for which he or she was arrested was to
exercise one or more of the rights guaranteed to him or her under the United
States Constitution or the Constitution of the state or to exercise any other
rights guaranteed to that person by law.
(Prior Code, § 9-104) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983; Ord. passed 7-3-2023) Penalty, see
§
131.99
§ 131.02 FALSE EMERGENCY ALARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to make, turn in or give a
false alarm of fire, explosion or impending danger of explosion or of need for
police or ambulance assistance or to aid or abet in the commission of such an
act.
(Prior Code, § 9-116) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
131.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 15A-10-20
§ 131.03 LOITERING.
   (A)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in a
place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon
appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or
manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless flight
by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a police officer
shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person
an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by
requesting the person to identify himself or herself and to explain his or her
presence or conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this
section if the police officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if
it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if
it had been believed by the police officer at the time, would have dispelled
the alarm. Any police officer may arrest any person suspected of being a
loiterer or prowler without a warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay
in arresting the suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the
suspect's escape.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a
police officer, or where a “no loitering” sign or signs have been posted, to
loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk,
street, curb, cross-walk, walkway area, mall or that portion of private
property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the
free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon. It shall be unlawful for any
person to block, obstruct, or prevent free access to the entrance to any
building open to the public.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any
thoroughfare or place open to the public for the purpose of inducing, enticing,
soliciting, or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution. Among the
circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such action is
consistent with the intent to induce, entice, solicit, or procure another to
commit an act of prostitution are that the person is a known prostitute or
panderer and repeatedly beckons, in the attempt to stop or engage male or
female passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor
vehicles by engaging their operators by hailing, waving of arms, or other
bodily gestures. The violator's conduct must be such as to demonstrate a
specific intent to induce, entice, solicit, or procure another to commit an act
of prostitution. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this division
unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain
his or her conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this division if
it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful
purpose.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACE has the following
definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning: an area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles
(whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general public, including
those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and
entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
130.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
131.01 shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days,
or both.
(Prior Code, § 9-104)
   (C)   Whoever violates §
131.02 shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days,
or both.
(Prior Code, § 9-116)
   (D)   Whoever violates §
131.03 shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days,
or both, for a first offense. For a second or subsequent offense, such person
shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
(Ord. passed 8-1-1983; Ord. passed 8-14-1987; Ord. passed 7-3-2023)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
132.01   Assault
   
132.02   Battery
   
132.03   Abandoned refrigerators and other airtight appliances
   
132.04   Curfew
   
132.05   Disorderly conduct
   
132.06   Noise
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 ASSAULT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault.
(Prior Code, § 9-102) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
132.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 61-2-9(b)
§ 132.02 BATTERY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a battery.
(Prior Code, § 9-103) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
132.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 61-2-9(c)
§ 132.03 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND OTHER AIRTIGHT APPLIANCES.
   No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on premises under his
or her control, in a place accessible to children, any refrigerator or
otherwise airtight or semi-airtight container which has a capacity of one and
one-half cubic feet or more and an opening of 50 square inches or more and
which has a door or lid equipped with a hinge, latch or other fastening device
capable of securing such door or lid, without rendering such equipment harmless
to human life by removing such hinges, latches or other hardware which may
cause a person to be contained therein. This section shall not apply to a
refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part
of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman. Each day that a
person remains in noncompliance with this section shall constitute a separate
offense. The application or use of any penal statute or ordinance shall not be
held to prevent the removal of the prohibited conditions, and the town shall
have the right, in addition to the penal provisions, to proceed in any court
having jurisdiction for correction of the same by any lawful procedure provided
for by the statutes of the state.
(Prior Code, § 9-117) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
132.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 61-2-26
§ 132.04 CURFEW.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the “Marlinton Curfew Ordinance”.
   (B)   The Town Council finds that there exists within the town a problem
with children under the age of 18 years remaining on the streets of the town at
late hours. Such children are apt to do acts of vandalism or other mischief or
are open to harm from other persons in the general public. The Town Council
finds that public policy requires the town to enact an ordinance providing for
the protection of such children from others and to protect the general public
from harm done by certain children. The Town Council finds that a curfew
ordinance limiting the time children may remain on the streets to be one step
towards such protection and to be consistent with public policy.
   (C)   From and after the effective date of this section, a curfew shall be
placed on the town from the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. during which time
no person under the age of 18 years shall be allowed to remain in any public
place in the town. Exceptions for the foregoing include:
      (1)   Children accompanied by their parents or other person having legal
custody of them;
      (2)   Children on an emergency errand;
      (3)   Children returning from a church, school, athletic or other
recreational activity authorized by the parents of such children or by such
other persons having legal custody of the children; however, such children must
not remain in any public place longer than one-half hour after the termination
of such authorized activity; and
      (4)   Children engaged in any lawful employment, trade, occupation or
profession.
   (D)   Sponsors of events in the town which terminate after the hour of 10:30
p.m. must so inform the Mayor’s office or the town’s Police Department of such
activity and the hour of termination.
   (E)   Whenever a child under the age of 18 shall be found in the town in a
public place after the hour of 11:00 p.m. and before the hour of 6:00 a.m., the
police shall confront the child for the purpose of obtaining his or her name,
age, address and name or names of the child’s parent or parents or other
persons having legal custody of him or her. The police may then take such child
to his or her home but under no circumstances shall such child be taken to the
county jail. If the police have probable cause to believe that the child has
committed a violation of the criminal law of the state or the town, they shall,
in addition to taking said child home, contact the Department of Human Services
and the prosecuting attorney’s office on the following day to determine the
suitability of filing a juvenile petition in circuit court. Such parents or
others having legal custody of said child shall then be notified by certified
mail of such a violation of this section and that any further violation could
result in fine or imprisonment or both.
   (F)   If the parents of the child are not at home, when the police are
taking a child home for a violation of the curfew imposed by this section, the
police may detain the child until such parents or other persons having legal
custody over the child or such other persons willing to assume responsibility
for the child can be found.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1984) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.05 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the “Marlinton Disorderly Conduct
Ordinance”.
   (B)   Any person who, in a public or private place, shall disturb the peace
of others by violent, profane, indecent or boisterous conduct or language or by
the making of unreasonably loud noise that is intended to cause annoyance or
alarm to another person, and who persists in such after being requested to
desist by a law enforcement officer acting in his or her lawful capacity, shall
be guilty of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. passed 7-6-1987) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.06 NOISE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create, assist in creating,
permit, continue or permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud and/or
raucous, disturbing, unusual or unreasonably loud sound which annoys, disturbs,
injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others
within the limits of the town. For the purpose of this section, sound shall
include vibrations caused by human, animal or mechanical means. A person shall
not be in violation of this section unless any such sound is perceived on
another property, it being solely the intent of this section to prohibit sounds
from carrying from one property to adjacent or nearby properties, or a public
right-of-way.
   (B)   Within the town limits, the following activities are prohibited if
they produce audible sound beyond the property line of the property on which
they are conducted or from a public right-of-way:
      (1)   The operation, between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday through
Friday, and 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., Saturday, Sunday and holidays, of power
tools or equipment;
      (2)   The operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, tape
player or compact disc player that can be heard 50 feet away, or beyond the
property line of the property on which is being operated or played;
      (3)   The operation or playing of any musical instrument, loudspeaker,
sound amplifier, public address system or any similar device used to amplify
sounds between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless same shall be in conjunction
with any authorized school, church, festival or civic function;
      (4)   Construction, repair, remodeling, demolition, drilling or
excavation work between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
      (5)   The use of any type of Jacob’s engine brakes, i.e., jake brakes are
prohibited;
      (6)   The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long
continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the
vicinity; and
      (7)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any dog or
other animal to bark, howl or in any other manner disturb the quiet of any
persons.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a fire, accident or natural disaster; to restore public utilities, or
to protect persons or property from an imminent danger;
      (2)   Sound made to alert persons to the existence of an emergency,
danger or attempted crime; and
      (3)   Activities or operations of governmental units or agencies.
   (D)   Whenever noise or sound is made, created or continued in violation of
the provisions of this section, and if the property upon which or from which
the sound is emanating has two or more occupants, and it cannot be determined
which occupant is the violator, the owner of the property, if present shall be
presumed to be responsible for the violation; in the absence of the owner of
the property, the tenant, sub-tenant, licensee, invites or guest then in
control of the property shall be presumed to be responsible for the violation.
In the event that it is impossible to determine the person then in control of
the property, it shall be presumed that the owner of the property, if present,
is responsible and if not present, all persons then on or in said property
shall be ordered to disperse and leave said property and a failure to do so by
any person shall itself be a municipal infraction punishable under the
provisions of this section.
   (E)   When a violation of this section occurs, a law enforcement officer
shall undertake to notify the persons present in or on the property from which
the sound or activity is emanating that they are in violation and notify them
to cease and desist whatever is causing the violation. At this time the law
enforcement officer shall also ascertain, if reasonably possible, the owner or
the tenant of the property in question. Notice hereunder may be given orally by
the officer to the owner and/or posting a written notice on the premises where
such violation is occurring. Any written notice posted shall contain a specific
description of the nature of the violation.
   (F)   The continuation of such violation or any subsequent violation of the
same proscription following receipt of the notice to cease and desist shall
constitute a municipal infraction punishable as hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. passed 7-1-2003) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
130.99.
   (B)   A violation of §
132.01 shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time or
confinement in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days or both fine
and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 9-102)
   (C)   A violation of §
132.02 shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time or
confinement in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days or both fine
and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 9-103)
   (D)   A violation of §
132.03 shall be punished by a fine set by Council from time to time or by
confinement in the county jail not to exceed 30 days or both such fine and
imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 9-117)
   (E)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any parent or other person having legal
custody of a child to allow such child under the age of 18 years to remain in
any public place within the town after the hour of 11:00 p.m. and before 6:00
a.m. in violation of §
132.04. Upon a plea of guilty for a first violation or a finding of guilty of a
first violation, no penalty shall be imposed. For a second or subsequent
violation there shall be a fine set by Council from time to time or confinement
in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
   (F)   A violation of §
132.05 is a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, the violator shall be
fined an amount set by Council from time to time.
   (G)   Violation of any provision of §
132.06 is declared to be a municipal infraction, punishable by a fine set by
Council from time to time and court costs if said violation is a first offense,
with an additional fine set by Council from time to time each time with court
costs.
(Ord. passed 8-1-1983; Ord. passed 4-17-1984; Ord. passed 7-6-1987; Ord. passed
7-1-2003)
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
Section
   
133.01   Disorderly houses
   
133.02   Immoral conduct
   
133.03   Obscene literature
   
132.04   Indecent or improper exposure or dress
   
133.05   Public indecency
   
133.06   Profanity
   
133.07   Gambling
   
133.08   Betting prohibited
   
133.09   Drinking and public intoxication
   
133.10   Alcoholic beverages
 
   
133.99    Penalty
§ 133.01 DISORDERLY HOUSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep any disorderly house
or house of ill fame for the purpose of prostitution or lewdness or where
drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or other breaches of the peace are carried on
or permitted to be carried on to the disturbance of others.
(Prior Code, § 9-105) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 61-8-5(a)
§ 133.02 IMMORAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall commit, offer or agree to commit, nor shall any person
secure or offer to secure another person for the purpose of committing a lewd
or adulterous act or act of prostitution or moral perversion
   (B)   No person knowingly transport or direct or offer to transport or
direct any person to any place or building for the purpose of committing any
lewd act, or an act of prostitution or moral perversion, or knowingly permit
any person to remain in any place or building owned by him or her or under his
or her control for such purpose.
(Prior Code, § 9-106) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 61-8-7
§ 133.03 OBSCENE LITERATURE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to publish, sell, exhibit, distribute or
possess for the purpose of loaning, selling or otherwise circulating or
exhibiting, any book, pamphlet, ballad, film, filmstrip, record or other
written, printed or filmed matter containing obscene language, prints, pictures
or descriptions manifestly intended to corrupt the morals of youth or tending
to corrupt the public morals.
(Prior Code, § 9-107) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code §§ 61-8A-1 et seq.
§ 133.04 INDECENT OR IMPROPER EXPOSURE OR DRESS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to expose intentionally his or her sex
organs or anus under circumstances in which he or she knows his or her conduct
is likely to cause affront or alarm. This section shall be interpreted to apply
equally to either sex.
(Prior Code, § 9-108) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 61-8-9
§ 133.05 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing his or her conduct is likely to
be observed by others who would be affronted or alarmed, to engage in any overt
act of sexual gratification or when he or she intentionally exposes the private
or intimate parts of his or her body to another. This section shall be
interpreted to apply equally to either sex.
(Prior Code, § 9-109) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 61-8-9
§ 133.06 PROFANITY.
   No person shall use any profane, vulgar or indecent language in or near any
public street or other public place or in or around any place or business open
to use by the general public.
(Prior Code, § 9-110) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 61-6-1b
§ 133.07 GAMBLING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or exhibit a gaming table
commonly called a craps table, roulette table or any other gaming table or
device of like kind under any denomination, or which has no name, whether the
gaming table, bank or device be played with cards, dice or otherwise, or to be
a partner, or concerned in interest, in keeping or exhibiting such table, bank
or gaming device of any character.
(Prior Code, § 9-114) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 61-10-1
§ 133.08 BETTING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person at any place, public or private, to bet
or wage money or other thing of value on any game of chance, or knowingly to
furnish money or other thing of value to any other person or to bet or wage on
any such game.
(Prior Code, § 9-115) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 61-10-5
§ 133.09 DRINKING AND PUBLIC INTOXICATION.
   (A)   The title of this section shall be the “Marlinton Public Drinking and
Public Intoxication Ordinance”.
   (B)   It is ordained and passed by the town:
      (1)   A person shall not:
         (a)   Appear in a public in an intoxicated condition;
         (b)   Drink alcoholic liquor in a public place;
         (c)   Drink alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle on any highway,
street, alley or in a public garage;
         (d)   Tender a drink of alcoholic liquor to another person in a public
place;
         (e)   Possess alcoholic liquor in the amount in excess of ten gallons,
in containers not bearing stamps or seals of the Commissioner, without having
first obtained written authority from the said Commissioner therefor;
         (f)   Possess any alcoholic liquor which was manufactured or acquired
in violation of the provisions of the West Virginia Code; and
         (g)   Purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, wine or
nonintoxicating beer if such person at the time of the purchase or attempted
purchase is under the age of 19 unless the person is at least 18 years of age
as of July 1, 1983.
      (2)   Any law enforcement officer may arrest without a warrant and take
the following actions against a person who, in his or her presence, violates
division (A)(1) above:
         (a)   If there is some nonintoxicated person who will accept
responsibility for the intoxicated person, the officer may issue the
intoxicated person a citation specifying a date for appearance before a
judicial officer and release him or her to the custody of the individual
accepting responsibility; provided, that the issuance of a citation shall be
used whenever feasible;
         (b)   If it does not impose an undue burden on the officer, he or she
may, after issuance of such a citation transport the individual to the
individual’s present residence or arrange for such transportation; or
         (c)   1.   If the individual is incapacitated and, in the law-
enforcement officer’s judgment, is in need of acute medical attention, that
officer shall arrange for transportation by ambulance or otherwise to a
hospital emergency room. The officer shall accompany the individual until he or
she is discharged from the emergency room or admitted to the hospital.
            2.   If the individual is released from the emergency room, the
officer may proceed as described in divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)(2)(b) above. If
the individual is admitted to the hospital, the officer shall issue a citation
to the individual specifying a date for appearance before a judicial officer.
      (3)   (a)   Upon presentment before the proper judicial officer the law
enforcement officer shall serve as the chief complaining witness. The judicial
officer must make a finding that there is probative evidence that the
individual may be guilty of the charge of public intoxication. If such evidence
is not presented, the charge shall be dismissed and the individual released. If
sufficient evidence is presented, the judicial officer shall issue a warrant
and establish bail or issue a summons to the individual.
         (b)   Once a warrant or summons has been issued, the following actions
may be taken:
            1.   If the individual is no longer incapacitated, he or she may be
released;
            2.   If the individual is still incapacitated but a nonintoxicated
person is available to accept responsibility for him or her, he or she may be
released to the responsible person; or
            3.   If the individual is still incapacitated, and no responsible
person is available, the judicial officer shall proceed under the provisions of
W. Va. Code §§ 27-5-1 et seq. or 27-6A-1 et seq.
      (4)   Any law enforcement officer is hereby authorized and empowered to
arrest and hold custody, without a warrant, until complaint may be made before
a judicial officer and a warrant or summons issued, any person who in the
presence of the law enforcement officer violates any one or more of divisions
(B)(1)(a) through (B)(1)(f) above; provided, that the law enforcement officer
may use reasonable force to prevent harm to himself or herself, the individual
arrested or others in carrying out the provisions of this section.
   (C)   The definitions for all terms used in this section shall be the same
as those definitions being accepted by the West Virginia Legislature.
(Ord. passed 9-16-1983) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.10 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   It shall be unlawful to consume, partake, carry, distribute, sell or
purchase any alcoholic beverages, including wine and beer in and about the
roads, streets, avenues, sidewalks or crosswalks, or any other place where said
actions might be viewed by the general public.
(Ord. passed 5-5-1982) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
130.99.
   (B)   A violation of §
133.01 shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time or
confinement in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days or both fine
and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 9-105)
   (C)   A violation of §
133.02 shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time or
confinement in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days or both fine
and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 9-106)
   (D)    A violation of §
133.03 shall by punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days or both such
fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 9-107)
   (E)   A violation of §
132.04 shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time or
confinement in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days or both fine
and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 9-108)
   (F)   A violation of §
133.05 shall be punished by a fine set by Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 9-109)
   (G)   A violation of §
133.06 shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 9-110)
   (H)   A violation of §
133.07 shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time or by
confinement in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days or both such
fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 9-114)
   (I)   A violation of §
133.08 shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 9-115)
   (J)   (1)   Any person who violates §
133.09(B)(1) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be sentenced by a judicial officer in accordance with the following
options:
         (a)   Upon first offense, a fine set by Council from time to time and
not more than 30 days in jail or completion of an alcohol education program of
not more than six hours’ duration at the nearest community mental health
retardation center. If the individual, prior to conviction, agrees to
voluntarily attend the alcohol education program, the judicial officer may
delay sentencing until the program is completed and upon completion may dismiss
the charges;
         (b)   Upon conviction for a second offense a fine set by Council from
time to time and not more than 30 days in jail or completion of not less than
five hours of alcoholism counseling at the nearest community mental health/
mental retardation center; and
         (c)   Upon third and subsequent convictions, a fine set by Council
from time to time and not less than five nor more than 30 days in jail or a
fine set by Council from time to time and completion of not less than five
hours of alcoholism counseling at the nearest community mental health/mental
retardation center; provided, that three convictions for public intoxication
within the preceding six months shall be considered evidence of alcoholism;
provided, however, that for the education counseling programs described in this
division (J)(1)(c) the community mental health/mental retardation center may
charge each participant its usual and customary fee and shall certify in
writing to the referring judicial officer the completion or failure to complete
the prescribed program for each individual.
      (2)   A person charged with a violation of §
133.09(B)(1)(a) who is an alcoholic shall be found not guilty by reason of
addiction and proper disposition made pursuant to W. Va. Code §§ 27-5-1 et seq.
and 27-6A-1 et seq.
      (3)   Any person who violates §
133.09(B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c) or (B)(1)(d) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount set by Council from time to
time, or confined in jail not more than 30 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Any person who violates §
133.09(B)(1)(e) or (B)(1)(f) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction, shall be fined an amount set by Council from time to time, or
confined in jail not more than 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
      (4)   Any person who violates §
133.09(B)(1)(g) is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined as set by Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 8-1-1983; Ord. passed 9-16-1983)
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
134.01   Resisting arrest; interfere with officer
   
134.02   Impersonating government officer or employee
 
   
134.99   Penalty
§ 134.01 RESISTING ARREST; INTERFERE WITH OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to resist or in any way interfere with
or attempt to interfere with any police officer while the latter is in the
discharge or apparent discharge of his or her official duties.
(Prior Code, § 9-111) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
134.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 61-5-17
§ 134.02 IMPERSONATING GOVERNMENT OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
   No person other than an official police officer of the municipality shall
wear the uniform, apparel or badge or carry any identification card or other
insignia of office like or similar to or a colorable imitation of that adopted
and worn or carried by the official police officers of the municipality.
Furthermore, no person shall deceitfully impersonate or represent that he or
she is any other government officer or employee.
(Prior Code, § 9-112) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
130.99.
   (B)    A violation of §
134.01 shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time or
confinement in the county jail not to exceed 30 days or both such fine and
imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 9-111)
   (C)   A violation of §
134.02 shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time or
confinement in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days or both fine
and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 9-112)
(Ord. passed 8-1-1983)
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
135.01   Malicious mischief
   
135.02   Trespassing
   
135.03   Destruction of property
   
135.04   Littering
   
135.05   Anti-littering
 
   
135.99   Penalty
§ 135.01 MALICIOUS MISCHIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to
damage, deface, destroy, tamper with or remove or conceal any real or personal
property which does not belong to him or her.
(Prior Code, § 9-118) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
135.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code § 61-3-30
§ 135.02 TRESPASSING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person knowingly to enter in, upon or under
a structure or conveyance without being authorized, licensed or invited, or
having been, authorized, licensed or invited is requested by the owner, tenant
or the agent of such owner or tenant, and to refuse to do so. It shall further
be unlawful for any person who knowingly and without being authorized, licensed
or invited to enter or remain on any property, other than a structure or
conveyance, as to which notice against entering or remaining is either given by
actual communication to such person or by posting, fencing or cultivation.
   (B)   If the offender defies an order to leave, personally communicated to
him or her by the owner, tenant or agent of such owner or tenant, or if the
offender opens any door, fence or gate, and thereby exposes animals, crops or
other property to waste, destruction or freedom, or causes any damage to
property by such trespassing other than a structure or conveyance, he or she
shall be in violation of this division (B).
(Prior Code, § 9-119) (Ord. passed 8-1-1983) Penalty, see §
135.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see W. Va. Code §§ 61-3B-1 et seq.
§ 135.03 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the “Destruction of Property
Ordinance”.
   (B)   If any person unlawfully, but not feloniously, take and carry away, or
destroy, injure or deface any property, real or personal, not his or her own,
he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be in violation of this section.
(Ord. passed 9-4-1984) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.04 LITTERING.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the “Marlinton Town Littering
Ordinance”.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LITTER. All waste material including, but not limited to, any garbage,
refuse, trash, disposable package, container, can, bottle, paper, ashes,
cigarette or cigar butt, carcass of any dead animal or any part thereof, or any
other offensive or unsightly matter, but not including the wastes of primary
processes of mining, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
      LITTER RECEPTACLE. Those containers suitable for the depositing of litter
at each respective public area designated by the director’s regulations
promulgated pursuant to W. Va. Code § 22-15A-2(9).
      PUBLIC AREA. An area within the town, including public road and highway
rights-of-way, parks and recreation areas owned or controlled by this state or
any county thereof, or an area held open for unrestricted access by the general
public.
   (C)   Any person who places, deposits, dumps, or throws or causes to be
placed, deposited, dumped or thrown any litter as defined in this section, in
or upon any public or private highway, road, street or alley, or upon any
public park or other public property other than in such place as may be set
aside for such purpose by the governing body having charge thereof, is guilty
of a violation of this section.
   (D)   No portion of this section shall be construed to restrict a private
owner in the use of his or her own private property or to prohibit the disposal
of litter in any manner otherwise authorized by law.
   (E)   Any law enforcement officer who shall observe a person violating the
provisions of this section shall have a mandatory duty to arrest or otherwise
prosecute the violator to the limits provided.
(Ord. passed 10-7-1985) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.05 ANTI-LITTERING.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the “Marlinton Anti-Littering
Ordinance”.
   (B)   The Town Council finds that a problem exists in the town with respect
to the improper disposal of solid and liquid refuse. This creates health and
aesthetic problems in any town but particularly so in the center town of a
county-wide resort area. The Town Council deems it in the best interests of the
town to enact an ordinance defining the littering problem and exacting
penalties for the violation of the ordinance.
   (C)   From and after the effective date of the passage of this section, it
shall be a misdemeanor for a person within or without the town to dispose of
any solid or liquid waste on any public street, avenue, alley or other public
right-of-way or public property, or on any property not his or her own   within
the town.
   (D)   From and after the effective date of this section it shall be a
misdemeanor for any person to allow solid or liquid matter on their own
property to be carried off and be deposited on any street, avenue, alley or
other public right-of-way or other public property, or on other property not
his or her own, or to allow such liquid matter to flow onto any street, avenue,
alley or other public right-of-way or other public property or on any other
property not his or her own. The Town Council finds that public policy requires
a person to take such positive steps such as are necessary to confine any and
all solid and liquid waste to his or her own property.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1984) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
130.99.
   (B)    A violation of §
135.01 shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time or by
confinement in the county jail for a term not to exceed days or by both fine
and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 9-118)
   (C)   (1)   A violation of §
135.02(A) shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time.
      (2)   A violation of §
135.02(B) shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time or
confinement in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 9-119)
   (D)   A violation of §
135.03 shall be punishable by a fine set by Council from time to time, or
imprisoned in the county jail not more than 30 days, or both fined and
imprisoned.
   (E)   (1)   (a)   A violation of §
135.04 is a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount
set by Council from time to time, or imprisoned in the county jail not more
than 30 days, or sentenced to remove litter from any public highway, road,
street, alley or any other public park or property as designated by the court
for a total of not less than 30 hours under the supervision of the county
supervisor of the Department of Highways, or his or her designated agent, or of
the Mayor of the town.
         (b)   If any litter be thrown or cast from a motor vehicle, such
action is a prima facie evidence that the driver of such motor vehicle intended
to violate the provisions of §
135.04. If any litter be dumped or discharged from a motor vehicle, such action
is prima facie evidence that the owner and driver of such motor vehicle
intended to violate the provisions of §
135.04.
      (2)   Every person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to disposing of
litter in violation of §
135.04 shall pay the sum set by Council from time to time as costs for clean-
up, investigation and prosecution in such case, in addition to any other court
costs that the court is otherwise required by law to impose upon such convicted
person. The municipal court wherein such additional costs are imposed shall, on
or before the last day of each month, transmit all such costs received under
this division (E)(2) to the State Treasurer for deposit in the state treasury
to the credit of a special revenue fund known as the Litter Control Fund.
   (F)   (1)   The penalty for a violation of §
135.05(C) shall be a fine set by Council from time to time or confinement in
the county jail for a term not to exceed ten days or both such fine and
confinement. As an alternative to any fine or sentencing or both, the municipal
court may, with the consent of the person pleading guilty to a violation of §
135.05(C), or being found guilty of same, require such person to work for any
town crew in the town on any public project at the prevailing minimum wage. The
time spent by such person working for the town shall not be greater than the
number of hours equal to the fine divided by the prevailing minimum wage or the
time set for confinement, whichever is greater. The person pleading guilty or
being found guilty of a violation of §
135.05(C), in order to qualify for such alternate penalty, shall first sign a
release of liability form releasing the town from any and all liability from
all harm except from gross negligence or intentional harm.
      (2)   The penalty and alternate provisions of division (F)(1) above shall
apply equally to a violation of §
135.05(D).
(Ord. passed 8-1-1983; Ord. passed 4-17-1984; Ord. passed 9-4-1984; Ord. passed
10-7-1985)
CHAPTER 136: WEAPONS
Section
   
136.01   Weapons
   
136.02   Weapon discharge
 
   
136.99   Penalty
§ 136.01 WEAPONS.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the “Weapons and Firearms Ordinance of
the Town of Marlinton”.
   (B)   If any person, without a state license therefor, carry about his or
her person any revolver or pistol, dirk, bowie knife, slung shot, razor, billy,
metallic or other false knuckles, or other dangerous or deadly weapon of like
kind or character, he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.02 WEAPON DISCHARGE.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the “Weapon Discharge Ordinance”.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any
firearms, BB guns, pellet guns or pellet pistols, sling shots or gravel
shooters within the corporate limits of the town.
(Ord. passed 11-5-1984) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
130.99.
   (B)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
136.01, any person shall be confined in the county jail for a term not to
exceed 30 days and fined as set by Council from time to time.
   (C)   Any person violating §
136.02 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined as set by Council from time to time, or, in the discretion of
the court, may be imprisoned in the county jail not more than 30 days for each
offense. For the purpose of §
136.02, each discharge shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 10-1-1984; Ord. passed 11-5-1984)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
      
152.   FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
In General
   
150.001   Title
   
150.002   Adoption of State Building Code
Technical Codes
   
150.015   Definitions
   
150.016   Adoption
   
150.017   Conflicts
Building and Structures
   
150.030   Violations; injunctive relief upon violation
   
150.031   Adopted; purpose
   
150.032   Scope
   
150.033   Code remedial
   
150.034   Matters not provided for
   
150.035   Continuation of unlawful use
   
150.036   Ordinary repairs; general
   
150.037   Installation of service equipment
   
150.038   Maintenance
   
150.039   Owner responsibility
   
150.040   Continuation of existing use
   
150.041   Change in use
   
150.042   Minimum setback requirements
Existing Structures
   
150.055   Application
The Building Inspector
   
150.070   Office of building inspector; established; appointment and general
powers and duties of building inspector; delegation of authority
   
150.071   Specific powers and duties
   
150.072   Duty of other officers to cooperate
   
150.073   Official records
   
150.074   Additional duties and powers of building inspector; general
   
150.075   Application and permits
   
150.076   Building notices and orders
   
150.077   Inspections
   
150.078   Department records
   
150.079   Approved materials and equipment
   
150.080   Preliminary inspection
   
150.081   Required inspections
   
150.082   Final inspection
   
150.083   Right of entry
   
150.084   When permit is required
   
150.085   Form of application
   
150.086   By whom application is made
   
150.087   Description of work
   
150.088   Amendments to application
   
150.089   Action on application
   
150.090   Suspension of permit
   
150.091   Signature to permit
   
150.092   Approved plans
   
150.093   Revocation of permits
   
150.094   Posting of permit
   
150.095   Payment of fees
   
150.096   Compliance with permit
   
150.097   Compliance with permit
   
150.098   Demolition of structures; service connections
   
150.099   Notice to adjoining owners
   
150.100   Lot regulation
   
150.101   Moved structures
   
150.102   Fees
   
150.103   New construction, mobile homes and prefabricated homes and
alterations
   
150.104   Moving of buildings
   
150.105   Demolition
   
150.106   Signs
Rental Unit Maintenance
   
150.120   Certificate of use and occupancy
   
150.121   Purpose
   
150.122   Scope
   
150.123   Definitions
   
150.124   Illegal conditions
   
150.125   Application for certificate of use and occupancy
   
150.126   Fees and conditions
   
150.127   Inspection procedure
   
150.128   Violations
   
150.129   Notices and orders
   
150.130   Appeals
Construction and Alteration
   
150.145   Buildings hereafter altered
   
150.146   Existing buildings
   
150.147   Contents of certificate
   
150.148   Notice of violation
   
150.149   Prosecution of violation
   
150.150   Violation penalties
   
150.151   Abatement of violation
   
150.152   Stop work order
   
150.153   Unlawful continuance
Dangerous or Unhealthy Structures
   
150.165   Scope
   
150.166   Definitions
   
150.167   Inspections
   
150.168   Repair, closing, demolition of unsafe structures
   
150.169   Hearings
   
150.170   Enforcement orders; violations
Plumbing Code
   
150.185   Adopted; purpose; where filed; short title; effective date
   
150.186   Permit fees
Electrical Code
   
150.200   Adopted; purpose; applicability; where filed; short title; effective
date
   
150.201   Permit fees
Building Maintenance Board/Powers
   
150.215   Purpose
   
150.216   Building Maintenance Board
   
150.217   Authority to enter premises
   
150.218   Liability if violator to town for abatement of nuisances and the like
Vacant Structures
   
150.230   Adoption
   
150.231   Purpose
   
150.232   Definitions
   
150.233   Standards
   
150.234   Applicability
   
150.235   Inspections
   
150.236   Corrective action
   
150.237   Registration generally
   
150.238   Right of appeal
   
150.239   Amending information
   
150.240   Reinspection
   
150.241   Non-payment of fees/liens
   
150.242   Relation to other codes and laws
Recreational Vehicles and Tents
   
150.255   Use of recreational vehicles and tents as dwelling prohibited
 
   
150.999   Penalty
IN GENERAL
§ 150.001 TITLE.
   This Town of Marlinton building chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority
granted to the town under W. Va. Code § 8-12-16.
(Prior Code, § 4-101) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.002 ADOPTION OF STATE BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   The town on February 6, 2012 adopted the State Building Code, as
amended as the town’s building code. This chapter has been adopted to
supplement and localize the State Building Code, as amended and adopted in the
2022 State Building Code. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to
abrogate any provision of the 2022 State Building Code and should any provision
of this chapter be found in conflict with this chapter, the 2022 State Building
Code shall control. The 2022 State Building Code is made a part of this chapter
as if set out herein verbatim.
   (B)   A copy of the 2022 State Building Code shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the Mayor of the town during normal business hours.
(Prior Code, § 4-102) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017; Ord. passed 7-25-2022)
TECHNICAL CODES
§ 150.015 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Specific. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      TECHNICAL CODE. As used in this chapter, shall mean any building code,
plumbing code, electrical code or any other code adopted by ordinance to be
applicable within the town.
   (B)   Other definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BUILDING OFFICIAL. The building inspector or his or her authorized
representative.
      CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR. The Mayor of the Town of Marlinton, West Virginia.
      CHIEF APPOINTING AUTHORITY. The Mayor, with the approval of the Town
Council when such approval is required.
      ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR. The building inspector or other authorized
representative.
      LEGAL DEPARTMENT. The Town Attorney.
      LOCAL GOVERNING BODY. The Mayor and Town Council.
      MUNICIPALITY. The Town of Marlinton.
      PLUMBING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT. The office of the building inspector or
authorized representative.
      PLUMBING OFFICIAL. The building inspector or authorized representative.
(Prior Code, § 4-201) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.016 ADOPTION.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by reference for the purpose of establishing
rules and regulations, the 2022 State Building Code as promulgated by the West
Virginia State Fire Commission, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling
within the corporate limits of the town. A copy of such will be available in
the town offices and available for public inspection during regular business
hours.
   (B)   The standards and requirements set out by the International Code
Council and American Standards Institute, as listed below, shall have the same
force and effect as if set out verbatim herein (except that any and all
references to the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code).
   (C)   There is hereby adopted the following codes:
      (1)   The International Building Code, Edition, 2015;
      (2)   The International Plumbing Code, Edition, 2015;
      (3)   The International Mechanical Code, Edition, 2015;
      (4)   The International Property Maintenance Code, Edition, 2015;
      (5)   The International Residential Code, Edition, 2015;
      (6)   The ICC/ANSI Standards for Accessibility and Usable Buildings and
Facilities, Edition, 2009;
      (7)   The International Existing Building Code, Edition, 2015; and
      (8)   The National Electrical Code, Edition, 2014.
(Prior Code, § 4-202) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017; Ord. passed 7-25-2022)
§ 150.017 CONFLICTS.
   (A)   Whenever there arises a conflict between the State Fire Code and the
State Building Code, the State Fire Code shall take precedence.
   (B)   Whenever there arises a conflict between the International Plumbing
Code portion of the State Building Code and the rules of the West Virginia
Department of Health and Human Resources, the rules of the West Virginia
Department of Health and Human Resources shall take precedence.
   (C)   Whenever there arises a conflict between the State Building Code and
the West Virginia Code, the West Virginia Code shall take precedence.
   (D)   In the event that any portion of the State Building Code conflicts
with any provision of the National Electrical Code, and such provision relates
to electrical work, the applicable provisions of the National Electrical Code
shall take precedence.
(Prior Code, § 4-203) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
BUILDING AND STRUCTURES
§ 150.030 VIOLATIONS; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF UPON VIOLATION.
   (A)   Violations. It shall be a violation of this chapter of the town for
any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, remove,
demolish, maintain, fail to maintain, provide, fail to provide, occupy, let to
another to occupy or permit another person to occupy any premises, property,
structure or equipment regulated by the town, or cause same to be done contrary
to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the
ordinances of the town and any of the technical codes adopted by the town, or
fail to obey a lawful order of the building inspector, or to remove or deface a
placard or notice posted or issued by the building inspector.
   (B)   Injunction. In the case of any revisions, the Mayor or such person as
the Mayor may designate is hereby authorized and empowered to institute and
maintain a suit to restrain by injunction the violation of the ordinances of
the town or any technical code notwithstanding the penalty for the violation
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 4-301) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.031 ADOPTED; PURPOSE.
   There is hereby adopted by the town, for the purpose of providing additional
safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the
construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of
buildings, structures or premises, that certain code known as the town’s
Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 4-302) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.032 SCOPE.
   These regulations shall control all matters concerning the construction,
alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and
maintenance of all buildings and structures in the town; except as such matters
are otherwise provided for in other ordinances or statutes.
(Prior Code, § 4-303) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.033 CODE REMEDIAL.
   This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to
ensure public safety, health and welfare insofar as they are affected by
building construction through structural strength, adequate egress facilities,
sanitary equipment, light and ventilation, and in general, to secure safety to
life and property from all hazards incident to the design, erection, repair,
removal, demolition or use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises.
(Prior Code, § 4-304) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.034 MATTERS NOT PROVIDED FOR.
   Any requirement essential for structural, fire or sanitary safety of an
existing or proposed building or structure, or essential for the safety of the
occupants thereof, and which is not specifically covered by any ordinances of
the town or any technical code, shall be determined by the building inspector.
(Prior Code, § 4-305) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.035 CONTINUATION OF UNLAWFUL USE.
   The continuation of occupancy or use of a building or structure, or any part
thereof, contrary to the ordinances of the town or any technical code, shall be
deemed a violation and subject to the penalties prescribed hereunder and each
day such conditions is allowed to continue and shall constitute a separate
violation of this code.
(Prior Code, § 4-306) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.036 ORDINARY REPAIRS; GENERAL.
   Ordinary repairs to structures may be made without application or notice to
the building inspector; but such repairs shall not include the cutting away of
any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any
structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any required
means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway
requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of,
replacement or relocation of any stand pipe, water supply, sewer, drainage,
drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electrical wiring or
mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
(Prior Code, § 4-307) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.037 INSTALLATION OF SERVICE EQUIPMENT.
   When the installation, extension, alteration or repair of an elevator,
moving stairway, mechanical equipment, refrigeration, air conditioning or
ventilating apparatus, plumbing, gas piping, electric wiring, heating system or
any other equipment, it shall be unlawful to use such equipment until a
certificate of approval has been issued therefor by the building inspector.
(Prior Code, § 4-308) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.038 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All buildings and structures and all parts thereof, both existing and
new, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.
   (B)   All service equipment, means of egress, devices and safety guards
which are required in a building or structure, shall be maintained in good
working order.
(Prior Code, § 4-309) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.039 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner of any building or structure shall be responsible for the safe and
sanitary maintenance of the building or structure and its exitways at all
times.
(Prior Code, § 4-310) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.040 CONTINUATION OF EXISTING USE.
   The legal use and occupancy of any structure existing as of the date of
adoption of this chapter or for which it had been heretofore approved, may be
continued without change, except as may be specifically deemed necessary by the
building inspector for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the
public.
(Prior Code, § 4-311) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.041 CHANGE IN USE.
   It shall be unlawful to make any changes in the use or occupancy of any
building or structure without approval of the building inspector, and
certification that such a structure meets the provisions of the ordinances of
the town governing building construction for the proposed new use and
occupancy, and that such change does not result in any hazard to public safety
or welfare.
(Prior Code, § 4-312) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.042 MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BUILDING. Any dwelling, garage, storage building or other structure in
excess of 100 square feet.
      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line establishing the minimum allowable distance
between the nearest part of any building, including decks, patios, covered
porches, steps and landings exceeding 24 square feet, but excluding eaves,
overhangs, bay windows, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features
not exceeding two feet in width, to the nearest edge of a street right-of-way,
property line or easement line, when measured perpendicular thereto.
   (B)   Minimum building setback line.
      (1)   The minimum building setback line for all buildings located in a
business or commercial district shall be five feet.
      (2)   The minimum building setback line for all buildings located in the
residential district shall be ten feet.
   (C)   Existing buildings. The Town Council recognizes that many existing
buildings within the town do not currently meet the minimum building setback
line requirements set forth herein. In the event of the demolition, destruction
or removal of an existing building, a replacement building may be erected using
the setback lines that existed at the time of the enactment hereof; provided,
that said replacement building must meet all other applicable building code and
floodplain requirements.
   (D)   Injunction.
      (1)   The Town Council or any designated enforcement official may seek an
injunction in the circuit court of the county to restrain the owner, tenant,
occupant, other person or persons responsible, from violating the provision of
this section or any rule, regulation or requirement adopted or established
hereunder.
      (2)   The Town Council or any designated enforcement official may also
seek a mandatory injunction in the circuit court of the county, directing the
owner, tenant, occupant, other persons or persons responsible to remove a
structure erected in violation of the provisions of this section or rule,
regulation or requirement adopted or established hereunder.
      (3)   If the Town Council or any designated enforcement official is
successful in any suit brought under this section, the respondent shall bear
the costs of the action.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2025) Penalty, see § 150.99
EXISTING STRUCTURES
§ 150.055 APPLICATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, existing structures, when altered or
repaired as herein specified, shall be made to conform to the full requirements
for new buildings or structures.
(Prior Code, § 4-313) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
THE BUILDING INSPECTOR
§ 150.070 OFFICE OF BUILDING INSPECTOR; ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT AND GENERAL
POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR; DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The office of building inspector is hereby established, which shall be
headed by the building inspector and shall have such other personnel as may
from time to time be authorized by the Town Council.
   (B)   The building inspector shall be appointed or designated by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Town Council, and shall have the powers and
perform the duties prescribed for the office by this title and all other
ordinances, resolutions or orders of the Town Council, and as prescribed by the
West Virginia Code for municipal officers charged with the administration and
enforcement of building, plumbing, gas, electrical and other technical codes
which municipalities are authorized to adopt pursuant to state law.
   (C)   The building inspector may delegate powers to and require performance
of duties by such deputies, assistants and other personnel as may from time to
time be assigned or detailed by the Mayor and Town Council.
   (D)   For all purposes under all technical codes adopted by the Town of
Marlinton and all other ordinances of the Town of Marlinton, the building
inspector shall be the responsible “building official”, “code official” or such
other designation for such officer as used within such, technical codes or
ordinances of the town. The building inspector shall be vested with all
authority, duty and responsibility permitted and authorized by all technical
codes and other ordinances of the town and to the full extent of the licenses
and certificates possessed by the building inspector.
(Prior Code, § 4-401) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.071 SPECIFIC POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The building inspector or authorized representative shall receive all
applications required to be submitted to the town. The building inspector shall
make or cause to be made all inspections required to be made; and issue all
permits and certificates required to be issued by the town by this code and by
all technical codes adopted by the town. The building inspector shall examine
premises for which permits have been issued and make necessary inspections to
see that the provisions of law and ordinances of the town are complied with and
that construction and other work is safely prosecuted. The building inspector
shall enforce all provisions of all technical codes adopted by the town. The
building inspector shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the
public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with matters
referred to in the provisions of the town and the technical codes and render
written reports thereon. To enforce compliance with law and ordinances of the
town, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary
safeguards during construction, or to require adequate exit facilities in
building and structures, he or she shall issue such notices or orders as may be
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this title and all other ordinances of
the town and technical codes adopted by the town.
   (B)   Inspections required under the provisions of this code and all
technical codes adopted by the town shall be made by the building inspector or
duly authorized agents. The building inspector may accept reports of inspectors
of recognized inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications
and reliability. No certificate called for by any provision of any ordinance or
technical codes shall be issued on such reports unless they are in writing and
certified by a responsible officer of such service.
   (C)   The building inspector shall keep comprehensive records of
applications, or permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made,
of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. The building inspector
shall retain on file copies of required plans and all documents relating to
construction work so long as any part of the building or structure to which
they relate may be in existence.
   (D)   All such records shall be open to public inspection during normal
business hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the building
inspector, however the building inspector shall have photo copies available to
any citizen who may request same.
   (E)   The building inspector shall make written reports to the Mayor once
each month, or more often if requested, including statements of permits and
certificates, and orders issued.
   (F)   The building inspector shall create and prescribe forms of all
notices, orders, inspections, reports and any other document necessary to
perform the duties hereunder in the enforcement of the ordinances of the town,
building codes and all technical codes. Such forms shall be open to public
inspection during normal business hours.
   (G)   When in the discharge of the building inspector’s duties, the building
inspector exercising professional judgement determines that any violation(s) or
deviation(s) of this code or any technical code should not result in a formal
notice or order, the building inspector may exercise professional discretion
and is authorized to issue a warning. Any warning so issued shall describe the
violation(s) or deviation(s) and shall specify a time within which such
violation(s) or deviation(s) shall be remedied, such time period not to exceed
ten calendar days and further notify the owner or responsible person that
failure to comply therewith will result in the issuance of a notice or order
and a fine.
(Prior Code, § 4-402) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.072 DUTY OF OTHER OFFICERS TO COOPERATE.
   The building inspector may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and cooperation
of other town officers and employees.
(Prior Code, § 4-403) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.073 OFFICIAL RECORDS.
   An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the
building inspector specified in ordinances of the town and all technical codes
adopted by the town, and all such records shall be open to public inspection
during regular business hours.
(Prior Code, § 4-404) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.074 ADDITIONAL DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING INSPECTOR; GENERAL.
   The building inspector shall enforce all the provisions of the ordinances of
the town and all technical codes and shall act on any question relative to the
mode or manner of construction and the materials to be used in the erection,
addition to, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, installation of service
equipment, and the location, use, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings
and structures.
(Prior Code, § 4-405) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.075 APPLICATION AND PERMITS.
   The building inspector shall receive applications and issue permits for all
construction and alteration of buildings and structures and inspect the
premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with
the ordinances of the town and all technical codes adopted by the town.
(Prior Code, § 4-406) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.076 BUILDING NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   The Building inspector shall issue all necessary notices or orders to remove
illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the necessary safeguards during
construction, to require adequate exit ways in existing buildings and
structures, and to ensure compliance with all ordinances of the town and all
technical codes adopted by the town for the safety, health and general welfare
of the public.
(Prior Code, § 4-407) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.077 INSPECTIONS.
   The building inspector shall make all the required inspections, or may
accept reports of inspection by authoritative and recognized services or
individuals; and all reports of such authoritative service or individuals; or
the building inspector may engage such expert as may be deemed necessary to
investigate and report upon unusual technical issues that may arise, subject to
approval of the Mayor and any additional costs incurred by the town for such
unusual technical issue shall be paid by the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 4-408) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.078 DEPARTMENT RECORDS.
   The building inspector shall keep official records of applications received,
permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections,
warnings notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the
official records as long as the building or structure to which they relate
remains in existence unless otherwise provided by ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 4-409) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.079 APPROVED MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
   All materials, equipment and devices approved for use by the building
inspector shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
(Prior Code, § 4-410) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.080 PRELIMINARY INSPECTION.
   Before issuing a permit, the building inspector may examine or cause to be
examined all buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been
filed for a permit to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, demolish or
change the use thereof.
(Prior Code, § 4-411) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.081 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
   After issuing a building permit the building inspector shall conduct such
inspections from time to time during construction and upon completion of the
work for which a permit was issued; and shall maintain a record of all such
examinations and inspections and of any and all violations.
(Prior Code, § 4-412) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.082 FINAL INSPECTION.
   Upon completion of the building or structure, and before issuance of a
certificate of use and occupancy a final inspection shall be made, any
violation of the approved plans and permit shall be noted and the holder of the
permit shall be notified of the discrepancies and given an appropriate period
of time to remedy and comply with the permit issued, not to exceed 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 4-413) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.083 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   In the discharge of these duties, the building inspector or authorized
representative shall have the authority to enter at any reasonable hour any
buildings, structures or premises in the town.
(Prior Code, § 4-414) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.084 WHEN PERMIT IS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to construct, enlarge, alter or demolish a structure;
or change the occupancy of a building or structure, exitway or sanitary
provisions; or to change to another use; or to install or alter any equipment
for which provision is made or the installation of which is regulated by
ordinances of the town and all technical codes adopted by the town, without
first filing an application with the building inspector in writing and
obtaining the required permit therefor; except that ordinary repairs, shall be
exempt from the need for a permit. Such permit must be issued prior to the
commencement of any work upon the building or structure. Failure to comply with
this section shall subject the owner a fine as set forth in this code.
(Prior Code, § 4-415) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.085 FORM OF APPLICATION.
   The application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the building
inspector may prescribe and shall be accompanied by the required fee.
(Prior Code, § 4-416) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.086 BY WHOM APPLICATION IS MADE.
   Application for a permit shall be made by the owner of the building or
structure, or the owner’s agent, or by the licensed engineer or architect
employed in connection with the proposed work. If the application is made by a
person other than the owner, it shall be accompanied by a duly verified
affidavit of the owner or the qualified person making the application that the
proposed work is authorized by the owner and that the applicant is authorized
to make such application. The full names and addresses of the owner, applicant
and of the responsible officer, if the owner or lessee is a corporation, shall
be stated in the application.
(Prior Code, § 4-417) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.087 DESCRIPTION OF WORK.
   The application shall contain a general description of the proposed work,
its location, the use and occupancy of all parts of the building or structure
and of all portions of the site or lot not covered by the building or
structure, and such additional information as may be required by the building
inspector. Two sets of plans for the construction shall be submitted with the
application.
(Prior Code, § 4-418) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.088 AMENDMENTS TO APPLICATION.
   Amendments to any application or other record accompanying the same may be
filed at any time before the completion of the work for which the permit is
sought or issued; and such amendments shall be deemed part of the original
application and shall be filed therewith. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
building inspector shall act promptly on any and all such amendments and render
a decision in writing, within ten calendar days of the filing thereof.
(Prior Code, § 4-419) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.089 ACTION ON APPLICATION.
   The building inspector shall examine or cause to be examined all
applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after
filing not to exceed five calendar days. If the application or the plans do not
conform to the requirements of all technical codes adopted by the town and
ordinances of the town such application shall be rejected in writing, stating
the reasons therefor. If satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of all codes and ordinances applicable thereto, the building
inspector shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable, not to exceed
ten calendar days from the date of filing.
(Prior Code, § 4-420) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.090 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not
commenced within six months after issuance of the permit, or if the authorized
work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the
commencement of work.
(Prior Code, § 4-421) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.091 SIGNATURE TO PERMIT.
   The building inspector shall sign every permit, order or notice issued under
all technical codes and ordinances of the town; or may authorize a subordinate
to affix such a signature thereto.
(Prior Code, § 4-422) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.092 APPROVED PLANS.
   The building inspector shall stamp or endorse in writing both sets of plans
“APPROVED” and one set of such approved plans shall be retained by the building
inspector and the other set shall be kept at the construction site, open to
inspection of the building inspector or authorized representative at all times.
(Prior Code, § 4-423) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.093 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   The building inspector may revoke a permit or approval issued in the case of
any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or plans on
which the permit or approval was based.
(Prior Code, § 4-424) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.094 POSTING OF PERMIT.
   A true copy of the building permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location
on the construction site for public inspection during the entire time of
prosecution of the work and until removed by the building inspector.
(Prior Code, § 4-425) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.095 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   A permit shall not be issued until all fees have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 4-426) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.096 COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT.
   The permit shall be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be
construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions of
this code, any technical code adopted by the town or other ordinance, except as
specifically stipulated by modification or legally granted variation as
described in the application and permit.
(Prior Code, § 4-427) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.097 COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT.
   All work shall conform to the approved application and plans for which the
permit has been issued and any approved amendments thereto. Any deviation
therefore shall subject the owner to a fine as set forth in this code.
(Prior Code, § 4-428) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.098 DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES; SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   Before a structure can be demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall
notify all utilities having service connections within the structure such as
water, electric, gas, sewer and any other connection. A permit to demolish or
remove a structure shall not be issued until the owner shall obtain a written
statement from all utilities, that their respective service connections and
appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators, have been removed or
sealed and plugged.
(Prior Code, § 4-429) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.099 NOTICE TO ADJOINING OWNERS.
   Only when written notice has been given by the applicant to all owners of
all adjoining lots of the applicants intent to demolish a structure such that
adjoining lot owners may experience a temporary interruption of utility
services necessitated by the proposed work, shall a permit be granted for the
removal of a building or structure. Proof of compliance herewith shall be by
certified mail receipt or sworn affidavit or other proof acceptable to the
building inspector.
(Prior Code, § 4-430) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.100 LOT REGULATION.
   Whenever a structure is demolished or removed, the premises shall be
maintained free from all unsafe or hazardous conditions.
(Prior Code, § 4-431) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.101 MOVED STRUCTURES.
   Buildings and structures moved into or within the town shall comply with all
of the provisions of, all technical codes adopted by the town and ordinances
relating to new buildings and structures.
(Prior Code, § 4-432) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.102 FEES.
   The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or
demolition and for work done in connection with or concurrently with the work
contemplated by a building permit, shall not relieve the applicant or holder of
the permit from the payment of any other fees that may be prescribed by law or
ordinance for water taps, sewer connections, electrical permits, fees for signs
and display structures, or other appurtenant structures, or fees for
inspections, certifications of use and occupancy or other privileges or
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 4-433) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.103 NEW CONSTRUCTION, MOBILE HOMES AND PREFABRICATED HOMES AND
ALTERATIONS.
   The fee for a building permit shall be $25 base fee plus $5 per $1,000 of
value (or any portion thereof).
(Prior Code, § 4-434) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.104 MOVING OF BUILDINGS.
   The fee for a building permit for the moving of a building or structure into
the town or from one lot to another within the town or to a new location on the
same lot shall be $25.
(Prior Code, § 4-435) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.105 DEMOLITION.
   The fee for a permit for the demolition of a building or structure shall be
$25.
(Prior Code, § 4-436) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.106 SIGNS.
   The fee for signs, billboards and other display structures for which permits
are required shall be paid consistent with the provisions of the town’s sign
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 4-437) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
RENTAL UNIT MAINTENANCE
§ 150.120 CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY.
   A building or structure intended to be used for rental housing shall not be
used nor occupied in whole or in part until a certificate of use and occupancy
has been issued by the building inspector.
(Prior Code, § 4-501) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.121 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter shall be is to promote health and safety
standards for rental housing and to secure and preserve the integrity and
character of residential districts within the town. These standards relate to
the condition, maintenance and occupancy of rental dwelling units and are
intended to ensure that rental housing is safe, sanitary and suitable in
accordance with applicable provisions of the State Building Code, the
International Property Maintenance code, and all codes and other ordinances
adopted by the town.
(Prior Code, § 4-502) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.122 SCOPE.
   This subchapter applies to all rental dwelling units within the town. This
subchapter shall not apply to owner occupied dwellings wherein roomers or
boarders are maintained in common living areas nor to hotels, motels,
dormitories, bed and breakfast establishments or other transient residential
units.
(Prior Code, § 4-503) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.123 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY. The certificate issued by the building
inspector which permits the use of a building and which certifies compliance
with the provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the building in its
several parts together with any special stipulations or conditions.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The building inspector charged with the administration and
enforcement of the ordinances and technical codes adopted by the Town of
Marlinton, or a duly authorized agent.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   OWNER OCCUPIED. Occupied by the actual property owner or by any person or
persons related thereto by blood, marriage or adoption and where no rent is
paid.
   RENTAL DWELLING UNIT. Any dwelling unit, which is offered in whole or part
for residential purposes and for which rent is paid.
(Prior Code, § 4-504) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.124 ILLEGAL CONDITIONS.
   An owner or operator shall not rent or offer for rent any dwelling unit for
use in whole or in part for human habitation unless a written application for a
certificate of use and occupancy has been filed for such dwelling unit and a
valid certificate of use and occupancy has been issued for such dwelling unit
by the building inspector certifying that an inspection found the premises to
be in compliance with this and all applicable ordinance of the town, the State
Building Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, and all technical
codes adopted by the town.
(Prior Code, § 4-505) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.125 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Generally. The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to
create and maintain such applications, forms, guidelines, inspection sheets,
notices, orders and such other documents needful and necessary to perform the
duties under all applicable ordinances of the town.
   (B)   Initial application. Application for a certificate of use and
occupancy for a rental dwelling unit where none has previously been issued
shall be filed prior to occupancy of any rental dwelling unit.
   (C)   Renewal application. An application for renewal of an existing
certificate of use and occupancy shall be filed at least 30 calendar days
before the expiration date of an existing certificate of use and occupancy.
   (D)   Initial applications. Initial applications upon passage of ordinance
an applications for a certificate of use and occupancy for any and all rental
dwelling units in existence upon passage of this chapter shall be filed within
90 calendar days from the date of passage of this and all related ordinances.
The building inspector shall cause to be published a Class II legal
advertisement in the Pocahontas Times stating the date of passage and the
deadline for filing.
(Prior Code, § 4-506) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.126 FEES AND CONDITIONS.
   The Town Council shall establish a fee schedule for inspections,
cancellations, re-inspections and application fees. The same shall be provided
for the building inspector and are to be posted in the office of the building
inspector. No permit shall be issued before any and all fees have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 4-507) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.127 INSPECTION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Once a properly executed application is filed and all fees paid
therefore, the building inspector shall conduct a full and complete inspection
of the subject unit within ten calendar days of filing. The owner or the
owner’s agent shall accompany the building inspector and provide access to any
and all areas of the building or structure for inspection.
   (B)   If, after inspection, any dwelling unit found to conform to all
requirements therefore, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of use
and occupancy within ten calendar days. Such certificate shall be valid for two
calendar years from the date of issue, unless sooner revoked.
   (C)   A certificate of use and occupancy issued for any unit shall be
transferrable upon sale of such unit. Such certificate must be posted within
the dwelling unit in a conspicuous location.
(Prior Code, § 4-508) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.128 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Upon inspection, the discovery of any violations and/or deviations of
any applicable technical code, State Building Code or any ordinance of the
town, that do not involve habitability nor safety, the building inspector shall
issue a notice of violation which shall provide the owner a specific period of
time no to exceed 30 calendar days to correct the same; however, such shall not
constitute grounds to refuse nor withhold, a certificate of use and occupancy
for such unit. However, in any proceeding to enforce this chapter, any
technical code adopted by the town, or the building code of the town and any
notice of violation where the owner has failed or refused to correct same and
comply such violations may be used to remove any certificate of use or
occupancy issued for any unit.
   (B)   Upon inspection, the discovery of violations and/or deviations of any
applicable technical code adopted by the town, State Building Code or any
ordinance of the town, such that habitability is or may be affected but such do
not pose an imminent hazard, the building inspector shall issue a notice of
violation which shall require the owner a specific period of time, not to
exceed 30 calendar days, to correct all such violations and/or deviations and
the building inspector shall issue a conditional certificate of use and
occupancy to the owner. In the event that the owner fails or refuses to correct
all violations and/or deviations within the specified time period, such
conditional certificate of use and occupancy shall be immediately revoked and
the building inspector shall issue an order to vacate. From and after the
revocation of the conditional certificate of use and occupancy and the order to
vacate continued human habitation of the rental unit shall be prohibited. Each
day thereafter wherein human habitation occurs shall constitute a separate
violation.
   (C)   The building inspector may upon written request of the owner of any
rental unit, extend the period of compliance with any notice of violation
issued by the building inspector where in the professional opinion of the
building inspector good cause exists for the delay in compliance and there
exists no immediate threat to the health or safety of any occupants of the
rental unit or the building or structure but shall not exceed an additional 30
calendar days. In such case, the building inspector shall issue a conditional
certificate of use and occupancy and an amended notice of violation providing
the future time period to correct any violation and/or deficiency the building
inspector deems appropriate.
   (D)   Upon inspection, the discovery of any violation and/or deviation from
any applicable technical code adopted by the town, State Building Code or any
ordinance of the town which in the professional opinion of the building
inspector constitutes good cause to withhold or revoke any certificate of use
and occupancy the building inspector shall immediately issue an order to
vacate. Further, upon inspection, the discovery of any violations and/or
deviations which in the professional opinion of the building inspector pose an
immediate threat to the health or safety of the occupants of a rental unit or
the building or structure, the building inspector shall issue an order of
immediate vacation of the rental unit or the building or the structure, as the
case may require. Any occupancy in violation of the order to vacate shall
subject the owner and/or occupants to the penalties provided under this chapter
and each day such occurs shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-509) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.129 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   (A)   Notice of violation. Whenever in the professional opinion of the
building inspector a notice of violation should be issued, the same shall be in
writing, on a form promulgated by the building inspector and shall include, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The application number to which the notice relates;
      (2)   The owner’s name as shown on the application;
      (3)   The description of the rental dwelling unit as shown on the
application;
      (4)   A clear statement of the reasons for the issuance of the notice;
      (5)   The code violation found;
      (6)   The remedial action necessary for compliance;
      (7)   A specific time period and date for compliance;
      (8)   Statement of the owner’s right of appeal; and
      (9)   Such notice shall be signed and dated by the building inspector.
   (B)   Service of notice. Any notice of violation issued under the authority
of the building inspector shall be personally delivered to the owner or posted
on the front door of the rental unit to which it applies, such delivery or
posting shall have the same effect as personal service and notice upon the
owner.
   (C)   Order of revocation or order of denial of a certificate of use and
occupancy. Whenever in the professional opinion of the building inspector an
order of revocation of a certificate of use and occupancy should be issued or
an order of denial of a certificate of use and occupancy should be issued, the
same shall be in writing, on a form promulgated by the building inspector and
shall include all of the information required to be included in a notice of
violation and shall also contain a clear and concise statement setting forth
all reasons and bases for the issuance of the order.
   (D)   Order to vacate. Whenever in the professional opinion of the building
inspector an order to vacate should be issued, the same shall be in writing, on
a form promulgated by the building inspector and shall include all the
information required to be included in a notice of violation and shall also
contain a clear and concise statement setting forth all reasons and bases for
the issuance of the order and the specific facts and violations found by the
building inspector which in the professional opinion of the building inspector
pose an immediate threat to the health and safety of the occupants of the
rental unit or the building or structure.
   (E)   Conditional certificate of use and occupancy. Whenever in the
professional opinion of the building inspector violations and/or deviations of
any applicable technical code adopted by the town, State Building Code or any
ordinance of the town exist in a rental unit and/or building or structure but
such violations and/or deviations do not pose an immediate threat to the health
and safety of the occupants thereof such that the building inspector issues a
conditional certificate of use and occupancy such conditional certificate shall
state upon its face that such certificate is “Conditional” and shall state the
violations and/or deviations found; and shall state the date of expiration
thereof. In the event such violations and/or deviations are not remedied prior
to the expiration date thereof, upon expiration thereof, the building inspector
shall issue an order to vacate and the owner of such rental unit shall cause
the unite and/or building or structure to be immediately vacated and shall be
required to commence the application process anew as if no certificate of use
and occupancy had ever been issued.
(Prior Code, § 4-510) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.130 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any owner of any rental unit or building or structure shall have an
absolute right of appeal from any decision, notice or order of the building
inspector.
   (B)   Such appeal shall be to the town’s Building Maintenance Board as
created by the town ordinances and such appeal shall be in writing and set out
therein all information regarding the rental unit, building or structure; all
information regarding the inspection and challenged decision of the building
inspector; and the basis for such appeal. The building inspector shall provide
a form for such appeal.
   (C)   Any appeal must be filed in the office of the Mayor within 20 calendar
days of the action by the building inspector appealed.
   (D)   In all cases the Building Maintenance Board shall convene upon said
appeal within 30 calendar days of the filing of any appeal unless the owner
requests an expedited appeal and sets forth good cause for an expedited appeal
in which case the Building Maintenance Board shall convene within 15 calendar
days after the filing of such appeal.
   (E)   The owner shall be given notice by regular United States mail as to
the date and time of the convening of the Building Maintenance Board and such
owner shall attend in person and may have legal counsel to present the owner’s
appeal. The owner may call witnesses and present testimony and evidence, under
oath.
   (F)   The Town Attorney shall represent the town at such hearing and shall
present evidence and testimony on behalf of the town.
   (G)   Upon conclusion of the proceedings the Building Maintenance Board
shall deliberate and return a decision upon the appeal. Such decision of the
Building Maintenance Board shall be final unless either party, the owner or the
town, shall obtain an order from the circuit court of the county reversing the
decision of the Building Maintenance Board.
   (H)   The filing of an appeal shall not stay any order or notice of the
building inspector but such appeal shall stay the enforcement of any monetary
penalties assessed, until the final decision of the Building Maintenance Board
is rendered.
   (I)   Any decision of the Building Maintenance Board shall be in writing and
a copy thereof served by regular United States mail upon the owner or upon
counsel for the owner.
(Prior Code, § 4-511) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
CONSTRUCTION AND ALTERATION
§ 150.145 BUILDINGS HEREAFTER ALTERED.
   A building or structure hereafter enlarged, extended or altered to change
from one use to a different use, in whole or in part, or a building or
structure hereafter altered for which a certificate of use and occupancy has
not been heretofore issued, shall not be occupied or used until a certificate
shall have been issued by the building inspector, certifying that the work has
been completed in accordance with the provisions of all applicable codes and
ordinances of the town relates to the proposed use of the building or
structure.
(Prior Code, § 4-601) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.146 EXISTING BUILDINGS.
   Upon written request from the owner of an existing building or structure,
the building inspector shall issue a certificate of use and occupancy, provided
that there are no violations of any technical code adopted by the town or
ordinance of the town, and it is established, after inspection and
investigation, that the proposed use of the building or structure can be
established.
(Prior Code, § 4-602) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.147 CONTENTS OF CERTIFICATE.
   When a building or structure is entitled thereto, the building inspector
shall issue a certificate of use and occupancy within ten calendar days after
submission of the written application. The certificate shall certify compliance
with the provisions of all technical codes adopted by the town and all other
applicable ordinances of the town for the purpose for which the building or
structure may be used in its several parts.
(Prior Code, § 4-603) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.148 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   The building inspector shall serve a notice of violation or order on the
person responsible for the construction, alteration, extension, repair,
removal, demolition, use or occupancy of a building or structure in violation
of any permit or certificate issued under the provisions of any code or
ordinance of the town; and such shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal
action or condition and abatement of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 4-604) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.149 PROSECUTION OF VIOLATION.
   If the notice of violation or order is not complied with within the time set
forth therein, promptly, the building inspector shall request the Town Attorney
to institute the appropriate proceeding to restrain, correct or abate such
violation or to require the termination of the unlawful use of the building or
structure.
(Prior Code, § 4-605) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.150 VIOLATION PENALTIES.
   Any person who shall violate a provision of any technical code adopted by
the town, the State Building Code or any ordinance of the town or shall fall to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct,
alter or repair a building or structure in violation of any certificate, notice
or order of the building inspector shall be fined.
(Prior Code, § 4-606) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.151 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION.
   The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
Town Attorney from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful
construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to stop an illegal
act, conduct, business or use of a building or structure.
(Prior Code, § 4-607) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.152 STOP WORK ORDER.
   Upon notice from the building inspector that work on any building or
structure is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of any code or
ordinance of the town or in any unsafe or dangerous manner, such work shall be
immediately stopped. The building inspector is hereby authorized to issue a
stop work order, by a form promulgated by the building inspector for such
purpose. A stop work order shall be in writing and shall be posted on the
property in a conspicuous location; and shall state that all work must cease
forthwith and state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Such
posting shall constitute notice to the owner of such building or structure.
(Prior Code, § 4-608) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.153 UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE.
   Any person who shall continue any work in or about the building or structure
after posting of a stop work order, except such work as directed by the
building inspector to remove a violation or abate any unsafe condition, shall
be fined.
(Prior Code, § 4-609) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017) Penalty, see §
150.999
DANGEROUS OR UNHEALTHY STRUCTURES
§ 150.165 SCOPE.
   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to authority contained in W. Va. Code §
8-12-16, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to abrogate or impair
the power of any department of the town to enforce any provision of this code
or other ordinance or regulation, nor to prevent or punish violations; and the
powers conferred by this subchapter shall be in addition and supplemental to
the powers conferred by any other law of the state or ordinance of the town.
(Prior Code, § 4-701) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.166 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING CODES. The building codes adopted by the Town of Marlinton, West
Virginia pursuant to §§
150.015 and
150.016.
   BUILDING MAINTENANCE BOARD. The Building Maintenance Board of the Town of
Marlinton, West Virginia, as established and more particularly described in §§
33.15 through
33.19 of this code of ordinances.
   CIRCUIT COURT. The circuit court of Pocahontas County, West Virginia.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Town of Marlinton, West Virginia.
   OWNER or LANDOWNER. A person who individually or jointly with others:
      (1)   Has legal title to the property, with or without actual possession
of the property;
      (2)   Has charge, care or control of the property as owner or agent of
the owner;
      (3)   Is an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the owner;
      (4)   Is the agent of the owner for the purpose of managing, controlling
or collecting rents; or
      (5)   May control or direct the management or disposition of the
property.
   UNSAFE BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. Any dwelling or other building unfit for human
habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing and hazard of fire,
accidents or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary
facilities or any other conditions prevailing in any dwelling or building,
whether used for human habitation or not, which would cause such building to be
unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public welfare.
   UNSAFE, UNSANITARY, DANGEROUS, OR DETRIMENTAL TO THE PUBLIC SAFETY OR
WELFARE.
      (1)   Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of
egress that does not conform to the approved building or fire code of the
jurisdiction as related to the requirements for existing buildings;
      (2)   The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or
other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to
not provide safe and adequate means of egress;
      (3)   Any portion of a dwelling, building, structure or appurtenance that
has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect,
abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to an extent that it is likely to
partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged;
      (4)   Any portion of a structure or building, or any member, appurtenance
or ornamentation on the exterior that is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of one and one-half the
original designed value;
      (5)   The dwelling, building or structure, or part of the building or
structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction,
the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the
support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely
collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the dwelling,
building or structure is likely to fail or give way;
      (6)   The dwelling, building or structure, or any portion, is clearly
unsafe for its use;
      (7)   The dwelling, building or structure is neglected, damaged,
dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to
children, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals and criminal activity, or
enables persons to resort to the dwelling, building or structure for committing
a nuisance or an unlawful act;
      (8)   Any dwelling, building, or structure constructed, exists or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to any dwelling, building or structure provided by the approved building or
fire code of the jurisdiction or of any law or ordinance that presents either a
substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and
safety;
      (9)   A dwelling, building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
contamination by any hazardous substance or material, including, but not
limited to, substance resulting from the illegal manufacture of drugs, damage,
faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical,
or plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the code enforcement agency
to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in a condition that is likely
to cause sickness or disease;
      (10)   Any dwelling, building or structure, because of a lack of
sufficient or proper fire resistance rated construction, fire protection
systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing
system, or other cause, is determined by the code official to be a threat to
life or health; or
      (11)   Any portion of a building that remains on a site after the
demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or whenever any
building or structure is abandoned.
(Prior Code, § 4-702) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.167 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The building inspector or his or her agent or agents shall inspect and
examine any dwelling or building within the town which, upon complaint of any
federal, state or municipal official or employee, or upon complaint of any
resident or citizen of the municipality, is alleged to constitute an unsafe
building or structure as herein defined; provided, that any entrance upon
premises for the purpose of making such inspection or examination shall be made
in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in
possession.
   (B)   Any inspections conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be consistent
with the following:
      (1)   Except in exigent circumstances and as permitted by law, the
building inspector shall provide reasonable advance notice to the owner and
request permission from the owner to enter the property;
      (2)   If the owner cannot be located after reasonable inquiry by the
building inspector as required by this section, or if the owner refuses entry,
the building inspector may obtain an administrative search warrant from either
the municipal court or the magistrate court located in the jurisdiction of the
municipality or county where the structure, dwelling or building is located.
Before obtaining an administrative search warrant, the building inspector is
required to make a sworn statement and prima facie case showing that the
building inspector was unable to gain access to the structure, dwelling or
building after reasonable and good faith efforts, and that there is a
legitimate and substantial safety concern involving the structure, dwelling, or
building that supports the requested entry;
      (3)   If granted by the court, and if the owner can be located, the
building inspector shall provide the owner a copy of the administrative search
warrant five days before entering the property. If applicable, the building
inspector shall also provide the same notice to any tenant or other person in
possession of the structure, dwelling or building; and
      (4)   Entry is for the sole purpose of inspection of the structure,
dwelling or building for unsafe or unsanitary conditions and not for the
purpose of criminal prosecution or gathering evidence for use in any criminal
charge or proceeding unrelated to the unsafe or unsanitary condition of the
structure, dwelling or building.
(Prior Code, § 4-703) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.168 REPAIR, CLOSING, DEMOLITION OF UNSAFE STRUCTURES.
   (A)   When a building or structure or any portion thereof is, upon
inspection by the building inspector or his or her agent or agents, found to be
an unsafe building or structure as herein defined, the building inspector shall
issue a written complaint setting forth therein the name of the inspector, the
date of the inspection, the condition or conditions prevailing in such building
or structure which render it to be an unsafe building or structure as herein
defined and directing the repair, alteration, improvement or the vacating and
closing or removal or demolition, or any combination thereof, of such building
or structure, as the case may require, within a reasonable time to be set by
the building inspector. Such complaint shall further set a time and place for
hearing before the Building Maintenance Board at which time all interested
parties may appear and be heard.
   (B)   All complaints or orders issued by the building inspector shall be
served in accordance with the law of the state concerning the service of
process in civil actions, and shall, in addition thereto, be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint.
(Prior Code, § 4-704) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.169 HEARINGS.
   If the directions of the building inspector as set forth in the complaint
are not carried out within the time specified therein, the Building Maintenance
Board shall conduct a hearing at the time and place set forth in the complaint
at which hearing all interested parties may appear, present evidence and be
heard with respect to such complaint.
(Prior Code, § 4-705) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.170 ENFORCEMENT ORDERS; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   If, after hearing the evidence presented at the hearing, the Building
Maintenance Board determines that the building or structure in question is an
unsafe building or structure as herein defined, the Building Maintenance Board
shall order that it be repaired, altered, improved, vacated, closed, removed or
demolished, or any combination thereof, as the case may require, within a time
to be set by the Building Maintenance Board and, if the owner or occupant of
such building or structure does not comply with such order within the time
specified, the town shall carry out the order and direction of the Building
Maintenance Board and shall assess all costs of such repairs, alterations,
improvements or such vacating and closing or removal or demolition, or any
combination thereof, to the owner of such building or structure, and such
costs, after the sale of any and all salvaged material is credited to the
account, shall be a lien against the real property upon which costs were
incurred.
   (B)   All orders issued by the Building Maintenance Board shall be served in
accordance with the law of the state concerning the service of process in civil
actions, and shall, in addition thereto, be posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises affected by the order.
   (C)   The Building Maintenance Board may enter orders providing for the
vacating, closing, removal or demolition of any dwelling, structure or
building, in the absence of owner agreement or court order provided that the
Building Maintenance Board provides lawful notice and undertakes reasonable
efforts to seek agreement from the owner before taking such action, and further
provided that:
      (1)   The dwelling, structure or building meets the definition of unsafe,
unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare as set
forth in §
150.166, divisions (3), (4) or (8) of the definition for unsafe, unsanitary,
dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare;
      (2)   The dwelling, structure, or building meets the definition of
unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare as
set forth in§
150.166, divisions (6), (7), (9) or (11) of the definition for unsafe,
unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare, provided
that the dwelling, building or structure is vacant, abandoned or has been
lawfully declared unfit for human habitation; and the reasonable estimated cost
of repair, rehabilitation or corrective action exceeds the fair market value of
the dwelling, building or structure;
      (3)   If the Building Maintenance Board cannot effect personal service on
the owner, a Building Maintenance Board official shall subscribe a written
affidavit, to be maintained for a minimum of two years, that demonstrates the
structure, dwelling or building falls within one of the categories set forth
division (C)(1) or (C)(2) above, and sets forth the basis in reasonable detail,
including documentation of same, and memorializes the Building Maintenance
Board’s efforts to contact or get permission for entry and any corrective
action from the owner; and the Building Maintenance Board shall publish notice
of its intent to enter the property for the purpose of demolition or
correction, along with the address of the property, the name of the owners and
the date of the proposed action, as a Class II legal advertisement consistent
with the requirements of W. Va. Code § 59-3-2, the first of which shall run at
least 30 days before the date of the proposed action by the enforcement agency,
and the last being no later than 20 days before the date of the proposed action
by the enforcement agency; and
      (4)   If there is no response to the notice by the owner or landowner in
the time specified in the notice, then the town may proceed in correction or
demolition of the subject dwelling, building or structure.
   (D)   It is an absolute defense to any civil action by an owner, landowner
or tenant for damages resulting from the closure, demolition or other
corrective action taken by the town under this section; provided, that the town
acted in good faith, can demonstrate that the structure, dwelling or building
falls within one of the categories set forth in division (C)(1) or (C)(2)
above, that the town followed the procedures set forth in this division (D),
and that the town had adopted the State Building Code at the time of the
closure, demolition or other corrective action occurred.
   (E)   Any owner or occupant of any building or structure affected by any
complaint or order of the Building Maintenance Board, as well as the town,
shall have the right to apply to the circuit court for a temporary injunction
restraining the enforcement of any order of the Building Maintenance Board
pending final disposition of the cause, as provided in W. Va. Code § 8-12-16.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, lessee or other person
in interest of such dwelling, building or structure as determined by the
Building Maintenance Board to be dangerous, unhealthy or unfit for human
habitation, to fail to comply with any order to repair, vacate or demolish and
remove same, or any other order of the Building Maintenance Board from which no
appeal or other remedy has been invoked. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation shall not excuse subsequent violations or deny subsequent
impositions, fines or imprisonment or both for continuing violations; and all
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects
within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that
prohibited conditions continue, shall constitute a separate offense.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any notice or order of
the building inspector and/or Building Maintenance Board posted as required
under any of the provisions of the chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-706) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020) Penalty, see §
150.999
PLUMBING CODE
§ 150.185 ADOPTED; PURPOSE; WHERE FILED; SHORT TITLE; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the town for the purpose of further
promoting health, sanitation, general public safety and welfare the town’s
Plumbing Code.
   (B)   There is hereby adopted the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition
and one copy of which shall remain on file in the office of the Mayor and such
Code is hereby incorporated in and made a part of this chapter as fully as if
it were set out verbatim herein and the provisions of the Plumbing Code hereby
adopted shall be withholding within the town with respect to all subjects
regulated or governed thereby.
(Prior Code, § 4-801) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.186 PERMIT FEES.
   No permit required by ordinance of the town’s Plumbing Code shall be applied
until the applicable fee required by the particular permit applied for shall be
paid. The Town Council shall establish a schedule of fees for permits and
inspections required by the town’s Plumbing Code.
(Prior Code, § 4-802) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
ELECTRICAL CODE
§ 150.200 ADOPTED; PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY; WHERE FILED; SHORT TITLE; EFFECTIVE
DATE.
   There is hereby adopted by the town for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for the practical safeguarding of persons and of buildings and
their contents from hazards arising from the use of electricity, that certain
electrical code known as the National Electrical Code, the National Fire
Protection Association 2014 copy of which one copy, shall remain on file in the
office of the Mayor, and such code is hereby incorporated in and made a part of
this chapter as fully as if it were set out verbatim herein, and the provisions
of the Electrical Code hereby adopted shall be controlling within the town with
respect to all subjects regulated or governed thereby. The Code adopted by this
section shall be known and may be cited as the “Town of Marlinton Electrical
Code”.
(Prior Code, § 4-901) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.201 PERMIT FEES.
   No permit required by ordinance or by the town’s Electrical Code shall be
issued until the applicable fee required for the particular type of permit
applied for has been paid. The Town Council shall establish a schedule of fees
for permits and inspections required by the town’s Electrical Code.
(Prior Code, § 4-902) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
BUILDING MAINTENANCE BOARD/POWERS
§ 150.215 PURPOSE.
   The Town Council has determined and resolved that the health and safety of
the citizens of the town and all persons visiting the town is directly affected
by the quality, condition, upkeep and maintenance of the buildings and
structures within the town and as a result the Town Council has determined the
ordinances ensuring the habitability and safety of the citizenry of the town
and other members of the public are a priority of the town.
(Prior Code, § 4-1001) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.216 BUILDING MAINTENANCE BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby created the town’s Building Maintenance Board which
shall consist of a member of Town Council selected by majority vote, the
building inspector and one member at large. The member at large shall be
selected by and serve at the will and pleasure of the Mayor. The ranking health
officer of the town or county and the town’s Volunteer Fire Department Fire
Chief or their designees may serve as ex officio members of the Board.
   (B)   The Mayor shall designate and appoint the building inspector to be the
town’s building maintenance officer. The building inspector shall exercise the
powers herein granted along with any and all other powers currently granted or
as may be granted in the future to such officer pursuant to town ordinance and
state law.
   (C)   The purpose of the Board is the enforcement agency of all codes and
ordinances of the town.
(Prior Code, § 4-1002) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.217 AUTHORITY TO ENTER PREMISES.
   (A)   The Chief of the Marlinton Volunteer Fire Department, any inspector of
the State Fire Marshal Office, the building inspector or any designee thereof
may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises within the town
for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation which, under the
provisions of any code or ordinance of the town they may deem necessary.
   (B)   No person, owner or occupant of any building or premises shall fall,
after proper credentials are displayed to permit entry into any building or
onto any property, by the Fire Chief of the Marlinton Volunteer Fire
Department, State Fire Marshal inspector, the building inspector or any
inspector thereof for the purpose of inspections pursuant to any code or
ordinance of the town.
   (C)   (1)   All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not
provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, are otherwise
dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a
hazard to health or safety, or public welfare, by reason of improper
construction or repair, inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence,
fire hazard, disaster damage or abandonment, are, for the purposes of this
chapter, unsafe buildings.
      (2)   All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
(Prior Code, § 4-1003) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
§ 150.218 LIABILITY IF VIOLATOR TO TOWN FOR ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES AND THE
LIKE.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of the town’s Building Code
including any technical codes adopted by the town, shall, in addition to the
imposition of any fine which may be adjudged by reason of such violation, be
liable to the town for all costs and expenses incurred by reason of such
violation or by reason of the abatement of any nuisance or hazard thereby
created or by reason of rectifying any condition on any premises found to be in
violation.
   (B)   Any liability so incurred shall be enforceable in the same manner as
the collection of other debts and taxes due the town.
(Prior Code, § 4-1004) (Ord. passed 8-28-2017)
VACANT STRUCTURES
§ 150.230 ADOPTION.
   There is hereby adopted a Vacant Structure Code for the town.
(Prior Code, § 4-1101) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.231 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The town has determined that an uninspected and unmonitored vacant
building may present a fire hazard, may provide temporary occupancy by
transients (including drug users and traffickers), may detract from private
and/or public efforts to rehabilitate or maintain surrounding buildings, and
that the health, safety and welfare of the public is served by the regulation
of such vacant buildings.
   (B)   Owners of uninspected and unmonitored vacant buildings shall register
such vacant buildings with the town, make payment of a fee for the registration
thereof, and otherwise conform to these vacant building regulations.
   (C)   This subchapter ensures that, through a registration, inspection and
monitoring process, vacant buildings will be kept weather tight and secure from
trespassers, will provide safe entry to police officers and firefighters in
times of emergency, will not impede private and /or public efforts to
rehabilitate or maintain surrounding buildings, and will not present otherwise
a public hazard.
   (D)   The town, by and through its departments (particularly the building
inspector and Building Maintenance Board) shall inspect and monitor vacant
buildings, shall assess the effects of the condition of those buildings on
nearby structures, and shall promote substantial efforts to rehabilitate and
develop such buildings when appropriate.
   (E)   These provisions will streamline and consolidate the procedure (that
is, complaint, research, notification, inspection, orders, fines, liens,
appeals and due process lien enforcement) by placing the responsibility to
register and maintain vacant structures on the building owner before a
building’s condition falls into disrepair or otherwise merits a complaint.
(Prior Code, § 4-1102) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.232 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARDED. A building or structure subject to the provision of this subchapter
shall be deemed to be BOARDED if, in place of one or more exterior doors, other
than a storm door, or of one or more windows, there is a sheet or sheets of
plywood or similar material covering the space for such door or window.
   CONTINUAL. Is meant to be without more than one 30-day interruption in any
given 360-day period. In order for such continual utility service to be
considered as being actually in use as described in this subchapter, it must be
more than merely registered to the owner for purposes of billing and must be
utilized, at a minimum, in order to keep the property and the major systems of
the building in compliance with building and safety codes. The person or entity
asserting that there has been continual utility service has the burden to
produce actual bills evidencing utility service for the relevant period.
   EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE AND MAJOR SYSTEMS. The safe and lawful maintenance of
the facade, windows, doors, roof and other parts of the exterior of the
building and the maintenance of its major systems consisting of the roof, the
electrical and plumbing systems, the water supply system, the sewer system and
the sidewalk, driveway, if any, area of the lot, as applicable and as enforced
by the Building Maintenance Board, particularly in connection with codes
adopted by the town as well as all applicable local, state and federal laws.
   OCCUPIED. Any building or structure shall be deemed to be occupied if one or
more persons actually conducts a lawful business or resides in all or any part
of the building as the licensed business occupant, or as the legal or equitable
owner/occupant(s) or tenant(s) on a permanent, non-transient basis, or any
combination of the same. For purposes of this subchapter, evidence offered to
prove that a building is so OCCUPIED may include, but shall not be limited to,
the regular receipt of delivery of regular mail through the U.S. Postal
Service; proof of continual telephone, electric, gas, heating, water and sewer
services; a valid business license, or the most recent, federal, state income
tax statements indicating that the subject property is the official business or
residence address of the person or business claiming occupancy; or proof of
bona fide pre-rental inspection.
   OPEN. A building or structure subject to the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to be OPEN if any one or more exterior doors other than a storm
door is broken, open and/or closed but, without a properly functioning lock to
secure it, or if one or more windows is broken or not capable of being locked
and secured from intrusion, or any combination of the same.
   OWNER. An owner of the freehold of the premises or any lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee, a vendee-in-possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm or corporation that
is directly or indirectly in control of a building subject to the provisions of
this subchapter, and as set forth below.
   VACANT. A building or structure shall be deemed to be VACANT if no person or
persons actually, currently, conduct a lawfully licensed business, or lawfully
reside, dwell or live in any part of the building as the legal or equitable
owner(s) or tenant-occupant(s), or owner-occupant(s), or tenant(s) on a
permanent, non-transient basis. A building or structure shall be deemed VACANT
and subject to the registration and possible penalty provisions provided herein
if the exterior maintenance and major systems of the building and the
surrounding real property thereof, as defined in this section, are in violation
of the building codes or health and sanitation codes and if there is not proof
of continual utility service evidencing actual use of electric, gas (i.e.,
applicable heating sources), water service and the like.
(Prior Code, § 4-1103) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.233 STANDARDS.
   All vacant structures shall also comply with the following criteria.
   (A)   Exterior property areas are to be mowed regularly and non-cultivated
gardens maintained at no more than 12 inches of growth. All noxious weeds are
prohibited.
   (B)   Structure is to be broom swept and cleared of all contents, not
including building materials or components to be used in the future renovation
at that structure.
   (C)   Electrical service is to provided to the building via temporary pole
service on the exterior of the structure or create a permanent service for the
structure and install two GFCI protected receptacles.
   (D)   NEC and OSHA compliant string lighting is to be provided to the entire
structure so that it may be illuminated as needed to view the structure.
   (E)   Unstable interior and exterior surfaces and components are to be
removed. Unstable or unsound accessory buildings are to be razed or renovated.
   (F)   Using wood sheet goods, all loose, deteriorated and broken windows and
doors are to be covered to eliminate the danger of their falling and to prevent
the unwanted entry of trespassers. Such wood sheet goods are to be cut and
neatly fit, not just nailed over the opening.
   (G)   All loose or deteriorated trim, gutter or overhang extensions (masonry
or frame) are to be removed or reattached to prevent falling.
   (H)   Regular routine monitoring of the structure is to occur by the owner
to ensure that the building is being kept in compliance with the above items.
   (I)   Utilities need to be connected to the structure.
(Prior Code, § 4-1104) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.234 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The requirements of this section shall be applicable to each owner of
any building that is found to be vacant as defined herein.
   (B)   (1)   When the building inspector has reason to believe that a
structure is a vacant structure and that the owner has failed to register in
compliance with this subchapter, the building inspector may post a notice on
the subject structure indicating that the building inspector has reason to
believe that the building is a vacant structure and directing the owner to
either:
         (a)   Register the structure in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter; or
         (b)   Provide the building inspector with evidence demonstrating that
building is not a vacant structure as defined by this subchapter.
      (2)   In addition to posting the aforementioned notice on the suspected
vacant structure itself, the building inspector shall, via registered mail or
via regular mail if registered mail is unsuccessful, send a copy of the same
notice to the record owner of the property according the tax or other public
records maintained by the Assessor or Sheriff of the county. If, within 30 days
of posting and mailing, the owner has neither registered the property in the
vacant property registration created by this subchapter nor demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the building inspector that the property is not a vacant
structure, then the building inspector shall add the structure to the vacant
property registry using the information of record in the office of the Assessor
or Sheriff of the county.
   (C)   The following are exempt from the requirements of this subchapter:
      (1)   Any building owned by town, state or federal government, or any of
their respective agencies or political subdivisions;
      (2)   A new building under construction or property that is undergoing,
in the reasonable discretion of the building inspector, an active renovation or
rehabilitation;
      (3)   Any property being actively marketed; provided, however, this
exemption shall only be available for up to six months for each structure
otherwise meeting the vacant structure designation, unless owner provides
justification satisfactory to the Building Commissioner supporting an extension
of the exemption beyond six months; and
      (4)   Any property regularly used by the owner as a vacation property or
second home; provided however that the exterior maintenance and major systems
of the building and the surrounding real property thereof are in compliance
with the building codes or health and sanitation codes and there is proof of
continual utility service evidencing actual use of electric, gas (i.e.,
applicable heating sources), water service and the like. For purposes of this
division (C)(4), REGULAR USE is use of the property for a minimum of ten days
in each calendar year. For purposes of this section, CONTINUAL is meant to be
without more than one 30-day interruption in any given 360-day period.
(Prior Code, § 4-1105) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.235 INSPECTIONS.
   At the time of registration, and upon the annual renewal thereof, the Mayor,
building inspector, Fire Chief and Police Chief shall determine whether it is
necessary for any or all of them to inspect the structure so as to identify any
public safety issues needing addressed. Inspections shall also be available to
verify the status of any property concerning occupancy, vacancy and the like.
If an internal inspection is deemed necessary, the owner will be notified of,
and arrangements made for, the same. If the owner fails or refuses to consent
to and arrange for an inspection, the town will seek an administrative search
warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction, which shall include the
municipal court, to authorize inspection of the premises for the purpose of
determining the structural integrity of the building, the repairs necessary to
ensure its structural integrity and that it will be safe for entry by
firefighters and police officers in time of emergency, and that the building
and its contents do not present a hazard to the public during the time that the
building remains vacant.
(Prior Code, § 4-1106) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.236 CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   Subsequent to any inspection performed pursuant to §
150.235, the property owner shall be notified in writing of any corrective
action deemed necessary for the protection of life and safety, and/or to bring
the property into compliance with any applicable provisions of the municipal
code, including the Town Building Code. This notice shall contain the
applicable code provisions and regulations in question, as well as setting a
reasonable time for the corrective action to be taken.
(Prior Code, § 4-1107) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.237 REGISTRATION GENERALLY.
   (A)   Within 30 days following the adoption of this subchapter, all owners
of real property within the town limits that contains a vacant structure, as
defined in §
150.232, shall register the same with the office of the building inspector of
the town. Each such owner shall cause to be filed a notarized registration
statement, which shall include the street address and parcel number of each
such vacant building, the names and addresses of all owners, as defined in §
150.232, and any other information deemed necessary by the building inspector
and/or the Building Maintenance Board. The building inspector and/or the
Building Maintenance Board shall have the authority to require that the
property owner provide a professional opinion (architect, engineer and the
like) to determine the structural integrity of the vacant structure and affirm
that it will be safe for entry by firefighters and police officers in time of
emergency, and that the building and its contents do not present a hazard to
the public during the time the building remains vacant. For purposes of this
section, the following shall also be applicable:
      (1)   If the owner is a corporation, the registration statement shall
provide the names and residence addresses of all officers and directors of the
corporation and shall be accompanied by a copy of the most recent annual
franchise tax report filed with the Secretary of State;
      (2)   If the owner is a limited liability company, the registration
statement shall provide the names and residence addresses of all officers,
directors, members and managers of the company and shall be accompanied by a
copy of the most recent annual report filed with the Secretary of State;
      (3)   If the owner is an estate, the name and business address of the
executor of the estate;
      (4)   If the owner is a trust, the name and address of all trustees,
grantors and beneficiaries;
      (5)   If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of all partners
with an interest of 10% or greater;
      (6)   If any other form of unincorporated association, the names and
residence addresses of all principals with an interest of 10% or greater; and
      (7)   If an individual person, the name and residence address of that
individual person.
   (B)   If none of the persons listed on the registration statement is shown
at an address within the state, the registration statement also shall provide
the name and address of a person who resides within the state and who is
authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the owner and who shall be
designated as a responsible, local party or agent, both for purposes of
notification in the event of an emergency affecting the public health, safety
or welfare and for purposes of service of any and all notices or registration
statements as herein authorized and in connection herewith.
   (C)   Registration shall be required for all vacant buildings, whether
vacant and secure, vacant and open, or vacant and boarded, and shall be
required whenever any building has remained vacant for 30 consecutive days or
more. In no instance shall the registration of a vacant building and the
payment of registration fees be construed to exonerate or exempt the owner,
agent or responsible party for compliance with any other provisions of the
municipal code, including, but not limited to, the Building Code, Fire Code
and/or §§
150.165 through
150.170 relating to dangerous or unsafe structures.
   (D)   One registration statement may be filed to include all vacant
structures owned by the registrant, but each such structure requires a separate
annual fee. The owner of the vacant structure as of the last day of the month
when the property has been registered of each calendar year shall be
responsible for the payment of the non-refundable registration fee. The
registration fee(s) as required by this section shall be billed by the town and
shall be paid annually on or before the last day of the month in which the
property was registered. Said annual fee shall and based on the duration of the
vacancy as determined by the following scale:
      (1)   No fee for properties that are vacant for less than one year;
      (2)   Two hundred dollars for properties that are vacant for at least one
year but less than two years;
      (3)   Four hundred dollars for properties that are vacant for at least
two years but less than three years;
      (4)   Six hundred dollars for properties that are vacant for at least
three years but less than four years;
      (5)   Eight hundred dollars for properties that are vacant for at least
four years but less than five years; and
      (6)   One thousand six hundred dollars for properties that are vacant for
at least five years, plus an additional $300 for each year in excess of five
years.
   (E)   All fees collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be deposited into
a separate, dedicated account and shall only be used to:
      (1)   Repair, close or demolish a vacant structure as authorized in W.
Va. Code § 8-12-16;
      (2)   Improve public safety efforts, especially for police and fire
personnel, who most often contend with the dangerous situations manifested in
vacant properties; or
      (3)   Implement, monitor and administer this subchapter.
   (F)   A change in ownership of a vacant structure shall not remove the
vacant structure from the vacant properties registry or from the requirements
of this subchapter, nor shall it renew the time period for the exemption in §
150.234(C)(3). Fees arising under this subchapter shall continue to accrue at
the applicable rate until the structure either no longer constitutes a vacant
structure or qualifies for an exemption, all transfers of ownership
notwithstanding. All fees arising under this subchapter shall run with the
property and failure to pay such fees may result in the town filing a lien that
attaches upon the property
(Prior Code, § 4-1108) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.238 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   (A)   Request for reconsideration. The owner shall have the right to request
reconsideration of the imposition of the registration fees imposed by this
subchapter and/or the designation of a building as a vacant structure by filing
an application in writing to the building inspector no later than 15 calendar
days after the date of notification to owner that a property has been placed on
the vacant property registry or that fees are due under this subchapter. On the
request for reconsideration, the owner shall bear the burden of providing
satisfactory proof of occupancy or that the building in question is not a
vacant structure or that the building is exempt from registration.
   (B)   Waiver of registration fee. The owner of a vacant structure may
request a waiver of the registration fee by providing the building inspector
said request in writing. The building inspector may, on a case-by-case basis
and for good cause shown, grant a waiver request upon advice and consent of the
Mayor.
   (C)   Building inspector’s determination. Within 30 days, or as soon
thereafter as is practicable, after the building inspector receives an
application pursuant to divisions (A) or (B) above, the building inspector will
contact the owner and afford them the opportunity to appear in person related
to their request for reconsideration or waiver of fee. Within 30 days, or as
soon thereafter as is practicable, after consideration of all information
provided by owner and upon advice and consent of the Mayor, the building
inspector shall grant or deny the request in writing and provide owner with a
copy of the decision.
   (D)   Appeal of building inspector’s decision. If the owner filed a request
pursuant to divisions (A) or (B) above and received an unfavorable decision
from the building inspector, the owner may appeal the building inspector’s
decision to a review by the Building Maintenance Board. An owner appealing the
decision of the building inspector shall file a written appeal with the Town
Recorder, indicating the portion of the building inspector’s decision he or she
deems inaccurate or incorrect, within 15 days after notice of the building
inspector’s decision. As soon as is practicable after receiving the appeal, the
Building Maintenance Board shall convene a hearing to hear the dispute and
consider the owner’s and building inspector’s respective positions and
arguments. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to owner and owner shall be
afforded the opportunity to appear in person and be heard on the appeal. As
soon as practicable after conclusion of the hearing, the Building Maintenance
Board shall issue its findings and conclusions in writing either concurring
with or rejecting the findings and conclusions of the building inspector.
   (E)   Appeal of Board’s decision. Any owner may appeal a decision of the
Building Maintenance Board made pursuant to division (D) above, within 30 days
of the issuance of such decision to the circuit court of the county.
(Prior Code, § 4-1109) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.239 AMENDING INFORMATION.
   If the status of the registration information changes during the course of
any calendar year, it is the responsibility of the owner, responsible party or
agent for the same, to contact the building inspector within 30 days of the
occurrence of such change and advise the building inspector in writing of those
changes.
(Prior Code, § 4-1110) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.240 REINSPECTION.
   All vacant structures are subject to reinspection on an annual basis or as
deemed necessary pursuant to §
150.235.
(Prior Code, § 4-1111) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
§ 150.241 NON-PAYMENT OF FEES/LIENS.
   (A)   The failure or refusal for any reason, of any owner, or agent of an
owner acting on behalf of the owner, to register a vacant building upon
adoption of this subchapter or to pay any fees required to be paid pursuant to
the provisions of this section, within 30 days after they become due, shall
constitute a violation punishable upon conviction thereof by a fine.
   (B)   After the owner is given notice of the amount of the registration fee
due, except for those owners that have properly perfected an appeal pursuant to
§
150.238, and the owner fails to pay the amount due, said amount of the fine
shall constitute a debt due and owing to the town and the town may commence a
civil action to collect such unpaid debt.
   (C)   If an owner fails to pay the registration fee as assessed and the town
begins the collection action to enforce its lien, then the building inspector
shall post the written notice on the property and send the written notice to
the owner(s) by certified and regular mail.
   (D)   (1)   The town may take action to sell the subject property by means
of forfeiture and the court ordered enforcement process to collect the debt
owed the town.
      (2)   Should the town take the steps necessary to sell the subject
property, the town shall do so, subject to all liens and real and personal
property taxes that are due.
(Prior Code, § 4-1112) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.242 RELATION TO OTHER CODES AND LAWS.
   (A)   It is to be understood that the intent and purpose of this subchapter
is separate and distinct from other parts and sections of the codified
ordinances of the town and the general laws of the state which may also be
applicable.
   (B)   The provisions of this section are applicable to the owners of such
vacant buildings as set forth herein and are in addition to and not in lieu of
any and all other applicable provisions of the town’s municipal code.
(Prior Code, § 4-1113) (Ord. passed 8-3-2020)
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TENTS
§ 150.255 USE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TENTS AS DWELLING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall include,
but not be limited to the following.
      (1)   CAMPER. A separate vehicle or structure designed for human
habitation and which can be attached or detached from a pickup truck. CAMPERS
include unmounted campers, truck campers and overhead campers.
      (2)   CAMPING TRAILER. A type of trailer or trailer coach, the walls of
which are so constructed as to be collapsible and made from either canvas or
similar cloth, or some form of rigid material, such as fiberglass, plastic or
metal. The walls are collapsed while the recreational vehicle is being towed or
stored and are raised or unfolded when the vehicle becomes temporary living
quarters and is not being moved.
      (3)   MOTOR HOME. A vehicular portable structure built on a chassis
primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for travel, camping,
recreation and vacation uses.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, a TENT shall include, but not be limited
to, a collapsible shelter of fabric (such as nylon or canvas) stretched and
sustained by poles which is primarily used for camping outdoors or as a
temporary building.
   (C)   The use of recreational vehicles or tents for permanent living,
sleeping or housekeeping and its connection to utility services (other than for
periodic maintenance and/or repair purposes) shall be prohibited on any private
or public property within the corporate limits of the town.
   (D)   Any recreational vehicle or tent situated on private property for the
purpose of storage must abide by all setback codes and fire codes pursuant to
the town code.
   (E)   The provisions set forth herein shall not apply to those recreational
vehicles permitted by variance pursuant to § 92.004.
(Ord. passed 9-9-2024) Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of the town’s Building
Code, the State Building Code, as amended or any technical code, adopted by the
town, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 at
the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues, after due
notice has been served, shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-301)
   (C)   In addition to the fees set forth herein any violation of the
provisions of this chapter or any of applicable technical codes or State
Building Code shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$1,000. Each day that a violation continues after notification to the owner,
shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a separate fine therefore.
(Prior Code, § 4-512)
   (D)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §
150.042 is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be punished for
each offense by a fine not less than $50 nor more than $500. Each day the
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
      (2)   Any buildings erected, raised or converted or land or premises used
in violation of any provision of §
150.042 is declared a common nuisance and the owner of the building, land or
premises shall be liable for maintaining a common nuisance.
   (E)   Any person violating any provision of §
150.150 shall be fined not less than $50 or more than $1,000. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-606)
   (F)   Any person violating any provision of §
150.153 shall be fined not less than $100 or more than $1,000.
(Prior Code, § 4-609)
   (G)   (1)   Where ever in this chapter any provision that does not set forth
a penalty or fine for any violation set forth herein, such violation shall be
punishable by a penalty or fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000.
      (2)   The administrative fines and penalties set forth in this chapter
shall not when assessed and/or paid preclude the enforcement of any state
statute, civil or criminal and in any appropriate case the town or such other
proper authority may proceed under any such state statute regardless whether or
not any administrative penalties or fines have been assessed or paid hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 4-1005)
   (H)   Any person violation §
150.241(A) shall be fined in the amount of not less than $100 nor more than
$500 for each failure or refusal to pay a required vacant building fee, as
applicable. In such cases, whenever the minimum fine of $100 is imposed, it
shall not be subject to suspension or reduction for any reason.
(Prior Code, § 4-1112)
(Ord. passed 8-28-2017; Ord. passed 1-6-2025)
CHAPTER 151: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
   
151.01   Adoption by reference
§ 151.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   A comprehensive plan has been drafted and prepared by the Planning
Commission, has been submitted to public review after notice, a public hearing
being had thereon, and after the same has been approved by the Planning
Commission of the town.
   (B)   The Planning Commission has presented to the Town Council as the
governing body, the final draft thereof, titled “Town of Marlinton
Comprehensive Plan, February, 1986”, to which reference is here made.
   (C)   The Town Council has reviewed the same and finds it to be thorough,
complete and satisfactory as presented, and requests no revisions or
alterations.
   (D)   The said comprehensive plan as presented by the Planning Commission is
hereby adopted as the town’s comprehensive plan, to be used hereafter, unless
properly modified, as a guide to the future development of the town. A copy of
such will be available in the town offices and available for public inspection
during regular business hours.
(Ord. passed 4-7-1986)
CHAPTER 152: FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Intent
   
152.002   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.003   Applicability
   
152.004   Matters not provided for specifically
Interpretation and Definitions
   
152.015   Interpretations
   
152.016   Definitions
Establishment of the Floodplain Area
   
152.030   Identification
   
152.031   Descriptions of floodplain areas
   
152.032   Changes in designation of area
   
152.033   Elevations prevail
   
152.034   Boundary disputes
Utilization of the Floodplain Area
   
152.045   Floodway (F1)
   
152.046   Floodway Fringe (F2)
   
152.047   AE Zone without Floodway
   
152.048   Approximated floodplain (Zone A)
   
152.049   Alteration or relocation of a stream
Criteria for Building and Site Plan Approval
   
152.060   General
   
152.061   Basic format
   
152.062   Elevation and flood proofing information
   
152.063   Site plan criteria
Specific Requirements
   
152.075   Design and construction standards
Administration
   
152.090   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
152.091   Development permits and site plan approvals required
   
152.092   Approval of permits and plans
   
152.093   Application procedures
   
152.094   Changes
   
152.095   Permit placards
   
152.096   Start of construction
   
152.097   Stop work orders, inspections and revocations
   
152.098   Certificate of compliance
   
152.099   Fees
Appeals
   
152.115   Appeals
   
152.116   Appeal review criteria
Government Actions
   
152.130   Municipal annexation
   
152.131   Permits for government entities
Severability and Municipal Liability
   
152.145   Severability
   
152.146   Liability
 
   
152.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community;
   (B)   Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future;
   (C)   Minimize danger to public health and safety by protecting water supply
and sanitary sewage disposal in cooperation with the County Sanitarian, and to
protect natural drainage;
   (D)   Assure the County Assessor obtains information concerning improvement
of real property as required by W. Va. Code § 11-3-3a;
   (E)   Assure county E-911 addresses are obtained to maintain the currency of
established emergency response dispatch systems; and
   (F)   Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units and its residents, by preventing the unwise design and construction of
development in areas subject to flooding.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.002 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in flood prone
areas. Any ordinance, however, shall remain in full force and effect to the
extent that its provisions are more restrictive.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.003 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any contractor, person, partnership, business
or corporation to undertake or cause to be undertaken, any development, new
construction, substantial improvement, repair of substantial damage, or the
placement or relocation of any structure (including manufactured homes) within
the town unless a permit application has been completed and a permit or
certificate of compliance has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
In addition, where land partially or fully in the floodplain is to be
developed, subdivided, utilized for a manufactured home park or subdivision or
otherwise developed, a site plan with elevation data must be submitted to, and
approved by, the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development.
   (B)   Provision of all other codes, ordinances and regulations shall be
applicable insofar as they are consistent with the provisions of this chapter
and the community’s need to minimize the hazards and damage resulting from
flooding.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.004 MATTERS NOT PROVIDED FOR SPECIFICALLY.
   Where conditions are encountered that are not specifically provided for
herein, the Floodplain Administrator shall determine the applicability of the
provisions of this chapter in accordance with its intent, and shall require the
applicant to take appropriate measures pursuant to such determination.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS
§ 152.015 INTERPRETATIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following interpretations shall apply.
   (A)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
   (B)   The singular includes the plural.
   (C)   The plural includes the singular.
   (D)   The word “person” includes corporation, unincorporated association or
partnership as well as an individual.
   (E)   The term “shall” or “will” is always mandatory.
   (F)   The word “building” or “structure” shall be construed as if followed
by the phrase “or part thereof’.
   (G)   The word “ordinance” shall refer to the floodplain regulations.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.016 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure on the same parcel of property as the
principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. This does not include a gas or liquid storage tank.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The water surface elevation of the base flood in
relation to the datum specified on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map.
For the purposes of this chapter, the 100-year flood or 1% annual chance flood.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certification that the entire development,
including the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure, is in
compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
   CONTRACTOR.
      (1)   A person who in any capacity for compensation, other than as an
employee of another, undertakes, offers to undertake, purports to have the
capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to construct, alter, repair, add to,
subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road,
railroad, structure or excavation associated with a project, development or
improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding
or other structures or works in connection therewith, where the cost of the
undertaking is set by Council from time to time. CONTRACTOR includes a
construction manager who performs management and counseling services on a
construction project for a professional fee.
      (2)   CONTRACTOR does not include:
         (a)   One who merely furnishes materials or supplies without
fabricating or consuming them in the construction project;
         (b)   A person who personally performs construction work on the site
of real property which the person owns or leases whether for commercial or
residential purposes;
         (c)   A person who is licensed or registered as a professional and who
functions under the control of any other licensing or regulatory board, whose
primary business is real estate sales, appraisal, development, management and
maintenance, who acting in his or her respective professional capacity and any
employee of such professional, acting in the course of his or her employment,
performs any work which may be considered to be performing contracting work;
         (d)   A pest control operator licensed under the provisions of W. Va.
Code § 19-16A-7 to engage in the application of pesticides for hire, unless the
operator also performs structural repairs exceeding $1,000 on property treated
for insect pests; or
         (e)   A corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship whose primary
purpose is to prepare construction plans and specifications used by the
contractors defined in this section and who employs full time a registered
architect licensed to practice in this state or a registered professional
engineer licensed to practice in this state. CONTRACTOR also does not include
employees of such corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship.
      (3)   See W.Va Code § 21-1 l-3(c).
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility in which even a slight chance of flooding is
too great a threat. Typical CRITICAL FACILITIES include hospitals, fire
stations, police stations, storage of critical records and similar facilities.
These should be given special consideration when formulating regulatory
alternatives and floodplain management plans. A CRITICAL FACILITY should not be
located in a floodplain if at all possible. If a CRITICAL FACILITY must be
located in a floodplain it should be provided a higher level of protection so
that it can continue to function and provide services during a flood.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report in which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has provided flood profiles, floodway information and water
surface elevations.
   FLOODPLAIN.
      (1)   A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or
watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; and
      (2)   An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The Mayor shall be the Floodplain Administrator.
The Floodplain Administrator may also be identified as the FLOODPLAIN MANAGER.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
area that must be reserved to discharge the base flood without increasing the
water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point.
   FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for
unknown factors that may contribute uncertainty to flood heights of any given
flood and floodway condition, such as wave action, blockage at stream
crossings, and increased runoff from urbanization of the watershed.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed foundation of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved
programs.
   LICENSED MANUFACTURED HOME DEALER. A business licensed to sell manufactured
homes in the state as set forth in the West Virginia Code.
   LICENSED MANUFACTURED HOME INSTALLER. A contractor licensed to install
manufactured homes in the state as set forth in the West Virginia Code.
   LICENSED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR. Any person licensed by the West Virginia
State Board of Examiners of Land Surveyors to engage in the practice of land
surveying as defined in West Virginia Code.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished enclosure constructed with flood resistant materials
as defined in FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) and usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction as herein
defined commenced on or after October 17, 1989 and including any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD. A flood that has one chance in 100 or a 1%
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   PERSON. Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association or other entity, including state and local governments and
agencies.
   PRACTICE OF ENGINEERING.
      (1)   Any service or creative work, as described in W. Va. Code Chapter
30 Article 13, the adequate performance of which requires engineering
education, training and experience in the application of special knowledge of
the mathematical, physical and engineering sciences to such services or
creative work as consultation, investigation, evaluation, planning and design
of engineering works and systems; planning the use of land and water; teaching
of advanced engineering subjects, engineering surveys and studies; and the
review of construction for the purpose of assuring compliance with drawings and
specifications any of which embraces such services or work, either public or
private, in connection with any utilities, structures, buildings, machines,
equipment, processes, work systems, projects and industrial or consumer
products or equipment of a mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, pneumatic or
thermal nature, insofar as they involve safeguarding life, health or property,
and including such other professional services as may be necessary to the
planning, progress and completion of any engineering services. Engineering
surveys include all survey activities required to support the sound conception,
planning, design, construction, maintenance and operation of engineered
projects.
      (2)   Any person who practices any branch of the profession of
engineering or who, by verbal claim, sign, advertisement, letterhead, card or
in any other way represents himself or herself to be a registered professional
engineer, or by using another title implies that he or she is a registered
professional engineer or that he or she is registered under W. Va. Code Chapter
30 Article 13 or who holds himself or herself out as able to perform, or who
performs any engineering service or work or any other service designated by the
practitioner which is recognized as engineering, is considered to practice or
offer to practice engineering within the meaning and intent of W. Va. Code
Chapter 30 Article 13.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. Where at least 51% of the actual cash value of a
structure, less land value, is above ground.
   REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING. During the base flood, water should not
damage structures and any subsurface waters related to the base flood should
not damage existing or proposed structures.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person who has been duly registered or
licensed as a registered professional engineer by the West Virginia State Board
of Registration for Professional Engineers as required under W. Va. Code
Chapter 30 Article 13 et seq.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring a structure or other development into
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, or, if full compliance is not
possible, to reduce the adverse impacts of the noncompliance to the greatest
extent feasible.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS are
designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in Flood Insurance
Studies and on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as Zones A, AE, AO, A1-30 and A99. The
term includes areas shown on other flood hazard maps that are specifically
listed or otherwise described in this chapter.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION.
      (1)   The definition below for START OF CONSTRUCTION is to be used only
when calculating the starting time for expiration of a permit.
      (2)   The date the permit was issued, including permits for substantial
improvement or repair of substantial damage, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START
means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Although a permit must be obtained prior to
beginning, permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an
alteration, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STATE COORDINATING OFFICE. The West Virginia Division of Homeland Security
and Emergency Management.
   STREAM. As defined in W.Va Code § 7-1-3U, any watercourse, whether natural
or human-made, distinguishable by banks and a bed, regardless of their size,
through which water flows continually or intermittently, regardless of its
volume.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means cumulative flood-related damages sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each flood event equals or exceeds 25% of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred. See SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement.
      (2)   This term includes structures, which have incurred “substantial
damage”, as defined herein regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violation of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
      (3)   Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT as defined above, must comply with all
ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      (4)   For the purpose of this definition, IMPROVEMENT is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural
part of the building commences whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure.
   TOP OF BANK. The lines depicted on the FIRM maps delineating each side of a
stream indicate the TOP OF BANK. In the field a professional familiar with
fluvial geomorphology should document the TOP OF BANK. When a professional is
not employed the TOP OF THE BANK will be considered to be the top of the first
significant slope landward of the waters edge when it is followed by at least
50 feet of relatively flat land.
   VIOLATION. The failure of any structure or development to be fully compliant
with all requirements of this chapter. A structure or other development without
the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such
time as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010; Ord. passed 7-14-2010)
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FLOODPLAIN AREA
§ 152.030 IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   The identified floodplain area shall be those areas of the Town of
Marlinton which are subject to the 100-year flood, as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and described in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
prepared for the Town of Marlinton by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) dated November 4, 2010, or the most recent revision thereof.
   (B)   The identified floodplain area shall also be those areas which have
been identified as flood hazard areas by the Town of Marlinton by use of
historic or other technical data and shown on the Town of Marlinton “Local
Flood Hazards Map”. These areas shall be designated as appropriate with the
level of technical data described below and shall be managed accordingly.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010; Ord. passed 7-14-2010)
§ 152.031 DESCRIPTIONS OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS.
   The identified floodplain shall consist of the following four specific
areas:
   (A)   The Floodway area (F1) shall be those areas identified as such in the
FIS and as shown on the FIRM. The term shall also include floodway areas
identified in studies required to be used in the approximate areas as discussed
below;
   (B)   The Floodway Fringe area (F2) shall be those areas for which specific
100-year flood elevations have been provided in the FIS but which lie beyond
the floodway area;
   (C)   The AE Area without Floodway (F3) shall be those areas identified as
an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which 100-year
flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been delineated; and
   (D)   The approximated area (F4) shall be those areas identified as an A
Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no 100-year
flood elevations have been provided.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.032 CHANGES IN DESIGNATION OF AREA.
   (A)   The delineation of the identified floodplain area may be revised by
the Town Council where natural or human-made changes have occurred and/or more
detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, a
River Basin Commission or other qualified agency or individual document the
necessity for such changes. However, prior to any such change, approval must be
obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
   (B)   A community’s base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting
from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable
but, not later than six months after the date such information becomes
available, the community shall notify the NFIP Administrator of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data.
   (C)   The town may identify and regulate new flood hazard or ponding areas.
These areas may be delineated on a “Local Flood Hazard Map using best available
topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of record,
historic high water marks and/or approximate study methodologies.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.033 ELEVATIONS PREVAIL.
   (A)   If the lowest natural grade adjacent to proposed development within an
identified flood hazard area is at or above the base flood elevation specified
in the Flood Insurance Study, the structure shall not be required to conform to
the flood prevention design and construction standards or flood-related
development codes in §
152.075. Topographic data certified by a registered professional engineer or
licensed professional surveyor shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow
a thorough review by the Floodplain Administrator. The applicant is advised to
apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA to have the special flood
hazard area designation removed from the parcel or structure.
   (B)   If the lowest natural grade adjacent to proposed development is below
the base flood elevation specified in the Flood Insurance Study, the site shall
be considered to be within the floodplain area and the proposed structure shall
be required to conform to all appropriate provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.034 BOUNDARY DISPUTES.
   Should a dispute concerning any district boundary arise, an initial
determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator and any party
aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the Town Council. The burden of proof
shall be on the appellant/applicant.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
UTILIZATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN AREA
§ 152.045 FLOODWAY (F1).
   (A)   Within any floodway area (F1), no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted
unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed
encroachment will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation.
   (B)   Because floodways present increased risk to human life and property
due to their relatively faster and deeper flowing waters the floodway shall be
preserved to the greatest extent possible.
      (1)   New development shall not be permitted in the floodway where
reasonable alternatives exist elsewhere. In addition to the requirements below
the applicant shall demonstrate that there are no reasonable alternatives other
than the floodway encroachment before a permit is issued.
      (2)   When the floodway is the only reasonable alternative the applicant
shall demonstrate that the floodway encroachment is the minimum necessary to
accomplish the project.
      (3)   All permitted uses, activities and development shall be undertaken
in strict compliance with the flood proofing and related provisions contained
herein, and in all other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.046 FLOODWAY FRINGE (F2).
   Within any floodway fringe area any development and/or use of land shall be
permitted provided that all such uses, activities and/or development shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the flood proofing and related provisions
contained herein and in all other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.047 AE ZONE WITHOUT FLOODWAY.
   Within any AE without floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the elevation of the 100-year flood more than
one foot at any point. This requirement can be satisfied by utilization of the
floodway area where determined.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.048 APPROXIMATED FLOODPLAIN (ZONE A).
   (A)   Within any approximated floodplain area.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall use elevation and floodway
information from federal, state or other acceptable sources when available to
determine the elevation above which development will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
      (2)   (a)   When data from an acceptable source is not available, the
Floodplain Administrator shall review, or shall cause to be reviewed; all
proposed development to determine:
            1.   The amount being invested; and
            2.   The specific flood risk at the site.
         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator shall then require the applicant to
determine the elevation above which the development will be reasonably safe
from flooding using the techniques set forth in the town’s approximate A zone
administrative procedures. When hydrologic and hydraulic analyses are required,
they shall only be undertaken by a registered professional engineer who shall
certify that the methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical
concepts. The resultant study shall include a cover letter, signed by the
responsible professional, providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In
addition, studies, analyses, computations and the like shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Floodplain
Administrator.
   (B)   Development. Any development and/or use of land shall be permitted
provided that all such uses, activities and/or development shall be undertaken
in strict compliance with the flood proofing and related provisions contained
herein and in all other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.049 ALTERATION OR RELOCATION OF A STREAM.
   (A)   Whenever a developer intends to alter or relocate a stream within the
floodplain area the developer shall notify in writing, by certified mail, the
town’s Floodplain Administrator, the State Coordinating Office, any adjacent
communities and any adjacent property owners of all such intended activities
prior to the alteration or relocation of the stream. Copies of all required
notifications must be submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration. In
addition prior to issuing the local permit the Floodplain Administrator shall
require copies of all necessary permits from those governmental agencies from
which federal or state law requires approval. Contact information for state and
federal permitting authorities as well as addresses for required notification
of appropriate county, state and federal government agencies are contained in
the town’s stream alteration administrative procedures.
   (B)   The developer shall also assure the town in writing that the flood
carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the stream will be
maintained. The Floodplain Administrator may require the applicant to
demonstrate that the altered or relocated portion of stream will provide equal
or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. If hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses are required, they shall only be undertaken by a registered
professional engineers, who shall certify that the methods used correctly
reflect currently accepted technical concepts. The resultant study shall
include a cover letter, signed by the responsible professional, providing a
statement of findings in basic terms. In addition, studies, analyses,
computations and the like shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   Alteration of a stream includes placement of culverts, bridges or
other stream crossings. The Floodplain Administrator may require the use of
certain “best practice” techniques in the construction of bridges, culverts or
stream crossings to prevent damage, loss of stream crossings and localized
flooding caused by blockage. These techniques may include, but are not limited
to, wing walls, trash grates or requiring openings to be of sufficient size to
pass debris and/or anticipated future increases in flood heights.
   (D)   All new and replacement bridges, culverts and other stream crossings
shall adhere to the relevant anchoring requirements contained in this chapter.
   (E)   The developer is required to provide the community a legal agreement
detailing all scheduled inspections and maintenance to be performed on altered
or relocated watercourses including culverts, bridges and other stream
crossings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to transfer this
agreement to the new owner when the land associated with the watercourse
alteration is transferred. A copy of all new agreements shall be provided to
the Floodplain Administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a
signed copy to the Floodplain Administrator shall subject the violator to the
penalties set forth in §
152.999.
   (F)   The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material
required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the Flood
Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Maps, when notified by the
Floodplain Administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
CRITERIA FOR BUILDING AND SITE PLAN APPROVAL
§ 152.060 GENERAL.
   Permits are required in order to determine whether all new construction or
substantial improvements are:
   (A)   Located in an identified floodplain, floodway or other flood hazard
area;
   (B)   Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
   (C)   Constructed with material and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage as outlined in FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) or the most
recent revision thereof;
   (D)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   (E)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
   (F)   To comply with W. Va. Code § 11-3-3a concerning County Assessor
building or real property improvement notice; and
   (G)   Approved by County Health Department for well, septic and other
permits to assure facilities are designed and located in compliance with the
flood damage reduction requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.061 BASIC FORMAT.
   The basic format of the permit shall include the following:
   (A)   Name and address of applicant;
   (B)   Name and address of owner of land on which proposed development is to
occur;
   (C)   Names, addresses and valid state license numbers of all contractors
working at the building site, or affidavits stating that work is being
performed by individuals exempt from contractor licensing as set forth in the
West Virginia Code of State Regulations, 28 C.S.R. 2-4.1, or the most recent
revision thereof;
   (D)   A description of site location sufficient to locate the project
including tax map and parcel number and most recent deed book and page number;
   (E)   A standard site plan showing size and location of the proposed
development as well as any existing buildings or structures. The site plan
shall also show all adjacent roads and watercourses with direction of flow, the
lowest adjacent grade to the proposed foundation and/or toe of fill, the base
flood elevation and the location of the floodway boundary when applicable;
   (F)   An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to pay any and all fees
associated with the permitting process as set forth in §
152.099;
   (G)   An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to allow authorized
representatives of floodplain management programs access to the development to
inspect for compliance; and
   (H)   The contract required by 28 C.S.R. 4, and all addendums to the
contract(s) shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator for review
within five business days of contract signing. The community does not require
and will not keep copies of the contracts or addendums. Failure to present
contract or addendums for review shall void the permit. If a licensed
contractor is not involved, or the work is of an aggregate value set by Council
from time to time including materials and labor, a brief written description of
proposed work and the estimated value will suffice.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.062 ELEVATION AND FLOOD PROOFING INFORMATION.
   (A)   All applicants are encouraged to exceed the minimum elevation
requirements contained herein. Flood insurance rates can be lowered
significantly by increasing the elevation of the lowest floor above the
freeboard height required by this chapter. In order to obtain an elevation
credited flood insurance rate on dry flood proofed buildings, flood proofing
must extend at least five-tenths feet above the base flood elevation.
   (B)   Depending on the type of structure involved, the following information
shall also be included in the application for work within the floodplain area:
      (1)   For structures to be elevated two feet above the base flood
elevation.
         (a)   A plan showing the size of the proposed structure and its
relation to the lot where it is to be constructed;
         (b)   A determination of elevations of the base flood, existing
ground, proposed finished ground and lowest floor, certified by a registered
professional engineer or licensed professional surveyor;
         (c)   Plans showing the method of elevating the proposed structure
including details of proposed fills, pile structures, retaining walls,
foundations, erosion protection measures and the like. When required by the
Floodplain Administrator, a registered professional engineer or architect shall
prepare these plans;
         (d)   Plans showing the methods used to protect utilities (including
sewer, water, telephone, electric, gas and the like) from flooding to two feet
above the base flood elevation at the building site;
         (e)   During the course of construction, as soon as the basic elements
of the lowest floor are in place and before further vertical construction, it
is highly recommended that the applicant check for error by obtaining elevation
data completed by a registered professional engineer or licensed professional
surveyor certifying the height of the lowest floor. If a mistake in elevation
has been made this is the best time to correct the error;
         (f)   A finished construction elevation certificate must be prepared
by a licensed professional surveyor or others of demonstrated qualification.
The elevation certificate must confirm that the structure in question together
with attendant utilities is elevated in compliance with permit conditions;
         (g)   A nonconversion agreement shall be signed by the applicant
whenever the community determines that the area below the first floor could be
converted to a nonconforming use (generally applies to enclosed areas below
base flood elevation that are five feet high or more). This agreement shall
state:
            1.   The area below base floor elevation shall not be converted for
use other than for parking, building access or for allowable storage as
detailed in this chapter; and
            2.   The applicant agrees to notify prospective buyers of the
existence of the non-conversion agreement. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to transfer the agreement at closing to the new owner via
notarized signature, a copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a
signed copy to the Floodplain Administrator shall subject the violator to the
penalties set forth in §
152.999.
      (2)   For structures to be flood proofed to two feet above the base flood
elevation (nonresidential structures only).
         (a)   All applicants are encouraged to exceed the minimum flood
proofing requirements contained herein.
         (b)   Flood insurance rates can be lowered significantly by increasing
the level of flood proofing above the height required by this chapter. In order
to obtain an “elevation credited” flood insurance rate on dry flood proofed
buildings, flood proofing must extend at least one foot above the base flood
elevation:
            1.   Plans showing details of all flood proofing measures, prepared
by a registered professional engineer, showing the size of the proposed
structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed;
            2.   A determination of elevations of the base floor, existing
ground, proposed finished ground, lowest floor, and flood proofing limits;
certified by a registered professional engineer or licensed professional
surveyor; and
            3.   A flood proofing certificate, FEMA 81-65, as revised by FEMA,
shall be prepared by the registered professional engineer who prepared the
plans in division (B)(2)(b)1. above, stating the structure in question,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities is designed so that:
               a.   The structure is water tight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water from the lowest structural element to two
feet above the base floor elevation; and
               b.   The structure will withstand the hydrostatic, hydrodynamic,
buoyant, impact and other forces resulting from the flood depths, velocities,
pressures and other factors associated with the base floor.
      (3)   For structures constructed of flood resistant materials - used
solely for parking of vehicles, or storage, (appurtenant structures only).
         (a)   A site plan prepared by a licensed professional surveyor or
others of demonstrated qualifications showing elevation of existing ground,
proposed finished ground and lowest floor. The plan shall also show details of
proposed flood resistant materials usage and the size of the proposed structure
and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed. The location of the
floodway boundary shall be represented on the plan when a floodway is present
on the site;
         (b)   An elevation certificate, based on finished construction, must
be prepared by a licensed professional surveyor or others of demonstrated
qualifications. This certificate or report must confirm that the structure in
question, together with attendant utilities is designed so that:
            1.   Flood resistant materials as detailed in FEMA Technical
Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) are used in the construction of the structure from the
lowest structural element to two feet above the base floor elevation and that
all utilities are located at least two feet above the base floor elevation;
            2.   Hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls are equalized by
allowing for automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
               a.   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided;
               b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
               c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
         (c)   In addition, the applicant shall sign a non-conversion agreement
and notify prospective buyers of the existence of the agreement. It shall be
the responsibility of the applicant to transfer the non-conversion agreement to
any new owner at closing via notarized signature. A signed copy of the
transferred non-conversion agreement shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a signed copy to
the Floodplain Administrator shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in §
152.999.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010; Ord. passed 6-3-2019) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.063 SITE PLAN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Site plans are required for all development, new construction and
substantial improvements determined to be located in a mapped floodplain area
and all proposed subdivisions and manufactured home parks. These proposals
shall be reviewed by the Floodplain Administrator to assure that they are
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (B)   The owner or developer shall submit a preliminary site plan to the
Floodplain Administrator that includes the following information:
      (1)   Name of registered professional engineer, licensed professional
surveyor or other qualified person responsible for providing the information
required in this section;
      (2)   A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or
development with respect to floodplain areas, proposed lot sites and fills;
      (3)   Where the subdivision and/or development lies partially or
completely in the floodplain areas, the plan map shall include detailed
information giving the location and elevation of proposed roads, public
utilities and building sites. All such maps shall also show contours at
intervals of two or five feet depending upon the slope of the land and identify
accurately the boundaries of the floodplain areas. A registered professional
engineer or licensed professional surveyor must certify the site plan;
      (4)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments which
are proposed to take place either fully or partially within the approximated
floodplain area (F4) and which are greater than ten lots or two acres,
whichever is the lesser, shall include base flood elevation data and shall
delineate a floodway:
         (a)   When a Flood Insurance Study (FIS) is available from FEMA, the
data contained in that study must be used to substantiate the base flood;
         (b)   If a FEMA Flood Insurance Study is not available the required
data may be available from an authoritative source, such as the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, U.S. Geological Survey, Natural Resource Conservation Service or
state and local water resource department; and
         (c)   If the required data is not available from other sources the
applicant shall develop the technical data using detailed methodologies
comparable to those contained in a Flood Insurance Study. This data shall be
prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer, who shall certify
that the methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
      (5)   Where the subdivision or other development site lies partially in
the floodplain area and all proposed development including fill will take place
on natural grade a significant vertical distance above the approximated
floodplain area (Zone A) boundary depicted on the map, development of detailed
base floor elevation data may not be necessary. In these cases the site plan
for the proposed development must show contours at intervals of two or five
feet depending on the slope, and clearly delineate the area to be developed and
the location of the floodplain boundary as scaled from the FEMA map. A
registered professional engineer, licensed professional surveyor or others of
demonstrated qualifications must certify the site plan.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
§ 152.075 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings, structures, and related
utilities and facilities, the following restrictions apply to all development,
subdivision proposals, manufactured home parks, new construction and to
construction of substantial improvements, and the repair of substantial damage,
to existing structures occurring in the floodplain area.
   (A)   Basements and lowest floors.
      (1)   Residential structures. All new construction, relocation,
substantial improvements, including repair of substantial damage, of
residential structures must have the lowest floor, including basement, ductwork
and utilities, elevated to two feet above the base floor elevation.
      (2)   Nonresidential structures. All new construction, relocation,
substantial improvements, including repair of substantial damage, of
nonresidential structures must have the lowest floor, including basement,
ductwork and utilities, elevated to two feet above the base floor elevation;
or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so
that the structure is water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water from the lowest structural element to two feet above the base
floor elevation.
      (3)   Openings.
         (a)   For all new construction, relocation, substantial improvements,
and repair of substantial damage, those fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding
shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for entry and exit of floodwaters.
         (b)   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by
a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
            1.   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
            3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
      (4)   Non-conversion agreement.
         (a)   A non-conversion agreement shall be signed by the applicant on
all flood proofed structures and any elevated structures when the community
determines that the area below the first floor could be converted to a
nonconforming use (generally applies to enclosed areas below base flood
elevation that are five feet high or more).
         (b)   This agreement shall state:
            1.   The area below base floor elevation shall not be converted for
use other than for parking, building access or for allowable storage as
detailed in this chapter; and
            2.   The applicant agrees to notify prospective buyers of the
existence of the non-conversion agreement. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to transfer the agreement at closing to the new owner via
notarized signature, a copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a
signed copy to the Floodplain Administrator shall subject the violator to the
penalties set forth in §
152.999.
   (B)   Manufactured home placement. Certain unique characteristics of
manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas pose an elevated risk of
substantial damage to property.
      (1)   All manufactured homes to be sited within the identified flood
hazard areas of the town shall be installed by a contractor possessing a valid
state manufactured home installer’s license. The installer shall use an
installation design engineered to withstand flood hazards specific to the
particular home site. Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within the flood hazard areas shall be installed in accordance with the
following standards:
         (a)   The lowest floor, ductwork and utilities including HVAC/heat
pump shall be elevated two feet above the base floor elevation;
         (b)   Elevation shall be on reinforced piers on a permanent foundation
or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength engineered for use
in a flood hazard area. Installation designs incorporating dry stacked block
piers shall not be used in flood hazard areas;
         (c)   All manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system in compliance with the requirements of 42
C.S.R. 10A.2 and 10B as authorized by W. Va. Code § 21-9-4. The anchoring shall
be adequate to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, the over-the-top and frame ties,
attached to permanent foundation elements. Ground anchors may not be adequate
to satisfy flood specific anchoring requirements. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces; and
         (d)   Permanently attached rigid skirts and perimeter wall skirts of
brick or block must have openings; this type of skirting can collapse during
floods and compromise supporting piers. The openings must be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces by allowing for entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
            1.   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
            3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
         (e)   Any additions to a manufactured home shall be similarly anchored
and vented.
      (2)   The licensed state manufactured home installer placing the unit
shall perform a site inspection and certify in writing that the manufactured
home has been installed to the standards set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   Appurtenant structures.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) below, appurtenant structures
shall be located out of the floodplain area or elevated to two feet above the
base floor elevation.
      (2)   Where appurtenant structures not connected to the principal
structure are to be located on sites below the base floor elevation, the
following flood damage reduction provisions apply:
         (a)   Structures shall be no more than 600 square feet in size and
valued at less than $10,000;
         (b)   Floors shall be at or above grade on at least one side;
         (c)   Structures shall be located, oriented and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
         (d)   Structures shall be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
         (e)   Flood resistant materials as detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin
2-93 (FIA-TB-2) shall be used in the construction of the structure from the
lowest structural element to two feet above the base floor elevation;
         (f)   Machinery, electric devices or appliances, and all utilities
shall be located at least two feet above the base floor elevation; and
         (g)   The venting requirements contained in division (A) above are
applicable and shall be strictly adhered to.
      (3)   In addition, a non-conversion agreement shall be signed by the
applicant stating that the use of the appurtenant structure or detached or
attached garage shall not be changed from the use permitted, acknowledging that
the structure may be subject to greater flood risk and that higher flood
insurance premiums may be possible, and that a change in use may require full
compliance with this chapter. The applicant agrees to notify prospective buyers
of the existence of this agreement. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to transfer the agreement at closing to the new owner via notarized
signature, a copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a signed copy to
the Floodplain Administrator shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in §
152.999.
   (D)   Recreational vehicle placement. Recreational vehicles to be placed
within any floodplain area shall either:
      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions; or
      (3)   Be installed in accordance with the manufactured home placement
requirements and all other flood reduction requirements contained in this
chapter.
   (E)   Fill.
      (1)   The Town Council officially recognizes the beneficial functions the
floodplain serves in storage and transportation of water during floods.
Placement of fill in the floodplain area is discouraged and should be
minimized.
      (2)   No fill shall be permitted in the floodway.
      (3)   All fill placed in other floodplain areas shall meet or exceed the
following standards:
         (a)   Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not
adversely affect adjacent properties. The town may require the applicant to
demonstrate through engineering reports that proposed fill would not adversely
affect adjacent properties. When required, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
shall be undertaken only by professional engineers who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
The resultant study shall include a cover letter, signed and sealed by the
responsible professional, providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In
addition, studies, analyses, computations and the like, shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the town. During
permit review the community shall consider the following issues that have the
potential to cause adverse impact to adjacent properties:
            1.   Unacceptable increases in flood heights;
            2.   Blocking drainage from adjacent property;
            3.   Deflection of floodwaters onto adjacent existing structures;
            4.   Increases to stream velocity initiating or exacerbating
erosion problems; and
            5.   Other unique site conditions may be considered when
determining whether fill will cause adverse impact to adjacent property
including, but not limited to, subsidence areas, karst topography, stream
blockages and steep topography adjacent to the channel.
         (b)   Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not
adversely affect the capacity of channels or floodways of any tributary to the
main stream, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system;
         (c)   Filled site must be contoured to drain properly (avoid ponding);
         (d)   Fill shall extend beyond a structure for a sufficient distance
to provide acceptable access. For residential structures, fill shall extend
laterally15 feet beyond the building line from all points before the start of
sloping required in division (E)(3)(e) below. For nonresidential structures,
fill shall be placed to provide access acceptable for intended use;
         (e)   At grade access, with fill extending laterally 15 feet beyond
the building line shall be provided to a minimum of 25% of the perimeter of a
nonresidential structure;
         (f)   Fill shall consist of soil or rock material only. Sanitary
landfills shall not be permitted, no trash or woody debris shall be buried on
site;
         (g)   Fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary
stability and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling. Fill compaction
standards must be appropriate to proposed post fill use, particular attention
is necessary when fill is being used to elevate a structure;
         (h)   Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one vertical on two
horizontal, unless substantiating data justifying steeper slopes are submitted
to and approved by the Floodplain Administrator;
         (i)   Fill site and fill must be protected from erosion;
         (j)   All applicants placing fill in a mapped flood hazard area must
obtain a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR)from FEMA when directed to
do so by the Floodplain Administrator before a permit can be issued. After fill
is finished the applicant must convert the CLOMR to a letter of map revision
based on fill (LOMR-F) before a certificate of compliance can be issued; and
         (k)   The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other
material required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise
the Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Maps, when notified by
the Floodplain Administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by
FEMA for this purpose.
   (F)   Placement of structures and other development. All structures and
other development shall be constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum obstruction effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
      (1)   Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
      (2)   So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on
the same flood-flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
   (G)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All structures and other development including stream crossings
shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to
prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement, thus reducing the threat to
life and property and decreasing the possibility of the blockage of bridge
openings and other restricted sections of the watercourse.
      (2)   All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below
the base floor elevation shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation.
   (H)   Flood protection setback.
      (1)   A flood protection setback equal to twice the width of the
watercourse channel measuring from the top of one bank to the top of the
opposite bank or 50 feet, whichever is less, shall be maintained from the top
of the banks of all watercourses. To reduce erosion, natural vegetation shall
be maintained in this area. Where natural vegetation does not exist along the
watercourse and conditions for replanting are suitable, high priority shall be
given to planting vegetation in the setback area to stabilize banks and enhance
aquatic resources.
      (2)   Necessary public works and temporary construction may be exempted
from this division (H).
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator may consider an appeal to the flood
protection setback requirement if the applicant demonstrates that it is
impossible to allow any development without encroachment into the flood
protection setback area. The appeal conditions shall be the minimum necessary
and shall be made only after due consideration is given to varying other siting
standards, such as side, front and back lot line setbacks.
   (I)   Storage.
      (1)   No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in times of
flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, shall be stored
below base floor elevation.
      (2)   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
      (3)   Due to the potential of masking the natural elevation and making it
more difficult to enforce this chapter, material that resembles “fill” material
shall not be considered “storage” material for purposes of this division (I).
   (J)   Utility and facility requirements.
      (1)   All new or replacement water systems whether public or private,
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems.
      (2)   All new or replacement sanitary disposal systems, whether public or
private, shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      (3)   All other new or replacement public and/or private utilities and
facilities shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
      (4)   Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (K)   Drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazard.
   (L)   Backflow preventers. Backflow prevention valves should be used for all
enclosed structures with sewage or drainage facilities located in the
floodplain.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010) Penalty, see §
152.999
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.090 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Mayor or his or her designee is hereby appointed as Floodplain
Administrator to administer and implement this local law by granting or denying
floodplain development permits in accordance with its provisions.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.091 DEVELOPMENT PERMITS AND SITE PLAN APPROVALS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any contractor, person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake or cause to be undertaken, any development or the new
construction, substantial improvement, repair of substantial damage, the
placement or relocation of any structure (including manufactured homes) within
the town unless a permit application and standard site plan has been completed,
and a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator. In addition,
where land that is either partially or fully in the regulatory floodplain is to
be subdivided, utilized for a manufactured home park or subdivision or
otherwise developed, a detailed site plan must be submitted to, and approved
by, the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.092 APPROVAL OF PERMITS AND PLANS.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review, or shall cause to be
reviewed, all permit applications and plans in order to determine whether
proposed building sites are reasonably safe from flooding.
   (B)   All permits and plans shall be approved only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with
the requirements of the state and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
   (C)   The Floodplain Administrator shall not issue a permit to any person
who does not possess a valid contractor’s license when a contractor’s license
is required by W. Va. Code § 30-42-10.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator, before issuance of the permit, shall
require the applicant to furnish satisfactory proof that such person is duly
licensed as a contractor under the provisions of West Virginia State Code. If
the applicant is not licensed, a written affidavit that such person is not
subject to licensure as a contractor or subcontractor as defined in W. Va. Code
§ 30-42-3 shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator and placed in the
permit file.
   (E)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require copies of all necessary
permits from those governmental agencies from which federal or state law
requires approval.
   (F)   The Floodplain Administrator shall provide a copy of all permits to
the County Assessor as required by W. Va. Code § 11-3-3a.
   (G)   The Floodplain Administrator shall provide a copy of all permits for
new structures to the county E-911 addressing coordinator.
   (H)   The county E-911 addressing coordinator shall provide a copy of all
requests for addresses for new structures to the County Floodplain
Administrator.
   (I)   The town shall provide sufficient space to allow the Floodplain
Administrator to keep on file in perpetuity, in a location safe from natural
hazards, all information collected during the course of the administration of
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.093 APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   Application for a permit and/or site plan approvals shall be made, in
writing, on the forms supplied by the town and shall include all information
stipulated under §§
152.060 through
152.063.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.094 CHANGES.
   After the issuance of a permit or site plan approval by the Floodplain
Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit
or any of the plans, specification or other documents submitted with the
application without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.095 PERMIT PLACARDS.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit placard, which shall
be prominently displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress.
   (B)   This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.096 START OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Work on the proposed development shall begin within 180 days after the
date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time
extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. All work on
the proposed development must be completed within 18 months of permit issuance,
at which time the permit shall expire, unless a time extension is granted in
writing by the Floodplain Administrator. The request for a time extension shall
be in writing and shall state the reasons for the extension.
   (B)   When considering an extension, the Floodplain Administrator shall
consider the following criteria:
      (1)   Has the developer diligently pursued the completion of the proposed
development during the 18 months?
      (2)   Will the granting of the extension be detrimental to public safety,
health, or welfare or injurious to other property?
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.097 STOP WORK ORDERS, INSPECTIONS AND REVOCATIONS.
   (A)   Stop work orders.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a
“stop work order notice” for any development found ongoing without having
obtained a permit. Disregard of a stop work order shall subject the violator to
the penalties described in §
152.999.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a
“stop work order notice” for any development found noncompliant with the
provisions of this law and/or the conditions of the permit. Disregard of a stop
work order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in §
152.999.
   (B)   Inspections and revocations.
      (1)   During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or
other authorized official may inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
application and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
      (2)   If the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not
comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances or
that there has been false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the
Floodplain Administrator shall issue a “stop work order notice” revoke the
permit and request a temporary injunction.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official may
inspect any development covered by this or previous ordinance to determine
whether any portion of the development has been altered to be in noncompliance
with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.098 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   In areas of flood hazard it shall be unlawful to occupy, or to permit
the use or occupancy, of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, installed, changed, converted or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of compliance
has been issued by the local Floodplain Administrator stating that the building
or land conforms to the requirements of this local law. Occupying or using a
building or premises in violation of this section shall subject the violator to
the penalties described in §
152.999.
   (B)   In areas of flood hazard it shall be unlawful to inspect and approve a
permanent utility connection to any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, installed or rebuilt until the inspector is
in possession of a copy of the certificate of compliance issued by the Local
Floodplain Administrator stating that the particular development being
inspected conforms to the requirements of this local law. Inspection and
approval of utilities in violation of this section shall subject the violator
to the penalties described in §
152.999.
   (C)   In areas of flood hazard it shall be unlawful to install a permanent
utility connection to any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, installed or rebuilt until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the local Floodplain Administrator stating that
the development conforms to the requirements of this local law. Installation of
utilities in violation of this section shall subject the violator to the
penalties described in §
152.999.
   (D)   A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local Floodplain
Administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in areas of
special flood hazard.
   (E)   Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in this chapter or local administrative procedures, and
any finished construction elevation certificate, hydraulic data, flood proofing
certificate, or encroachment analyses which may have been required as a
condition of permit approval.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.099 FEES.
   (A)   A floodplain determination fee set by Council from time to time,
payable to the Town of Marlinton shall be assessed on all proposed development.
   (B)   Application for a permit for proposed development determined to be
occurring in a flood hazard area regulated by this chapter shall be accompanied
by an additional fee, payable to the town based upon a set schedule approved by
the town using the estimated value of the proposed construction as determined
by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the
town for any additional costs for services necessary for review and/or
inspection of proposed development. Services include, but are not limited to,
professional engineering and surveying. The Floodplain Administrator may
require a deposit towards these additional costs. Additional costs may include
reimbursement for contracted services.
   (D)   Due to the increased cost of processing, when any work for which a
permit is required by this chapter is started or proceeded with prior to
obtaining a permit the fees above specified shall be doubled. The additional
fee is intended to partially reimburse the town for the additional cost of
processing permits for work already underway. To more fully recover this cost
the fees above shall be tripled for every subsequent occurrence by the same
person. Payment of the increased fee shall not relieve any person from
complying fully with the requirements of this chapter in the execution of the
work or from other penalties prescribed herein.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
APPEALS
§ 152.115 APPEALS.
   (A)   Whenever any person is aggrieved by a decision of the Floodplain
Administrator with respect to the provision of this chapter, it is the right of
that person to appeal to the Town Council which shall be known as the Appeals
Board.
   (B)   Such appeal must be filed with the Town Council, in writing, within 30
days after notification of the decision.
   (C)   Upon receipt of such appeal, the Appeals Board shall set a time and
place not less than ten nor more than 60 days for the purpose of hearing the
appeal. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to all
parties at which time they may appear and be heard. The determination by the
Appeals Board shall be final in all cases.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.116 APPEAL REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   All appeals contesting only the permit fee, the cumulative substantial
damage requirement, the flood protection setback requirement, or the freeboard
requirements, may be handled at the discretion of the Appeals Board.
   (B)   All decisions on appeals to all other provisions of this chapter shall
adhere to the following criteria:
      (1)   Affirmative decisions shall only be issued by the Appeals Board
upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the appeal would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of an appeal will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing locals laws or ordinance.
      (2)   An affirmative decision shall be issued only upon determination
that it is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief. Financial hardship, as a sole criterion, shall not be considered
sufficient justification to grant an appeal;
      (3)   An affirmative decision shall be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure;
      (4)   The Appeals Board shall notify the applicant in writing over the
signature of a community official that:
         (a)   The issuance of a decision to allow construction of a structure
below the base floor elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance; and
         (b)   Such construction below the base floor elevation increases risk
to life and property. Such notifications shall be maintained with a record of
all decisions as required in division (B)(5) below.
      (5)   The Appeals Board shall:
         (a)   Maintain a record of all decisions including justification for
their issuance; and
         (B)   Report such decisions issued in its biannual report to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
      (6)   An affirmative decision shall not be granted for any construction,
development, use or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the base floor elevation.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
GOVERNMENT ACTIONS
§ 152.130 MUNICIPAL ANNEXATION.
   (A)   The county floodplain ordinance in effect on the date of annexation
shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all
annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which
meets the requirements for participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
   (B)   Municipalities with existing floodplain ordinances shall pass a
resolution acknowledging and accepting responsibility for enforcing floodplain
ordinance standards prior to annexation of any area containing identified flood
hazards.
   (C)   All plats or maps of annexation shall show the floodplain boundaries,
base floor elevation and location of the floodway where determined.
   (D)   In accordance with the 44 C.F.R. § 59.22(a)(9)(v), all NFIP
participating communities must notify the Federal Insurance Administration in
writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified by
annexation or the community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to
adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In
order that all Flood Insurance Rate Maps accurately represent the community’s
boundaries, a copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction, clearly
delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which the community has
assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority must be
included with the notification.
   (E)   NFIP participating communities must notify the State Coordinating
Office in writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified
by annexation or the community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority
to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. A
copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating
the new corporate limits or new area for which the community has assumed or
relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority must be included with
the notification.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.131 PERMITS FOR GOVERNMENT ENTITIES.
   Unless specifically exempted by law, all public utilities and municipal,
county, state and federal entities are required to comply with this chapter and
obtain all necessary permits. Any entity claiming to be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter must provide a written statement setting forth the
rationale for exemption. In addition the entity claiming exemption shall
provide copies of all relevant legal documentation demonstrating the exemption.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
SEVERABILITY AND MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
§ 152.145 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall
not affect the remaining portions of this chapter which shall remain in full
force and effect and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are hereby
declared to be severable.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.146 LIABILITY.
   (A)   The granting of a permit or approval of a subdivision or development
plan in an identified flood- prone area, shall not constitute a representation,
guarantee or warranty of any kind by the town or by any official or employee
thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and shall create
no liability upon the town.
   (B)   All applicants proposing development in or near a flood hazard area
are urged to locate development as far away from, and as high above, all
flooding sources as possible.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of this chapter or direction of the Floodplain Administrator, or any
other authorized employee of the community, shall be unlawful and shall be
referred to the prosecuting attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such
violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, pay a fine to the town set by
Council from time to time plus cost of prosecution. In default of such payment
such person shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed ten days. Each day
during which any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are
hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of
this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or
noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the violation or
noncompliance with the chapter or permit it to continue; and all such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or noncompliance within
a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Town
Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2010)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   SALE OF REAL ESTATE
      
III.   CLOSING OF STREET
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        7-20-1987   Providing for the annexation of 95.38 acres to the town.
                    
 
TABLE II: SALE OF REAL ESTATE
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        5-14-1985   Offering for public sale a parcel of real estate in the
                     Edray District of Pocahontas County.
                    
 
TABLE III: CLOSING OF STREET
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Authorizing the closing of portion of Fourth Street and a
-        5-6-1985    20 foot alley intersecting Fourth Street; authorizing the
                     sale of the abandoned and closed street and alley at
                     public auction.
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to West Virginia Code
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO WEST VIRGINIA CODE
W. Va. Code Section Code Section
W. Va. Code Section             Code Section
2-2-1d                          10.02
2-2-4                           10.02
2-2-5                           10.02
2-2-7                           10.02
2-2-8                           10.06
2-2-9                           10.06
2-2-10                          10.02
2-2-10(a)                       10.02
2-2-10(b)                       10.02
2-2-10(c)                       10.02
2-2-10(d)                       10.02
2-2-10(i)                       10.02
2-2-10(p)                       10.02
2-2-10(q)                       10.02
2-2-10(r)                       10.02
2-2-10(z)                       10.04
2-2-12                          10.04
3-1-21a                         36.08
3-2-1 et seq.                   36.12
3-3-2                           36.17
3-3-5                           36.17
3-5-7                           36.05
3-5-11                          36.07
5-15-5                          76.08
6-9A-3                          30.18
6B-2-5(g)                       33.31
7-1-3U                          152.016
Ch. 7, Art. 18                  37.38
7-18-1 through 7-18-15          37.15
7-18-3                          37.15
7-18-13                         37.17
                                37.15,
7-18-15                         37.17,
                                37.18
7-22-1 et seq.                  37.38
Chapter 8                       30.17
Chapter 8, Article 16           33.17
Chapter 8, Article 33           33.15
8-1-1                           10.02
8-1-2                           10.02
8-1-3                           30.01
8-1-5a                          37.30
8-5-5                           36.01
8-5-7                           36.03
8-5-9                           36.02
8-5-10                          36.18
8-5-13                          36.12
8-10-1                          31.01,
                                Ch. 32
8-10-1a                         31.30
8-10-2                          34.02
8-10-3                          31.16
                                10.99,
8-11-1                          75.99,
                                90.006
8-11-4                          51.01
8-11-4(b)                       10.01,
                                91.15
8-12-5(1)                       92.020
8-12-5(23)                      92.020
8-12-5(24)                      111.03
8-12-5(26)                      90.050
8-12-5(43)                      Ch. 32
8-12-5(58)                      10.99
                                150.001,
8-12-16                         150.165,
                                150.170,
                                150.237
8-12-19                         Ch. 32
                                Ch. 110,
8-13-4                          110.05,
                                Ch. 111
8-13-5                          Ch. 110
8-13-5a                         37.38
8-13-6                          Ch. 110
8-13-7                          112.02,
                                112.15
Ch. 8, Art. 13C                 37.41
8-13C-1 et seq.                 37.30
                                37.40,
8-13C-6                         37.41,
                                37.99
8-13C-7                         37.40
8-14-1                          Ch. 32
8-14-1 et seq.                  Ch. 32
8-16-1 et seq.                  33.17
8-18-1 et seq.                  95.03
8-20-10                         51.01,
                                51.15
8-33-1 et seq.                  33.15
8-33-5                          33.17
8-34-1                          34.10
8-38-1 et seq.                  37.38
Chapter 8A, Articles 1 though 3 33.30
Chapter 8A, Article 3           33.36
11-1-1                          37.31
                                152.001,
11-3-3a                         152.060,
                                152.092
                                37.31,
Ch. 11, Art. 9                  37.42,
                                37.99
                                37.31,
Ch. 11, Art. 10                 37.41,
                                37.42
11-10-11c                       37.40
11-12-1 et seq.                 Ch. 111
11-12-3                         110.08,
                                111.04
11-12-4                         Ch. 111,
                                111.03
11-12-4d                        113.01
11-12-5                         110.09
11-12-9                         110.99
Ch. 11, Art. 14C                37.36
                                37.31,
                                37.32,
Ch. 11, Art. 15                 37.36,
                                37.38,
                                37.42
11-15-1 et seq.                 37.30
11-15-3c                        37.36
                                37.31,
Ch. 11, Art. 15A                37.33,
                                37.38,
                                37.42
11-15A-1 et seq.                37.30
                                37.31,
Ch. 11, Art. 15B                37.33,
                                37.42
11-15B-1 et seq.                37.30
11-15B-33                       37.40
11-15B-34                       37.35
11-15B-35                       37.39
Ch. 11, Art. 16                 Ch. 112
11-16-3                         112.01
11-16-13                        112.99
11-16-18                        112.99
11-16-26                        112.99
15A-10-20                       131.02
16-5C-1 et seq.                 111.06
Chapter 17                      74.07,
                                74.09
Chapter 17A-3                   74.01,
                                74.04
17A-3                           92.067
17A-3-1                         74.01
17A-3-13                        74.02
17A-3-15                        74.03
17A-9-2                         74.04
17A-9-3                         74.05
                                70.01,
17A-10-1                        73.18,
                                74.03
17A-11-1                        72.999
17B-2-1                         74.06
17B-2-1a                        74.07
17B-2-2                         74.07
17B-2-3a                        72.158
17B-2-7b                        74.06
17B-4-1                         74.09
17B-4-3                         72.999,
                                74.10
17B-4-3(b)                      74.99
17B-4-3(d)                      74.99
17B-4-4                         74.11
Chapter 17C                     73.18
17C-1-1                         70.01
17C-1-2                         70.01
17C-1-3                         70.01
17C-1-4                         70.01
17C-1-5                         70.01
17C-1-5a                        70.01
17C-1-6                         70.01
17C-1-7                         70.01
17C-1-8                         70.01
17C-1-12                        70.01
17C-1-13                        70.01
17C-1-15                        70.01
17C-1-16                        70.01
17C-1-17                        70.01
17C-1-21                        70.01
17C-1-22                        70.01
17C-1-24                        70.01
17C-1-25                        70.01
17C-1-26                        70.01
17C-1-29                        70.01
17C-1-30                        70.01
17C-1-31                        70.01
17C-1-32                        70.01
17C-1-33                        70.01
17C-1-35                        70.01
17C-1-36                        70.01
17C-1-37                        70.01
17C-1-38                        70.01
17C-1-39                        70.01
17C-1-40                        70.01
17C-1-41                        70.01
17C-1-42                        70.01
17C-1-43                        70.01
17C-1-44                        70.01
17C-1-45                        70.01
17C-1-46                        70.01
17C-1-47                        70.01
17C-1-48                        70.01
17C-1-49                        70.01
17C-1-50                        70.01
17C-1-51                        70.01
17C-1-52                        70.01
17C-1-53                        70.01
17C-1-54                        70.01
17C-1-55                        70.01
17C-1-60                        70.01
17C-1-62                        70.01
17C-1-64                        70.01
17C-1-65                        70.01
17C-1-66                        70.01
17C-2-1                         70.16
17C-2-3(c)                      70.17
17C-2-4                         70.18
17C-2-5                         70.19
17C-2-6                         70.20
17C-3-4                         71.01
17C-3-4a                        71.02
17C-3-4b                        71.08
17C-3-5                         71.03
17C-3-6                         71.04
17C-3-7                         71.05
17C-3-8                         71.06
17C-3-9                         71.07
17C-4-1                         72.999
17C-4-1(a)                      72.004
17C-4-3                         72.006
17C-4-4                         72.007
17C-4-5                         72.008
17C-4-6                         72.001
17C-4-8                         72.002
17C-4-12                        72.003
17C-5-3                         72.021
17C-5A-3a                       72.020
17C-6                           72.035
17C-6-1                         72.035,
                                72.999
17C-6-3a(a)                     72.036
17C-6-4                         72.037
17C-6-5                         72.037
17C-6-8                         72.999
17C-6-8(a)                      72.038
17C-7-2                         72.051
17C-7-3                         72.052
17C-7-4                         72.053
17C-7-5                         72.054
17C-7-6                         72.055
17C-7-7                         72.056
17C-7-8(b)                      72.057
17C-7-8(c)                      72.057
17C-7-10                        72.059
17C-7-11                        72.060
17C-7-12                        72.061
17C-8-1                         72.075
17C-8-2                         72.076
17C-8-3                         72.077
17C-8-4                         72.078,
                                72.148
17C-8-5                         72.079
17C-8-6                         72.080,
                                72.148
17C-8-7                         72.081
17C-8-8                         72.082
17C-8-9                         72.083
17C-8-10                        72.084
17C-9-1                         72.095
17C-9-2                         72.096
17C-9-3                         72.097
17C-9-4                         72.098
17C-9-5                         72.099
17C-9-6                         72.999
17C-10-1(a)                     76.01
17C-10-2                        76.02
17C-10-3                        76.03
17C-10-4                        76.04
17C-10-5                        76.05
17C-10-6                        76.06
17C-10-7                        76.99
17C-10-8                        76.07
17C-10A-1                       76.09
17C-10A-2                       76.09,
                                76.99
17C-11-1                        75.20
17C-11-2                        75.21
17C-11-3                        75.22
17C-11-4                        75.23
17C-11-5                        75.24
17C-11-6                        75.24
17C-11-7                        75.26
17C-11A-3                       75.31
17C-11A-4                       75.31,
                                75.47
17C-11A-5                       75.31,
                                75.47
17C-11A-6                       75.31,
                                75.47
17C-11A-7                       75.99
17C-12-1                        72.115
17C-12-2                        72.116
17C-12-3                        72.117
17C-12-4                        72.118
17C-12-5                        72.119
17C-12-6                        72.120
17C-12-7                        72.121
17C-12-8                        72.121,
                                72.122
17C-12-17a                      72.122
17C-14-2                        72.136
17C-14-4                        72.137
17C-14-5                        72.138
17C-14-6                        72.139
17C-14-9                        72.140
17C-14-9a                       72.141
17C-14-10                       72.142
17C-14-12                       73.18
17C-14-13                       77.04
17C-15-1                        73.01
17C-15-2                        73.02
17C-15-3                        73.03
17C-15-4                        73.04
17C-15-5                        73.05
17C-15-6                        73.99
17C-15-14                       73.06
17C-15-15                       73.07
17C-15-16                       73.08
17C-15-17                       73.09
17C-15-18                       73.10
17C-15-19                       73.11
17C-15-20                       73.12
17C-15-21                       73.13
17C-15-22                       73.14
17C-15-23                       73.15
17C-15-24                       73.16
17C-15-25                       73.17
17C-15-26                       70.01,
                                73.18
17C-15-26(e)                    72.122
17C-15-27                       73.18
17C-15-31                       73.19
17C-15-32                       73.20
17C-15-33                       73.21
17C-15-34                       73.22
17C-15-35                       73.23
17C-15-36                       73.24
17C-15-36a                      73.34,
                                73.99
17C-15-37                       73.25
17C-15-41                       73.27
17C-15-42                       73.28
17C-15-44                       73.29
17C-15-45                       73.30
17C-15-46                       73.31
17C-15-48                       73.33
17C-15-49                       73.35
17C-15-49a                      73.35
Article 17C-16                  73.32
17C-16-1 et seq.                77.007,
                                92.062
17C-16-9                        73.32
Article 17C-17                  73.50,
                                73.52
17C-17-2                        73.52
17C-17-3                        73.51
17C-17-4                        73.52
17C-17-5                        73.52
17C-17-6                        73.53
17C-17-7                        73.54
17C-17-11b                      73.52
17C-19-3                        74.30
Art. 17C-23                     72.143
Article 17D-2A                  72.155
17D-2A-9                        72.999
Chapter 17E                     72.158
Article 17E-1                   74.25
17E-1-3                         74.25
17E-1-4                         74.26
17E-1-5                         74.27
17E-1-6                         74.27
17E-1-7                         74.28
17E-1-8                         74.29
17E-1-9(d)                      74.25
17E-1-14                        74.30
17E-1-15                        74.30
17E-1-25                        74.99
19-9-2                          90.051
19-16A-7                        152.016
21-9-4                          152.075
21-11-3                         152.092
22-15A-2(9)                     135.04
24-2-4b                         51.01,
                                51.15
27-5-1 et seq.                  133.09,
                                133.99
27-6A-1 et seq.                 133.09,
                                133.99
27-11-17                        133.09
30-2-1 et seq.                  111.06
30-3-1 et seq.                  111.06
30-4-1 et seq.                  111.06
30-6-3                          111.06
30-12-1 et seq.                 111.06
Chapter Article 13              152.016
Chapter Article 13 et seq.      152.016
30-13A-1 et seq.                111.06
30-18-1 et seq.                 111.06
30-25-1 et seq.                 111.06
30-27-1 et seq.                 111.06
30-29-8                         32.21
30-40-1 et seq.                 111.06
30-42-3                         152.092
30-42-10                        152.092
33-2-12(f)                      111.06
33-1                            111.06
33-3                            111.06
Chapter 47                      Charter
Chapter 54                      33.17
54-1-1 et seq.                  33.17
59-2-1(c)                       75.99
59-3                            92.066
59-3-1 et seq.                  51.01,
                                51.15
59-3-2                          150.170
Chapter 60                      112.03
60-1-5                          112.01
60-1-7                          Ch. 112
60-6-9                          112.03
                                112.02,
Chapter 60, Article 7           112.15,
                                112.16
60-7-2                          112.01, 112.35
60-7-7                          112.15
Chapter 60A                     72.020
Chapter 61                      130.01,
                                130.02
61-2-9(b)                       132.01
61-2-9(c)                       132.02
61-2-26                         132.03
61-3-27                         90.003
61-3-30                         135.01
61-3B-1 et seq.                 135.02
61-5-17                         134.01
61-6-1b                         133.06
61-8-5(a)                       133.01
61-8-7                          133.02
61-8-9                          133.04,
                                133.05
61-8A-1 et seq.                 133.03
61-10-1                         133.07
61-10-5                         133.08
61-10-15                        33.31
Chapter 62, Article 11A         72.020
Chapter 62, Article 11B         72.020
Article 62-11B                  74.99
62-11B-5                        72.020
                                
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section Code Section
Prior Code Section Code Section
1-101              30.01,
                   30.02
1-102              30.15
1-103              30.16
1-104              30.17
1-105              30.18
1-1A01             30.30
1-1A02             30.31
1-202              31.02
1-203              31.03
1-204              31.04
1-301              31.15
1-304              31.17
1-401              32.01
1-402              32.02
1-403              32.03
1-404              32.04
1-405              32.05
1-406              32.06
1-407              32.07
1-408              32.08
1-409              32.99
1-501              34.01
1-502              34.02
1-503              34.03
1-504              34.04
1-505              34.05
1-506              34.06
1-507              34.07
1-508              34.08
1-509              34.09
1-510              34.10
1-511              34.11
1-512              34.12
1-513              34.13
1-514              34.99
1-601              35.01
1-602              35.02
1-603              35.03
1-604              35.04
1-605              35.05
1-701              35.20
1-702              35.21
1-703              35.22
1-704              35.23
1-705              35.24
1-801              31.30
1-901              35.35
1-902              35.36
1-903              35.37
1-904              35.38
1-905              35.39
1-906              35.40
1-907              35.41
1-908              35.99
1-10A01            50.01
1-10A02            50.02
1-10A03            50.03
1-10A04            50.04
1-10A05            50.05
1-10B01            50.20
1-10B02            50.21
1-10B03            50.22
1-10B04            50.23
1-10B05            50.24
1-1101             32.20
1-1102             32.21
2-101              112.01
2-102              112.02
2-103              112.03
2-104              112.99
2-301              112.15
2-302              112.16
3-101              90.001
3-102              90.002
3-103              90.003
3-104              90.004
3-105              90.005
3-106              90.006,
                   90.999
3-107              90.007
3-108              90.008
3-109              90.009
3-110              90.010
3-111              90.011
3-112              90.012
3-113              90.013
3-114              90.014
3-115              90.015,
                   90.999
3-116              90.016
3-201              90.030
3-202              90.031
3-301              90.045
3-302              90.046
3-303              90.047
3-304              90.048
3-305              90.049,
                   90.999
3-306              90.050,
                   90.999
3-307              90.051
3-308              90.052
3-309              90.053
3-310              90.054
3-311              90.055
3-312              90.056
3-313              90.057
3-401              90.999
3-402              90.999
4-101              150.001
4-102              150.002
4-201              150.015
4-202              150.016
4-203              150.017
4-301              150.030,
                   150.999
4-302              150.031
4-303              150.032
4-304              150.033
4-305              150.034
4-306              150.035
4-307              150.036
4-308              150.037
4-309              150.038
4-310              150.039
4-311              150.040
4-312              150.041
4-313              150.055
4-401              150.070
4-402              150.071
4-403              150.072
4-404              150.073
4-405              150.074
4-406              150.075
4-407              150.076
4-408              150.077
4-409              150.078
4-410              150.079
4-411              150.080
4-412              150.081
4-413              150.082
4-414              150.083
4-415              150.084
4-416              150.085
4-417              150.086
4-418              150.087
4-419              150.088
4-420              150.089
4-421              150.090
4-422              150.091
4-423              150.092
4-424              150.093
4-425              150.094
4-426              150.095
4-427              150.096
4-428              150.097
4-429              150.098
4-430              150.099
4-431              150.100
4-432              150.101
4-433              150.102
4-434              150.103
4-435              150.104
4-436              150.105
4-437              150.106
4-501              150.120
4-502              150.121
4-503              150.122
4-504              150.123
4-505              150.124
4-506              150.125
4-507              150.126
4-508              150.127
4-509              150.128
4-510              150.129
4-511              150.130
4-512              150.999
4-601              150.145
4-602              150.146
4-603              150.147
4-604              150.148
4-605              150.149
4-606              150.150,
                   150.999
4-607              150.151
4-608              150.152
4-609              150.153,
                   150.999
4-701              150.165
4-702              150.166
4-703              150.167
4-704              150.168
4-705              150.169
4-706              150.170
4-801              150.185
4-802              150.186
4-901              150.200
4-902              150.201
4-1001             150.215
4-1002             150.216
4-1003             150.217
4-1004             150.218
4-1005             150.999
4-1101             150.230
4-1102             150.231
4-1103             150.232
4-1104             150.233
4-1105             150.234
4-1106             150.235
4-1107             150.236
4-1108             150.237
4-1109             150.238
4-1110             150.239
4-1111             150.240
4-1112             150.241,
                   150.999
4-1113             150.242
5-101              110.01
5-102              110.02
5-103              110.03
5-104              110.04
5-105              110.05
5-106              110.06
5-107              110.07
5-108              110.08
5-109              110.09
5-110              110.10
5-111              110.11
5-112              110.99
5-113              110.12
5-114              110.99
5-115              110.13
5-116              110.14
5-201              111.01
5-202              111.02
5-203              111.03
5-204              111.04
5-205              111.05
5-206              111.06
5-207              111.07
5-208              111.08
5-209              111.09
5-210              111.10
5-211              111.11
5-212              111.12
5-301              113.01
5-302              113.02
5-303              113.03
5-304              113.04
5-308              113.05
6-100              91.01
6-101              91.02
6-201              91.15
6-202              91.16
6-203              91.17
6-204              91.18
6-205              91.19
6-206              91.99
6-301              91.30
6-302              91.31
6-303              91.32
6-304              91.33
6-305              91.34
6-306              91.35
6-307              91.99
7-101              92.020
7-102              92.021
7-103              92.022
7-104              92.023
7-105              92.024
7-106              92.025
7-107              92.026
7-108              92.027
7-109              92.028
7-110              92.029
7-111              92.030
7-112              92.031
7-113              92.032
7-114              92.033
7-116              92.999
7-201              53.01
7-202              53.02
7-203              53.03
7-204              53.04
7-205              53.05
7-206              53.06
7-301              53.20
7-302              53.21
7-303              53.22
7-401              92.001
7-402              92.002
7-403              92.003
7-404              92.004
7-405              92.005
7-406              92.006
7-407              92.007
7-408              92.008
7-409              92.009
7-410              92.999
9-102              132.01,
                   132.99
9-103              132.02,
                   132.99
9-104              131.01,
                   131.99
9-105              133.01,
                   133.99
9-106              133.02,
                   133.99
9-107              133.03,
                   133.99
9-108              133.04,
                   133.99
9-109              133.05,
                   133.99
9-110              133.06,
                   133.99
9-111              134.01,
                   134.99
9-112              134.02,
                   134.99
9-114              133.07,
                   133.99
9-115              133.08,
                   133.99
9-116              131.02,
                   131.99
9-117              132.03,
                   132.99
9-118              135.01,
                   135.99
9-119              135.02,
                   135.99
9-121              130.99
11-301             51.30
11-302             51.31
11-303             51.32
11-304             51.33
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        3-21-2012   37.01
                     70.01,
                     70.15—
                     70.20,
                     70.99,
                     71.01—
                     71.08,
                     71.99,
                     72.001—
                     72.008,
                     72.020,
                     72.021,
                     72.035—
                     72.038,
                     72.050—
                     72.061,
                     72.075—
                     72.084,
                     72.095—
                     72.100,
                     72.115—
                     72.123,
                     72.135—
-        6-3-2019    72.158,
                     72.999,
                     73.01—
                     73.36,
                     73.50—
                     73.54,
                     73.99,
                     74.01—
                     74.11,
                     74.25—
                     74.30,
                     74.99,
                     75.20—
                     75.31,
                     75.45—
                     75.47,
                     75.99,
                     76.01—
                     76.09,
                     76.99,
                     77.001—
                     77.012,
                     77.025—
                     77.029
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                     50.01—
-        9-9-1981    50.05,
                     50.20—
                     50.24
-        9-9-1981    51.15
-        11-9-1981   51.15
-        2-1-1982    50.24
-        2-1-1982    51.15
-        5-5-1982    133.10
                     131.01,
                     131.02,
                     131.99,
                     132.01—
                     132.03,
                     132.99,
                     133.01—
-        8-1-1983    133.08,
                     133.99,
                     134.01,
                     134.02,
                     134.99,
                     135.01,
                     135.02,
                     135.99
-        9-16-1983   133.09,
                     133.99
                     77.070—
-        3-5-1984    77.073,
                     77.100
                     92.060—
-        4-17-1984   92.068,
                     92.999
                     132.04,
-        4-17-1984   132.99,
                     135.05,
                     135.99
-        9-4-1984    135.03,
                     135.99
-        10-1-1984   136.01,
                     136.99
-        11-5-1984   136.02
-        5-6-1985    TSO III
-        5-6-1985    32.20,
                     32.21
-        5-14-1985   TSO II
139      6-6-1985    95.01—
                     95.05
-        7-8-1985    93.01,
                     93.02
-        10-7-1985   135.04,
                     135.99
                     77.085—
-        2-3-1986    77.088,
                     77.100
-        4-7-1986    151.01
                     92.045,
-        10-16-1986  92.046,
                     92.999
-        4-6-1987    50.24
-        7-6-1987    132.05,
                     132.99
-        7-20-1987   TSO I
-        8-14-1987   77.100
-        8-14-1987   131.03,
                     131.99
-        4-4-1988    130.01,
                     130.02
-        6-29-1988   96.01—
                     96.04
-        6-26-1989   51.15
-        6-26-1989   112.02
-        8-4-1990    50.24
-        8-4-1990    51.15
-        12-2-1991   111.06
-        1-4-1992    77.055—
                     77.057
-        3-2-1992    111.13,
                     111.99
-        3-1-1993    114.01—
                     114.04
-        9-17-1996   51.01,
                     51.15
-        1-20-1998   51.15
                     52.01—
-        5-2-2000    52.04,
                     52.99
-        6-24-2002   51.01
-        7-1-2003    132.06,
                     132.99
-        4-6-2004    75.60,
                     75.99
-        6-1-2004    51.01
                     152.001—
                     152.004,
                     152.015,
                     152.016,
                     152.030—
                     152.034,
                     152.045—
                     152.049,
                     152.060—
-        4-14-2010   152.063,
                     152.075,
                     152.090—
                     152.099,
                     152.115,
                     152.116,
                     152.130,
                     152.131,
                     152.145,
                     152.146,
                     152.999
-        7-14-2010   152.016,
                     152.030
-        10-4-2010   51.15
                     90.001—
                     90.016,
                     90.030,
-        11-7-2011   90.031,
                     90.045—
                     90.057,
                     90.999
-        5-7-2012    77.040—
                     77.043
-        8-6-2012    113.01—
                     113.05
                     92.020—
-        9-10-2012   92.033,
                     92.999
-        11-4-2013   36.01—
                     36.18
12-7     11-4-2013   33.30—
                     33.36
                     90.070—
-        6-2-2014    90.074,
                     90.999
-        10-6-2014   92.080—
                     92.085
                     94.01—
-        5-2-2016    94.25,
                     94.99
                     91.01,
                     91.02,
                     91.15—
-        8-1-2016    91.19,
                     91.30—
                     91.35,
                     91.99
                     150.001,
                     150.002,
                     150.015—
                     150.017,
                     150.030—
                     150.041,
                     150.055,
                     150.070—
                     150.106,
-        8-28-2017   150.120—
                     150.130,
                     150.145—
                     150.153,
                     150.185,
                     150.186,
                     150.200,
                     150.201,
                     150.215—
                     150.218,
                     150.999
-        9-25-2017   51.15
-        5-7-2018    37.15—
                     37.18
-        9-10-2018   92.004
-        6-3-2019    152.062
                     150.165—
-        8-3-2020    150.170,
                     150.230—
                     150.242
-        1-4-2021    51.01
-        5-3-2021    33.15—
                     33.19
-        7-25-2022   150.002,
                     150.016
-        2-6-2023    97.05
-        3-6-2023    Adopting Ordinance
-        3-6-2023    51.45—
                     51.47
-        4-4-2023    51.16
-        7-3-2023    131.01,
                     131.99
-        11-6-2023   37.02
-        9-9-2024    150.255
-        10-7-2024   110.15
                     37.30—
-        12-30-2024  37.43,
                     37.99
-        1-6-2025    150.042,
                     150.999
-        3-3-2025    10.99
-        3-24-2025   51.01
-        3-24-2025   51.15
-        6-9-2025    92.031,
                     92.033
-        7-7-2025    97.01—
                     97.04
                    
 
 
