NITRO, WEST VIRGINIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains 2025 S-4, current with
Ordinances passed through 12-2-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: www.amlegal.com 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Designation; citation; headings
   
10.02   General definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Repeal of repealing act; effect of repeal
   
10.05   Construction of section references
   
10.06   Acts by agent or deputy
   
10.07   Conflicting provisions
   
10.08   Separability
   
10.09   Wards established
   
10.10   City seal
   
10.11   City flag
 
   
10.99   General penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to impose penalties, see W. Va. Code 8-11-1, 8-12-2(11)
   Codification of ordinances, see W. Va. Code 8-11-4(b)
   Maximum penalty permitted, see W. Va. Code 8-11-1, 8-12-5(57)
§ 10.01 DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the municipality
as revised, recodified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, chapters, articles and sections shall be known and designated as the
“Codified Ordinances of Nitro, West Virginia, 2021”, for which designation
“codified ordinances” may be substituted. Code, chapter, subchapter and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the codified
ordinances.
   (B)   All references to codes, chapters, subchapters and sections are to
such components of the codified ordinances unless otherwise specified. Any
component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic
Code”. Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by
the number, such as “§ 101.01”.
(Prior Code, § 101.01)
§ 10.02 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNCIL. The legislative authority of the municipality.
   COUNTY. Either Kanawha County or Putnam County, as applicable to that
portion of the city located therein.
   LAND OR LANDS and REAL ESTATE OR REAL PROPERTY. Include lands, tenements and
hereditaments, and all rights thereto and interests therein except chattel
interests.
    LAWS OF THE STATE. Includes the West Virginia Constitution and the United
States Constitution, and treaties and laws made in pursuance thereof.
(W. Va. Code 2-2-10)
   MUNICIPALITY or CITY. The City of Nitro, West Virginia.
   OFFENSE. Includes every act or omission for which a fine, forfeiture or
punishment is imposed by law.
(W. Va. Code 2-2-10)
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner or
tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.
   PERSON or WHOEVER. Includes corporations, societies, associations and
partnerships.
   PERSONAL ESTATE or PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes goods, chattels, real and
personal, money, credits, investments and the evidences thereof.
   PRECEDING, SUCCEEDING or FOLLOWING. Used in reference to any section or
sections of a subchapter means next preceding, next succeeding or next
following that in which such reference is made.
(W. Va. Code 2-2-10)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and building.
   PROPERTY or ESTATE. Embraces both real and personal estate.
(W. Va. Code 2-2-10)
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale
of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail.
   STATE. The State of West Virginia or any department, division, commission,
board, educational or other institution of the state.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such
premises alone or with others.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes any representation of words, letters or
figures, whether by printing, engraving, writing or otherwise. But when the
signature of any person is required, it must be in his or her own proper
handwriting, or his or her mark, attested, proved or acknowledged.
(W. Va. Code 2-2-10)
(Prior Code, § 101.02)
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar
and appropriate meaning.
   (B)   Gender and plural. A word importing the singular number only may be
applied to several persons or things, as well as to one person or thing; a word
importing the plural number only may be applied to one person or thing as well
as to several; and a word importing the masculine gender only may be applied to
females as well as males.
(W. Va. Code 2-2-10)
   (C)   Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, or if the last
be a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, it shall also be excluded.
(W. Va. Code 2-2-3)
   (D)   Joint authority. Words purporting to give a joint authority to three
or more persons confer such authority upon a majority of them, and not upon any
less number.
(W. Va. Code 2-2-10)
   (E)   Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which
contains any express provision excluding such construction, or when the subject
matter or context of such law may be repugnant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 101.03)
§ 10.04 REPEAL OF REPEALING ACT; EFFECT OF REPEAL.
   (A)   When a law which has repealed another is itself repealed, the former
law shall not be revived without express words for that purpose.
(W. Va. Code 2-2-9)
   (B)   The repeal of a law, or its expiration by virtue of any provision
contained therein, shall not affect any offense committed, or penalty or
punishment incurred, before the repeal took effect or the law expired, save
only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform as far as practicable to the
laws in force at the time such proceedings take place, unless otherwise
specially provided; and that if any penalty or punishment be mitigated by the
new law, such new law may, with the consent of the part affected thereby, be
applied to any judgment pronounced after it has taken effect.
(W. Va. Code 2-2-8)
   (C)   The repeal by any provision of the codified ordinances of an ordinance
validating previous acts, contracts or transactions shall not affect the
validity of such acts, contracts or transactions, but the same shall remain as
valid as if there had been no such repeal, but no further.
(W. Va. Code 2-2-11)
(Prior Code, § 101.04)
§ 10.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   When reference is made to any section or group of sections of the
codified ordinances, such reference shall extend to and include any amendment
of or supplement to the section or group of sections so referred to or any
section or sections hereafter enacted in lieu thereof; and unless otherwise
provided, whenever a reference to a section or group sections is made in any
amendment or supplement to any section of the codified ordinances hereafter
enacted, such reference shall be deemed to refer to the section or sections as
the same shall then stand or as thereafter amended.
   (B)   Whenever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, such reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in such
reference.
   (C)   References in the codified ordinances to action taken or authorized
under designated sections of the codified ordinances include, in every case,
action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is
superseded by the codified ordinances.
   (D)   If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the first and
the last number or letters in the series are deemed to be included.
(Prior Code, § 101.05)
§ 10.06 ACTS BY AGENT OR DEPUTY.
   When a section requires that an act be done by an officer or person, it
shall be sufficient if it be done by his or her agent or deputy, unless it be
such as cannot lawfully be done by deputation.
(W. Va. Code 2-2-5) (Prior Code, § 101.06)
§ 10.07 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, articles or sections of the codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
(Prior Code, § 101.07)
§ 10.08 SEPARABILITY.
   Each section of the codified ordinances and every part of each section is an
independent section and part of a section, and the holding of any section or a
part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause does not
affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 101.08)
§ 10.09 WARDS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   First Ward. The First Ward of the city shall consist of that portion
of the city lying within the County of Putnam (comprised of Putnam County
Voting Precinct No. 22), as officially laid off and described by the County
Court of Putnam County, West Virginia, and the recently annexed area identified
as Carriage Way located in Putnam County. County Precinct 401 (redistricted
December, 1981) known as Brookhaven Addition and as shown by the records of the
County Court of Kanawha County, West Virginia, and residents residing in
recently annexed territory known as Carriage Way (February 24, 1983).
   (B)   Second Ward. The Second Ward of the city shall consist and be made up
of the area lying within the boundaries of Kanawha County Voting Precinct Nos.
402, 403 and 405, as the same are officially constituted and as shown by the
records of the County Court of Kanawha County (redistricted December, 1981).
   (C)   Third Ward. The Third Ward of the city shall consist and be made up of
the area lying within the boundaries of Kanawha County Voting Precincts Nos.
406 and 408, as the same are officially constituted and as shown by the records
of the County Court of Kanawha County (redistricted December, 1981).
   (D)   Fourth Ward. The Fourth Ward of the city shall consist and be made up
of the area lying within the boundaries of Kanawha County Voting Precincts Nos.
409 and 411, as the same are officially constituted and as shown by the records
of the County Court.
(Prior Code, § 103.01) (Ord. 83-5, passed 5-17-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Annexation, see W. Va. Code Art. 8-6
   Decrease of corporate limits, see W. Va. Code Art. 8-7
   Wards, see W. Va. Code 8-5-7
§ 10.10 CITY SEAL.
   (A)   The city seal shall be a corded circle, within which shall be another
corded circle; and between these two circles and conforming to the
circumferences thereof shall be the words in capital letters:
      (1)   At the top, “CITY OF NITRO”; and
      (2)   At the bottom, “KANAWHA and PUTNAM COUNTIES, W. VA.”. Across the
center of the inner circle shall be the word, set horizontally in capital
letters, “SEAL”.
   (B)   The City Recorder shall be custodian of the city seal.
(Prior Code, § 105.01)
Statutory reference:
   Seal, see W. Va. Code 8-12-1(1)
§ 10.11 CITY FLAG.
   The flag designed by the city’s Convention and Visitors Bureau, which
incorporates the city name of Nitro, the image of the World War I Doughboy and
the phrase “A Living Memorial to World War I”, is hereby adopted as the
official flag of the city.
(Ord. 17-, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whenever, in the codified ordinances or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any
act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise
provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be fined not more than
$100; upon a second violation within one year thereafter, shall be fined not
more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent violation, shall be fined not
more than $500. Each day any such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 101.99) (Ord. passed 5-20-2025)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   CITY POLICIES
      
34.   CITY EMPLOYEES
      
35.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
36.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
37.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
38.   TAXATION
      
39.   FEES
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Municipal officials constitute Council
   
30.02   Qualifications; election; term; vacancies
   
30.03   Meetings generally; quorum
   
30.04   Annual tax estimate and levy
   
30.05   Organization
   
30.06   Meeting at a place other than Council Chamber
   
30.07   Meetings to be public except when in executive session
   
30.08   Procedure when meeting lacks quorum
   
30.09   Sergeant at arms
   
30.10   City Recorder to attend meetings; Council journal
   
30.11   Order of business at meetings
   
30.12   Rules
   
30.13   Disorderly conduct prohibited at meetings
Ordinances and Resolutions
   
30.25   Ordinances generally
   
30.26   Attestation; record of ordinances
   
30.27   Resolutions; recording
Statutory reference:
   Action required to be by ordinance, see W. Va. Code 8-11-3, 8-5-12
   Adoption of rules, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(45)
   Composition, see W. Va. Code 8-5-7
   Delegating discretion, see W. Va. Code 8-11-2
   Extraterritorial exercise of powers, see W. Va. Code 8-12-19
   General powers, see W. Va. Code Art. 8-12
   Oath, see W. Va. Code 8-5-8
   Open meeting law, see W. Va. Code Art. 6-9A
   Penalty limitations, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(57); 8-11-1
   Procedures, see W. Va. Code 8-11-4
   Proceedings, see W. Va. Code Art. 8-9
   Term, see W. Va. Code 8-5-9
   To make powers effective, see W. Va. Code 8-11-1
   Vacancies, see W. Va. Code 8-5-10
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS CONSTITUTE COUNCIL.
   The municipal officials of the city shall be a Mayor, a Recorder and seven
Council members, who together shall form Council.
(Prior Code, § 123.01)
§ 30.02 QUALIFICATIONS; ELECTION; TERM; VACANCIES.
   Three Council members shall be elected from the city at large beginning with
the year 1960 for terms of four years each, or until their respective
successors have been elected and qualified. One Council member shall be elected
from each of the wards of the city beginning with the year 1960, for terms of
four years each, or until their respective successors have been elected and
qualified. The Council members elected from each ward shall, in addition to the
qualifications prescribed by W. Va. Code 8-5-7, be a resident and legal voter
of the ward from which he or she is elected, and must be resident and legal
voter at the time he or she files for election. The Council members must
continue to be residents of the city, and in the case of ward Council members,
residents of the ward from which elected, during their term of office. Removal
of any Council member from the city, and in the case of ward Council member,
from the ward from which elected, shall immediately vacate such office. Any
such vacancies shall be filled in the manner prescribed by W. Va. Code 8-5-10.
(Prior Code, § 123.02)
§ 30.03 MEETINGS GENERALLY; QUORUM.
   (A)   Regular meetings of Council shall be held in Council Chambers on the
first and third Tuesday of each month, beginning at 7:30 p.m., provided that
when any such day falls upon a holiday, Council may fix another day for such
meeting; provided however, that on and after July 1, 2009, the regular meetings
of the Council shall begin at 7:00 p.m.
   (B)   Special meetings of Council may be called by the Mayor or any three
members thereof. Whenever a special meeting of Council is called, it shall be
done by a warrant directed to the Chief of Police, signed by the Mayor or
three-members of Council and stating distinctly and by separate items the
matters of business for which the meeting is called. The Chief of Police shall
give notice to every member then in the city, and shall return the warrant to
the City Recorder who shall enter it in the journal. At any such special
meeting, only those matters of business stated in the warrant shall be
considered or acted upon, except by unanimous consent of all members present.
   (C)   A majority of Council shall be necessary for a quorum for the
transaction of business at any meeting, regular, adjourned or special, or
whether a special meeting be called by the Mayor or members of Council or
prescribed by state law, this code or other ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 123.03) (Ord. 09-03, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 30.04 ANNUAL TAX ESTIMATE AND LEVY.
   Prior to March 1 in each year, Council shall fix a date and hour between
March 7 and 28, and at the time so fixed Council shall meet in public session
in the Council Chamber at the City Building and then and there proceed with the
transaction of the business which is the subject of W. Va. Code 11-8-14. Upon
completion of that business, the session shall stand adjourned until the same
meeting hour on the next following third Tuesday in April, at which time it
shall reconvene and Council shall proceed in conformity with the provisions of
W. Va. Code 11-8-14a.
(Prior Code, § 123.04)
§ 30.05 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   At 10:00 a.m. on July 1 of each leap year, the Mayor-Elect, Council
members-Elect and City Recorder-Elect shall meet in special public session in
the Council Chamber and shall be called to order by the incumbent Mayor or, in
his or her absence, by the incumbent City Recorder, or, in the absence of both
the incumbent Mayor and the incumbent City Recorder, by the eldest Council
member or Council member-Elect, where upon those officers-elect who have not as
yet taken the prescribed oath of office shall do so before an officer who is
authorized by law to administer oaths, at which time they shall be deemed to
have qualified for the office to which they, respectively, have been elected;
provided, that no officer who is required to give bond shall be deemed to have
qualified until such bond has been given, except for the specific purpose of
participating and voting in this particular meeting and any adjourned session
thereof.
   (B)   Council shall then proceed to adopt, re-adopt or amend rules governing
the official conduct of its members and the transaction of its business, and
the failure to do so shall have the effect of continuing in force the rules of
the presiding Council. Council shall then proceed to consider and act upon
other matters of an organizational nature such as filling vacancies in
appointive offices which are within the appointive authority of Council or of
the Mayor and Council; but no such office shall be deemed vacant when it is in
fact held by an incumbent, unless the office be declared vacant by a majority
vote of Council.
   (C)   Every person elected or appointed to any office in this city, before
proceeding to exercise the authority or discharge the duties of such office,
shall take the oath or affirmation prescribed in Article IV, § 5 of the State
Constitution.
(Prior Code, § 123.05) (Ord. 84-6, passed 6-5-1984)
§ 30.06 MEETING AT A PLACE OTHER THAN COUNCIL CHAMBER.
   Whenever the Council Chamber in the City Building is for any reason not
available or will not be available for a meeting of Council, or whenever the
Council Chamber is deemed by Council to be unsuitable for any particular
meeting, whether by lack of sufficient space for the anticipated number of
spectators, lack of heat or other reason, then, in such instance, Council may
designate another place within the city and open to the public for the holding
of such meeting.
(Prior Code, § 123.06)
§ 30.07 MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC EXCEPT WHEN IN EXECUTIVE SESSION.
   All meetings of Council shall be open to orderly members of the public,
provided, that Council when sitting as a committee of the whole may go into
executive session and exclude all persons from attending such executive session
except those whose presence is deemed necessary by such committee of the whole;
and provided further, that the committee of the whole shall not reconstitute
itself as Council until the executive session is terminated and the meeting is
again open to orderly members of the public.
(Prior Code, § 123.07)
§ 30.08 PROCEDURE WHEN MEETING LACKS QUORUM.
   Any two or more members of Council who have assembled at a time appointed
for a meeting thereof, and a quorum is not present, may recess temporarily or
may adjourn to a subsequent time, and may cause the Sergeant at Arms to compel
the attendance of the absent members or give notice to the absent members of
the time to which adjournment has been made, requiring their attendance at such
adjourned meeting.
(Prior Code, § 123.08)
§ 30.09 SERGEANT AT ARMS.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to attend all meetings of
Council, or cause a competent police officer to do so, to serve as Sergeant at
Arms and maintain order in the Council Chamber and in the immediate vicinity
thereof; and to execute all lawful orders and process directed to him or her by
Council or by its presiding officer.
(Prior Code, § 123.09)
§ 30.10 CITY RECORDER TO ATTEND MEETINGS; COUNCIL JOURNAL.
   The City Recorder shall attend all meetings of Council and shall keep, in a
well bound book, which may be known as the journal, an accurate record of all
its proceedings, which shall be fully indexed and open to the inspection of all
interested persons. Upon request of any member of Council, the ayes and noes on
any question shall be taken and entered upon the journal.
(Prior Code, § 123.10)
§ 30.11 ORDER OF BUSINESS AT MEETINGS.
   At each meeting of Council, the roll shall be called and members shall be
recorded in the journal as present or absent. Then the proceedings of the last
meeting shall be read and corrected, if erroneous, and signed by the City
Recorder and the presiding officer for the time being; provided, that the
reading of the journal of the proceedings of the last meeting may be dispensed
with by majority vote of Council if the members thereof have received and
examined a copy of the journal or a synopsis thereof prior to the meeting at
which the journal is signed. The subsequent proceedings at any regular meeting
shall then be as specified in the agenda, prepared in advance by the Mayor or
by the City Recorder at the direction of the Mayor, except as may be provided
otherwise under the rules of Council.
(Prior Code, § 123.11)
§ 30.12 RULES.
   (A)   Council may, by resolution, adopt such rules as may be deemed
desirable for the conduct of its meetings, the transaction of its business and
the official conduct of its members, and may include therein reasonable
penalties for the violation thereof; but no such rule shall be inconsistent
with the state law or this code.
   (B)   Such rules may include, among other subjects, the following:
      (1)   Appointment, jurisdiction and duties of standing and special
committees of Council;
      (2)   Attendance at meetings of Council by members and by others;
      (3)   Investigations and hearings, and compulsory attendance thereat of
witnesses and the production of books and papers;
      (4)   Parliamentary procedure;
      (5)   Preservation of order at meetings;
      (6)   Manner and form of petitions, applications and other papers
intended for presentation to Council, and procedures relating thereto; and
      (7)   The order of business at regular meetings.
(Prior Code, § 123.12)
§ 30.13 DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED AT MEETINGS.
   (A)   No person shall behave in a boisterous or disorderly manner at any
meeting of Council or any committee thereof, or shall cause any disturbance
thereat, whether by force, shouting or other action tending to disrupt such
meeting, or shall fail or refuse to obey any ruling or order of the officer
presiding at such meeting relative to the orderly procedure thereof.
   (B)   Boisterous or disorderly behavior within the purview of division (A)
above shall include, but is not limited to, any of the following acts:
      (1)   Contemptuous or insolent behavior towards the presiding officer or
any member of Council or committee Council, or its Clerk, Sergeant at Arms or
any other officers, while Council or the committee is in session;
      (2)   Any breach of the peace, willful disturbance or indecent conduct in
the presence of such Council or committee while so engaged, or so near as to
obstruct or interrupt its proceedings;
      (3)   Violence or threats of violence to any member of such Council or
committee or any officer, witness or party going to, attending or returning
from, any Council or committee proceeding in respect to anything done or to be
done in the course of such proceeding;
      (4)   Willful resistance to any lawful order of the presiding officer or
Sergeant at Arms at any such meeting.
   (C)   The presiding officer of Council or of any committee of Council shall
have plenary power to order that the Council Chamber and adjacent areas be
cleared, or any part thereof, or any person or persons ejected from the Council
Chamber or adjacent areas, in the event of disorderly conduct or disturbance
which does or tends to interrupt or disrupt the orderly conduct of business by
Council or its committee,
(Prior Code, § 123.13)
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
§ 30.25 ORDINANCES GENERALLY.
   Action of Council shall be by ordinance in all cases enumerated in W. Va.
Code 8-11-3, except as may be otherwise provided by the state code; and the
requirements and procedures set out in W. Va. Code 8-11-3 shall be adhered to
by Council with respect to the introduction, action upon and passage of all
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 125.01)
§ 30.26 ATTESTATION; RECORD OF ORDINANCES.
   Each ordinance, upon its final passage, shall be signed by the presiding
officer of Council and attested by the City Recorder, who shall then number it
consecutively and record it in the Record of Ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 125.02)
§ 30.27 RESOLUTIONS; RECORDING.
   (A)   Each resolution shall, before its introduction, be reduced to writing
and, when adopted, shall be signed by the presiding officer and attested by the
City Recorder, who shall then date and number it and file it in his or her
office in a book for that purpose which shall be known as the “Record of
Resolutions”.
   (B)   Resolutions and portions of resolutions which are repealed or amended
by subsequent resolutions or ordinances shall be noted and initialed in the
margin thereof by the City Recorder so as to show the date and number of the
repealing or amendatory ordinance or resolution, but shall not be removed from
the Record of Resolutions.
(Prior Code, § 125.03)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
Officers Generally
   
31.001   Appointment and term of non-elective city officers
   
31.002   Multiple office holding; titles of deputies and assistants
   
31.003   Limited authority to administer oaths; false swearing
   
31.004   Availability to public of city books and records; protection
   
31.005   Right of entry of city personnel
   
31.006   Authority of deputies, assistants, acting officers and employees
Mayor
   
31.020   Term of office
   
31.021   Powers; duties
City Recorder
   
31.035   Term of office
   
31.036   Duties; Acting Mayor
   
31.037   Vacancy
   
31.038   Property inventories
City Treasurer
   
31.050   Powers; duties
   
31.051   Designation of city depositories; deposit of city funds
   
31.052   Payments to City Treasurer; deposit
   
31.053   Signatures on city checks
   
31.054   Fiscal reports
   
31.055   Budget system; financial accounts and records
   
31.056   Annual financial statement
   
31.057   Recording of city liens
City Attorney
   
31.070   Powers; duties
City Engineer
   
31.085   Powers; duties
Statutory reference:
   Accounting principles; funds, see W. Va. Code 8-13-17 et seq.
   Acting Mayor, see W. Va. Code 8-10-3
   Collection of moneys, see W. Va. Code 8-13-15 et seq.
   Financial statements, see W. Va. Code 8-13-23
   Hiring special counsel, see W. Va. Code 8-10-1a
   Notice of suit against municipality, see W. Va. Code 8-12-2
   Oath, see W. Va. Code 8-5-8
   Officers and employees generally, see W. Va. Code Art. 8-5
   Position established, see W. Va. Code 8-5-7
   Powers and duties generally, see W. Va. Code 8-10-1, 8-10-3
   Purchasing; competitive bidding, see W. Va. Code 8-12-10
   Supervision of public offices, see W. Va. Code Art. 6-9
   Term, see W. Va. Code 8-5-9
   Vacancy, see W. Va. Code 8-5-10
   Voting rights, see W. Va. Code 8-9-2
OFFICERS GENERALLY
§ 31.001 APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF NON-ELECTIVE CITY OFFICERS.
   All city officers, other than the Mayor, Council members and City Recorder,
shall unless otherwise provided by state law, this code or other ordinance, be
appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of Council, to serve for an
indefinite term of office.
(Prior Code, § 129.01)
§ 31.002 MULTIPLE OFFICE HOLDING; TITLES OF DEPUTIES AND ASSISTANTS.
   (A)   Council, and the Mayor with the approval of Council, may designate one
person to hold two or more city offices concurrently; provided, that no
elective officer shall hold concurrently any other office when to do so is
prohibited by state or federal law.
   (B)   Any deputy or assistant to any city officer who holds two or more
offices concurrently shall be designated according to the office or offices in
which he or she is to serve as such deputy or assistant. For example, should
the City Recorder at any time be also the City Treasurer, his or her assistant
should be designated as “Assistant City Recorder and Treasurer”, if he or she
is in fact the assistant in both of those offices; otherwise, he or she should
be designated as “Assistant City Recorder” or “Assistant City Treasurer”
according to the fact.
(Prior Code, § 129.02)
§ 31.003 LIMITED AUTHORITY TO ADMINISTER OATHS; FALSE SWEARING.
   (A)   The Mayor, the presiding officer of Council or any committee thereof,
the presiding officer of any board, commission or other body of the city
government, the City Recorder, the City Treasurer and each other officer,
deputy or assistant officer of the city to whom any sworn statement, whether
oral or in writing, is required to be made or submitted by any person pursuant
to any provision of this code or other ordinance or resolution of Council shall
have authority to administer the oath so required; provided, that nothing in
this section shall be construed as purporting to authorize the administration
of any oath which, by law, is required to be administered by a judicial
officer, notary public or other officer authorized by statute to administer
oaths, nor shall this section be construed as purporting to authorize the
taking of any acknowledgment of any signature or seal for the purpose of
recording elsewhere than in the office of the City Recorder or some other
office of this city.
   (B)   No person to whom an oath has been administered pursuant to this
section shall knowingly make any false certificate, affidavit or statement,
oral or written, concerning any matter whatsoever in violation of such oath.
(Prior Code, § 129.03)
§ 31.004 AVAILABILITY TO PUBLIC OF CITY BOOKS AND RECORDS; PROTECTION.
   (A)   Except as may be provided otherwise by state law, this code or other
ordinance or resolution of Council to safeguard the security of license tax
returns, personnel records and other confidential information, all records,
books, maps, documents and other papers which are maintained on file in any
city office shall be open for inspection and use by residents of the city and
others having an interest therein during all regular business hours, but none
shall be removed from the office of its custodian except by authority of the
Mayor, Council or a valid subpoena duces tecum issuing from a court or officer
having jurisdiction in the premises.
   (B)   No person shall, without proper authority as provided in division (A)
hereof, remove from the office of its custodian any record, book, map, document
or other paper which is maintained on file in any city office, nor shall any
person fail to return any such item to its proper custodian within the time set
by the custodian for its return.
   (C)   No person shall willfully destroy, obliterate, secrete, deface, mark
upon, disturb the arrangement of, damage or otherwise tamper with any record,
book, map, document or other paper which is maintained on file in any city
office.
(Prior Code, § 129.04)
§ 31.005 RIGHT OF ENTRY OF CITY PERSONNEL.
   Whenever any officer or employee of the city is required or authorized by
statute, these codified ordinances or any other ordinance or resolution, or
rules, regulations or orders issued pursuant thereto, in order to carry out his
or her duties thereunder, to enter any premises or vehicle for the purpose of
making an inspection thereof or of anything contained therein, such officer or
employee shall have the right to enter any such premises or vehicle in
accordance with law and upon display of proper identification at any reasonable
time in pursuance of such duties; provided, that this section shall not be
construed as purporting to authorize any unreasonable search and seizure
prohibited by Article III, § 6 of the State Constitution.
(Prior Code, § 129.05)
§ 31.006 AUTHORITY OF DEPUTIES, ASSISTANTS, ACTING OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Authority vested in, and duties imposed upon, city officers by state
law, these codified ordinances or other ordinances and resolutions of Council
may, when they so authorize, be exercised or performed by their deputies,
assistants and other subordinates, to the extent not prohibited by state law,
these codified ordinances or other ordinance or resolution of Council.
   (B)   When any city officer or employee is absent or disabled, or when any
office or position in the city government is vacant, the person designated by
competent authority to act in the place of such absent or disabled city officer
or employee or to hold temporarily the vacant office or position shall have the
powers and perform the duties of such absent or disabled officer or employee or
appertaining to such vacant office or position.
(Prior Code, § 129.06)
MAYOR
§ 31.020 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor shall be elected beginning with the year 1952, for terms of four
years, or until his or her successor has been elected and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 131.01)
§ 31.021 POWERS; DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city, and he or she
shall see that all provisions of the codified ordinances and other ordinances,
orders, acts, resolutions, rules and regulations of Council are faithfully
executed. He or she shall have control of the police of the city and may
appoint special police officers whenever he or she deems it necessary, except
when otherwise provided by law, and it shall be his or her duty especially to
see that the peace and good order of the city are preserved, and that persons
and property therein are protected; and to this end he or she may cause the
arrest and detention of all riotous and disorderly individuals in the city
before a warrant for arrest is issued. He or she shall, from time to time,
recommend to Council such measures as he or she may deem needful for the
welfare of the city; and he or she shall have such other powers and perform
such other duties as may be prescribed for him or her by law, the codified
ordinances or other ordinance or resolution of Council.
(Prior Code, § 131.02)
CITY RECORDER
§ 31.035 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The City Recorder shall be elected beginning with the year 1952, for terms
of four years, or until his or her successor has been elected and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 133.01)
§ 31.036 DUTIES; ACTING MAYOR.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Recorder to keep the journal of the
proceedings of Council, and he or she shall have charge of and preserve the
records of Council.
   (B)   Whenever the Mayor is unable because of illness or absence from the
city to perform the duties of his or her office, and during any vacancy in the
office of Mayor, the City Recorder shall perform the duties of the Mayor and be
invested with all of his or her power and authority.
   (C)   The City Recorder shall be custodian of all city records, books,
documents, correspondence and other instruments and papers for which the
custody is not otherwise provided, and he or she shall certify to all true
copies thereof for persons entitled thereto by law and shall charge therefor
such fees as may be prescribed by resolution or order of Council. The City
Recorder shall issue all city licenses and permits, except as may be provided
otherwise; and he or she shall have such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be provided for the office of City Recorder by state law, the
codified ordinances or other ordinance, resolution or order of Council.
(Prior Code, § 133.02)
§ 31.037 VACANCY.
   When the office of City Recorder is vacant due to the City Recorder having
resigned, become seriously ill or otherwise disabled and unable to perform his
or her duties, the powers, duties and authority held by such City Recorder
shall pass to the office of the Mayor or his or her designate who shall act as
City Recorder until the vacancy is filled according to law.
(Prior Code, § 133.03) (Ord. 81-9, passed 10-6-1981)
§ 31.038 PROPERTY INVENTORIES.
   (A)   The City Recorder shall maintain on file in his or her office an
inventory of all real property owned by or leased to the city. This inventory
shall be maintained in current status, and during January of each year shall be
revised, as may be appropriate, to show change in value due to depreciation or
to repairs, renovations and the like. For each building or lot such inventory
shall also show:
      (1)   A brief description;
      (2)   A reference to the deed, devise, lease or other instrument whereby
the city acquired title to or the use thereof;
      (3)   The department, office or agency charged with custody;
      (4)   The purpose or use;
      (5)   The insurance of all types thereon, together with rates as to
premiums payable and anniversary dates; and
      (6)   For property owned by the city and leased to other persons, copies
of such leases and appropriate notes as to the revenues derived therefrom.
   (B)   Each city officer or employee having custody of items of nonexpendable
personal property of value greater than $25 owned by or leased to the city
shall, during January of each year, prepare in duplicate an itemized inventory
of such property, showing for each item:
      (1)   Its value and a brief description, together with identification (by
serial number, where applicable);
      (2)   A reference to the instrument, if any, whereby title or use was
acquired;
      (3)   The department, office or agency having custody;
      (4)   The purpose or use; and
      (5)   The insurance of all types, if any, together with notes as to
premiums payable and anniversary dates. (The original copy of each such
inventory shall be filed in the office of the City Recorder before February 1
of each year, and the duplicate copy shall be retained on file in the office of
the person who prepared it.)
(Prior Code, § 133.04)
CITY TREASURER
§ 31.050 POWERS; DUTIES.
   (A)   Except as may be otherwise provided in the codified ordinances or by
state law, the City Treasurer shall collect all taxes, fines, special
assessments and other money due the city, and shall receive from all city
officers and employees money paid to them for the city, and all city money so
collected or received by him or her shall be deposited promptly in the
depositories designated for such purpose by Council. He or she shall not payout
any money of the city except as it shall have been apportioned and ordered by
Council to be paid, and he or she shall sign all checks, drafts and warrants
against the City Treasury or any depository of the city. The Treasurer shall
have such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed for
such office by state law, the codified ordinances or other ordinance,
resolution or order of Council.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall keep complete and accurate fiscal accounts
and records as required by law and in the manner prescribed by the State Tax
Commissioner and other state officers having authority to prescribe therefor,
and in accordance with directives from Council; and he or she shall render such
reports as may be required of him or her by law, the codified ordinances or
other ordinance, resolution or order of Council.
   (C)   The City Treasurer shall have power to collect any debts owing to the
city by appropriate civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   The City Treasurer shall impose on each delinquent tax or fee account
an interest rate in the amount of 1.5%; provided, that the amount of interest
calculated on the delinquent tax or fee account shall be added to and become
part of the amount of the unpaid delinquent tax or fee; provided, however, that
for each subsequent month the delinquent account remains unpaid, an additional
amount of interest equal to 1.5% of the delinquent tax or fee shall be added to
and become part of the unpaid delinquent tax or fee.
      (1)   The applicable municipal taxes and fees, when delinquent, that are
subject to the interest rate imposed by the section are:
         (a)   Business and occupation tax;
         (b)   Property maintenance fee;
         (c)   Hotel occupancy tax;
         (d)   License tax;
         (e)   Vacant property registration fee;
         (f)   Dumpster fee;
         (g)   Commercial fire fee;
         (h)   Residential fire fee;
         (i)   Court fees;
         (j)   Municipal service fee; and
         (k)   Franchise fee.
      (2)   A tax or fee account shall be considered delinquent if not paid by
the last day of the month following the month in which the tax or fee accrued;
provided, that for the purpose of the business and occupation tax, the tax is
delinquent if it is not paid on or before the expiration of one month from the
end of the quarter in which the tax accrued.
      (3)   A delinquent tax or fee account shall be subject to stoppage of
service with notice.
   (E)   The City Treasurer shall have the authority to settle delinquent taxes
or fees when the total tax or fee liability is no greater than $10,000;
provided, that:
      (1)   The city and the delinquent taxpayer or fee payer shall sign a
settlement agreement stating the amount of the delinquency and any accrued
interest, the total settlement amount, the dates for which the unpaid taxes or
fees are applied, and the basis of the settlement;
      (2)   The settlement agreement shall be signed by the City Treasurer and
either the Mayor or the Recorder representing the city and the appropriate
person or officer representing the delinquent taxpayer or fee payer; and
      (3)   The City Treasurer shall report monthly to the City Council the
number of tax or fee liabilities settled in the immediately preceding month,
the dollar amount of each tax or fee liability settled, and the settlement
amount of each tax or fee liability settled, but the City Treasurer shall not
disclose to the City Council, or to any members thereof, the identity of the
person, taxpayer or fee payer in whose name the tax or fee liability was
incurred.
   (F)   The City Council may authorize the settlement of specific tax or fee
liabilities that are for greater amount than stated in division (D) above.
(Prior Code, § 135.01) (Ord. 12-10, passed 10-2-2012; Ord. passed 11-19-2019)
§ 31.051 DESIGNATION OF CITY DEPOSITORIES; DEPOSIT OF CITY FUNDS.
   (A)   Every leap year, as soon as may be practicable following the election
and qualification of a new City Council, Council shall, by ordinance or
resolution, designate the place or places of deposit for all city funds, which
shall be kept by the City Treasurer separate and apart from his or her personal
funds.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to prevent the
designation of such a depository at any other time, or to prevent any change
being made, by ordinance or resolution of Council.
(Prior Code, § 135.02)
§ 31.052 PAYMENTS TO CITY TREASURER; DEPOSIT.
   All taxes, fees and other money belonging to the city shall be paid over by
the recipients thereof to the City Treasurer not less frequently than once each
week, as may be provided by resolution or order of Council; and the City
Treasurer shall promptly deposit such money to the credit of the city in such
depository as may be designated by ordinance or resolution of Council.
(Prior Code, § 135.03)
§ 31.053 SIGNATURES ON CITY CHECKS.
   All checks on city depositories shall be signed by the City Treasurer and
countersigned by the Mayor; provided, that Council may, by resolution, provide
alternate officers for such purposes to act when the City Treasurer or Mayor
are absent or disabled.
(Prior Code, § 135.04)
§ 31.054 FISCAL REPORTS.
   All fiscal reports, settlements, accounts and statements of the city and of
city officers shall conform to the fiscal year, which begins on July 1 of each
calendar year and terminates at the close of business June 30 of the next
succeeding calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 135.05)
§ 31.055 BUDGET SYSTEM; FINANCIAL ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS.
   The budgeting system and financial accounts and records of the city shall be
as prescribed by Council in conformity with W. Va. Code Article 6-9; and the
form and manner of keeping thereof shall be as approved or prescribed by the
State Tax Commissioner in his or her ex officio capacity as Chief Inspector and
Supervisor of Public Officers.
(Prior Code, § 135.06)
§ 31.056 ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENT.
   (A)   The City Treasurer, within 90 days after the beginning of each fiscal
year, shall prepare on a form to be prescribed by the State Tax Commissioner
and cause to be published a sworn statement revealing:
      (1)   The receipts and expenditures of the city during the previous
fiscal year arranged under descriptive headings;
      (2)   The name of each person who received more than $50 from any fund
during the previous fiscal year, together with the amount received and the
purpose for which paid; and
      (3)   All debts of the city, the purpose for which each debt was
contracted, its due date and to what date the interest thereon has been paid.
(Such statement shall be published as a Class I legal advertisement in
compliance with the provisions of W. Va. Code Article 59-3, and the publication
area for such publication shall be the city.)
   (B)   The City Recorder shall transmit to any resident of the city, upon
request, a copy of any published statement for the fiscal year designated,
supplemented by a document listing the name of each person who received less
than $50 from any fund during such fiscal year and showing the amount paid to
each and the purpose for which paid.
   (C)   The statement required by division (A) above shall be sworn to by the
City Recorder, the Mayor and two Council members. As soon as practicable
following the close of the fiscal year, a copy of any statement herein required
shall be filed by the City Recorder with the State Tax Commissioner, and the
Clerk of the County Court of Kanawha County, and the Clerk of the Circuit Court
of Kanawha County.
(Prior Code, § 135.07)
§ 31.057 RECORDING OF CITY LIENS.
   Liens arising under the provisions of any statute or ordinance for taxes,
assessments, fines and penalties may be presented to the Clerk of the County
Court of Kanawha or Putnam County, as may be appropriate, for recording, by any
city officer having an official interest therein.
(Prior Code, § 135.08)
CITY ATTORNEY
§ 31.070 POWERS; DUTIES.
   The City Attorney shall be the legal adviser and counselor of Council and
all other officers of the city. He or she shall represent the city in all
courts in all proceedings in which the city, or any city officer or employee in
his or her official capacity, is a party, and he or she shall perform such
duties incidental to his or her office as may be required of him or her by
Council. The City Attorney shall receive such regular compensation, and such
fees for special services, as may be agreed upon by Council and the City
Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 137.01)
CITY ENGINEER
§ 31.085 POWERS; DUTIES.
   The City Engineer shall maintain accurate records of all street grades
within the city, make all necessary surveys for the laying out of streets and
for other city projects for which a survey is required, and perform all
engineering duties required by the city at any time. He or she shall have such
other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed for municipal
engineers by state law, the codified ordinances or other ordinance and as may
be required of him or her from time to time by Council.
(Prior Code, § 139.01)
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Emergency Services
   
32.001   Definitions
   
32.002   Policy and purpose
   
32.003   Emergency Services Organization
   
32.004   Emergency Services Advisory Council
   
32.005   Director of Emergency Services: appointment; term; responsibilities
   
32.006   Director’s powers; duties
   
32.007   Mutual aid agreements
   
32.008   Appropriations; authority to accept services, gifts, grants and loans
   
32.009   Utilization of existing services and facilities
   
32.010   Political activity prohibited
   
32.011   Qualifications and oath required of emergency services personnel
   
32.012   Enforcement; availability of file of orders, rules and regulations
Board of Health
   
32.025   Board established
   
32.026   Definitions
   
32.027   Service area of the Board of Health
   
32.028   Appointment to and composition of Board; qualification; number of
appointees
   
32.029   Terms of appointment, reappointment, oath of office and the like
   
32.030   Meetings, attendance and the like
   
32.031   Powers and duties
   
32.032   City Health Officer; term of appointment; qualifications and the like
   
32.033   Powers and duties of Health Officer
   
32.034   Financial responsibilities of appointing authorities for the Board
Sanitary Board
   
32.045   Creation; powers and duties; composition
   
32.046   Officers; compensation and expenses; bond of Treasurer
   
32.047   Specific powers and duties
   
32.048   Bylaws
   
32.049   Additional rules and regulations
   
32.050   Transfer of real property to Sanitary Board
Planning Commission
   
32.065   Composition; qualifications
   
32.066   Appointment; term; expenses
   
32.067   Powers; duties
Building Commission
   
32.080   Commission created
   
32.081   Membership; terms; compensation
   
32.082   Powers and authority
   
32.083   Financial obligation
Board of Library Directors
   
32.095   Established; appointment; qualifications
   
32.096   Annual meetings; bylaws and regulations; powers and duties
   
32.097   Board a corporation; vesting of title to bequests or donations
   
32.098   Use of public library; authority of Board to restrict use
   
32.099   Fees; fines; sale of materials or equipment; deposit and disbursement
of receipts
   
32.100   Annual report
Kanawha Valley Regional Transportation Authority
   
32.115   City is participating member
   
32.116   City representatives on Board of the Authority
   
32.117   Certain city services to be made available to the Authority
World War I Memorial Commission
   
32.130   Establishment; goals
   
32.131   Membership
   
32.132   Vacancies
   
32.133   Reimbursement for expenses
   
32.134   Officers
   
32.135   Meetings
   
32.136   Authority to promulgate rules
   
32.137   Meetings to be public
   
32.138   Authority to employ
   
32.139   General authority and powers
   
32.140   Landmark agreements with property owners
   
32.141   Notice to County Assessor
   
32.142   Cooperation with state agencies
Museum Commission
   
32.155   Establishment; goal
   
32.156   Governance
   
32.157   Vacancies
   
32.158   Officers
   
32.159   Meetings
   
32.160   Reimbursement for expenses
   
32.161   Meetings to be public
   
32.162   Authority to employ
Historical Preservation Board
   
32.175   Establishment
   
32.176   Membership
   
32.177   Vacancies
   
32.178   Reimbursement for expenses
   
32.179   Officers
   
32.180   Meetings
   
32.181   Authority to promulgate rules
   
32.182   Meetings to be public
   
32.183   Authority to employ
   
32.184   General authority and powers
   
32.185   Landmark agreements with property owners
   
32.186   Notice to County Assessor
   
32.187   Cooperation with state agencies
Development Authority
   
32.200   Established
Land Reuse Authority
   
32.215   Short title
   
32.216   Purpose
   
32.217   Definitions
   
32.218   Creation and existence
   
32.219   Meetings open to the public; public hearings
   
32.220   Composition of Board
   
32.221   Staffing
   
32.222   Powers of Authority
   
32.223   Acquisition of property
   
32.224   Disposition of property
   
32.225   Financing of the Authority
   
32.226   Borrowing and issuance of bonds
   
32.227   Public records and public access
   
32.228   Dissolution of Authority
   
32.229   Conflicts of interest
   
32.230   Expedited quiet title proceedings
   
32.231   Construction, intent and scope
   
32.232   Annual audit and report
 
   
32.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of comprehensive plan, see W. Va. Code 8A-16-2
   Approval of subdivision plats, see W. Va. Code 8A-5-1 et seq.
   Authority to establish, see W. Va. Code 8A-1-1
   Authority to establish library, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(38)
   Composition of Board, see W. Va. Code 16-13-18
   Emergency services, see W. Va. Code Art. 15-5
   General provisions, see W. Va. Code Art. 8A-1
   Historic landmarks commission, see W. Va. Code Art. 8-26A
   Municipal development authorities, see W. Va. Code Art. 7-12
   Powers and duties, see W. Va. Code 16-13-3 et seq.
   Public libraries, see W. Va. Code Art. 10-1
   Publication of financial statement, see W. Va. Code 16-13-18a
   Urban Mass Transportation Systems, see W. Va. Code Art. 8-27
   Zoning recommendations, see W. Va. Code Art. 8A-7
EMERGENCY SERVICES
§ 32.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES. The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other natural or
other human-made causes. These functions include, without limitation,
firefighting services, police services, medical and health services,
communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense,
evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services,
emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant
protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the
foregoing functions. DISASTER includes the imminent threat of disaster as well
as its occurrence and any power or authority exercisable on account of a
disaster may be exercised during the period when there is an imminent threat
thereof.
   LOCAL ORGANIZATION FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES. An organization created in
accordance with the provisions of W. Va. Code Article 15-5 by state or local
authority to perform local emergency service functions.
   MOBILE SUPPORT UNIT. An organization for emergency services created in
accordance with the provisions of W. Va. Code Article 15-5 by state or local
authority to be dispatched by the Governor to supplement local organizations
for emergency services in a stricken area.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Any county or municipal corporation in this state.
(Prior Code, § 109.01)
§ 32.002 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   In view of the existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence
of disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from enemy
attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from fire, flood, earthquakes or
other natural or human-made causes and in order to ensure that preparations of
this city will be adequate to deal with such disasters, and generally to
provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health and
safety and to preserve the lives and property of the people of the city, it is
hereby found and declared to be necessary:
      (1)   To create a City Emergency Services Agency;
      (2)   To confer upon the Mayor and Council and the organization
established by this subchapter the emergency powers provided herein;
      (3)   To provide for the rendering of aid, on a mutual basis, to other
communities and local governmental units to the extent authorized or permitted
by state and federal laws and regulations, and to the extent of the
capabilities of this city; and
      (4)   To provide cooperation with the state and federal governments with
respect to the carrying out of emergency service functions.
   (B)   It is further declared to be the purpose of this subchapter and the
policy of this city, that all emergency service functions of this city be
coordinated to the maximum extent with the state government, including its
various departments and agencies, with other cities and localities, and with
private agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective preparation
and use may be made of this city’s manpower, resources and facilities for
dealing with any disaster that may occur.
   (C)   It is further declared to be the purpose of this subchapter and the
policy of this city to organize an emergency services organization in
conformity with the comprehensive plan and program prepared by the Governor
pursuant to W. Va. Code 15-5-5, and as the city is directed to do by W. Va.
Code 15-5-8.
(Prior Code, § 109.02)
§ 32.003 EMERGENCY SERVICES ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code 15-5-8, there is hereby
established the City Organization for Emergency Services, which may be known as
the “Nitro Emergency Services Organization”; and which shall consist of the
Director of Emergency Services, the Emergency Services Advisory Council and
such other members as may be designated in this subchapter or as from time to
time may be required and as authorized by Council.
   (B)   Council shall have general direction and control of the Emergency
Services Organization and shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions
of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 109.03)
§ 32.004 EMERGENCY SERVICES ADVISORY COUNCIL.
   Pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code 15-5-8, an Emergency Services
Advisory Council is hereby established, which shall consist of five residents
of the city, appointed by Council to advise the Director on all matters
pertaining to emergency services; provided, that not more than three members
thereof shall be members of the same political party. Council members shall
serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for the reasonable and
necessary expenses actually incurred in the performance of their duties. Each
Council member shall be appointed for a four-year term of office and until his
or her successor is duly appointed and qualified; and, to provide for
overlapping terms, three members shall be appointed in the month of September
in 1975 and every four years thereafter, and two members shall be appointed in
the month of September in 1977 and every four years thereafter; and members so
appointed shall take office on the first day of the month next following their
appointment. Vacancies which occur other than by reason of expiration of term
of office shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
(Prior Code, § 109.04)
§ 32.005 DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES: APPOINTMENT; TERM; RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Director of Emergency Services, hereinafter in this subchapter referred
to simply as “the Director”, shall be appointed by Council, to serve at its
will and pleasure. Subject to the direction and control of Council, the
Director shall be the executive head of the Emergency Services Organization and
shall be directly responsible to Council for the organization, administration
and operation of the local emergency services program.
(Prior Code, § 109.05)
§ 32.006 DIRECTOR’S POWERS; DUTIES.
   (A)   The Director shall coordinate the activities of all organizations
concerned with any or all phases of emergency services which may exist within
this city and shall maintain liaison and cooperate with the emergency services
agencies and organizations within the state and within the state government.
   (B)   The Director, in the performance of his or her duties, is hereby
authorized to cooperate with the state government, with other cities and
counties in the state and with private agencies in all matters pertaining to
emergency services of the city and of the state.
   (C)   In performing his or her duties under this subchapter, and to effect
its policy and purpose, the Director is further authorized and empowered:
      (1)   To make, amend and rescind the necessary orders, rules and
regulations to carry out the provisions of this subchapter within the limits of
the authority conferred upon him or her, with due consideration of the plans of
the state and federal governments;
      (2)   To prepare a comprehensive plan and program for emergency services
for this city, such plan and program to be integrated into and coordinated with
the plans of the state government, and of other cities and counties within the
state to the fullest extent;
      (3)   In accordance with such plan and program for this city, to procure
supplies and equipment, to institute training programs and public information
programs and to take all other preparatory steps including the partial or full
mobilization of the Organization in advance of actual disaster, to ensure the
furnishing of adequately trained and equipped forces of emergency services
personnel in time of need;
      (4)   To make such studies and surveys of the industries, resources and
facilities in this city as may be necessary to ascertain the capabilities of
the city to provide for emergency services, and to plan for the most efficient
emergency use thereof;
      (5)   On behalf of this city, to enter into mutual aid arrangements with
other cities and counties within this state, and also, with the approval of the
State Governor, with emergency services agencies or organizations of other
states, for reciprocal aid and assistance in case of disaster too great to be
dealt with unassisted;
      (6)   To delegate any administrative authority invested in him or her
under this subchapter and to provide for the subdelegation of any such
authority; and
      (7)   To cooperate with the Governor and the state’s Office of Emergency
Services and with officials and agencies of other cities and counties within
the state, in matters pertaining to the emergency services of the city and
state, including the direction or control of:
         (a)   Blackouts and practice blackouts, air raid drills, mobilization
of emergency services forces and other tests and exercises;
         (b)    Warnings and signals for drills or attacks and the electronic
and mechanical services to be used in connection therewith;
         (c)   The effective screening or extinguishing of all lights and
lighting devices and appliances and of all devices emitting electronic signals
of any character whatever;
         (d)   Shutting off water mains, gas mains, electric power connections
and the suspension of all other utility services;
         (e)   The conduct of civilians and the movement and cessation of
movement of pedestrians and vehicular traffic, during, prior and subsequent to
drills or attack;
         (f)   Public meetings or gatherings; and
         (g)   The evacuation and reception of the civilian population.
(Prior Code, § 109.06)
§ 32.007 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The Director, in collaboration with other public and private
agencies within this state, may develop or cause to be developed mutual aid
arrangements for reciprocal aid and assistance in case of disaster too great to
be dealt with unassisted.
      (2)   Such arrangements shall be consistent with the state plan and
program for emergency services and, in time of emergency, it shall be the duty
of the city’s Emergency Services Organization to render assistance in
accordance with mutual aid agreements.
   (B)   The Director may, subject to the approval of the Governor, enter into
mutual aid arrangements with emergency services agencies or organizations in
other states for reciprocal aid and assistance in case of disaster too great to
be dealt with unassisted.
(Prior Code, § 109.07)
§ 32.008 APPROPRIATIONS; AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS AND LOANS.
   (A)   Whenever the federal or state government, or any agency or officer
thereof, shall offer to this city services, equipment, supplies, materials or
funds by way of gift, grant or loan, for purposes relating to emergency
services, the city, acting with the consent of the Governor and through the
Mayor, may accept such offer, and, upon such acceptance, the Mayor may
authorize any officer of the city to receive such services, equipment,
supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the city, and subject to the terms of
the offer and the rules and regulations of any of the agencies making the
offer.
   (B)   Whenever any person shall offer to this city services, equipment,
supplies, materials or funds by way of gift or loan, for purposes relating to
emergency services, the city, acting through the Mayor, may accept such offer,
and, upon such acceptance, the Mayor may authorize any officer of the city to
receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the
city, and subject to the terms of the offer.
(Prior Code, § 109.08)
§ 32.009 UTILIZATION OF EXISTING SERVICES AND FACILITIES.
   In carrying out the provisions of this subchapter, the Director is directed
to utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing
departments, offices and agencies of the city to the maximum extent
practicable, and the officers and personnel of all such departments, offices
and agencies are directed to cooperate with and extend such services and
facilities to the Director, and to the city’s Emergency Services Organization
upon request.
(Prior Code, § 109.09)
§ 32.010 POLITICAL ACTIVITY PROHIBITED.
   No organization for civil defense established under the authority of this
subchapter shall participate in any form of political activity, nor shall it be
employed directly or indirectly for political purposes.
(Prior Code, § 109.10)
§ 32.011 QUALIFICATIONS AND OATH REQUIRED OF EMERGENCY SERVICES PERSONNEL.
   (A)   No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity in the
city’s Emergency Services Organization established under this subchapter, who
advocates or has advocated a change by force or violence in the constitutional
form of the government of the United States or of this state, or of this city,
or the overthrow of any government in the United States by force or violence,
or who has been convicted of or is under indictment of information charging any
subversive act against the United States.
   (B)   Each person who is appointed to serve in this Organization for
Emergency Services shall, before entering upon his or her duties, take an oath,
in writing, before a person authorized to administer oaths in this state, which
shall be substantially as follows:
   “I,                              , do solemnly swear or affirm that I will
support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of West Virginia, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear
true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely,
without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter.”
   “And I do further swear or affirm that I do not advocate, nor am I a member
of any political party or organization that advocates, the overthrow of the
government of the United States or this state by force or violence and that
during such time as I am a member of the (name of organization) I will not
advocate or become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or this state by
force or violence.”
(Prior Code, § 109.11)
§ 32.012 ENFORCEMENT; AVAILABILITY OF FILE OF ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Organization for Emergency Services, established
pursuant to this subchapter, and of the officers thereof, to execute and
enforce such orders, rules and regulations as may be made by the State Governor
pursuant to W. Va. Code Article 15-5, as well as those made by Council and by
the Director under authority of this subchapter; and the Director shall
maintain in his or her office, or in the office of the City Recorder, a
complete file of all such orders, rules and regulations of the Governor which
affect or relate to this city or to the city’s Emergency Services Organization
and all such orders, rules and regulations of Council and himself or herself,
while in effect, and this file shall be open to the public for inspection and
use during all regular business hours.
(Prior Code, § 109.12)
BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 32.025 BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   The City Council is hereby authorized to create, establish and operate a
Municipal Board of Health pursuant to W. Va. Code Chapter 16, Article 2, and
other provisions of the state code, as amended, and to be responsible for
directing, supervising and carrying out matters relating to the public health
of the city. This subchapter establishes provisions applicable to the Municipal
Board of Health to ensure the consistent performance of duties relating to
basic public health services and other health services and the enforcement of
the laws of this state and city pertaining to public health.
(Ord. 11-1, passed 1-4-2011)
§ 32.026 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASIC PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICES. Those services the Municipal Board of Health
is required to provide to protect the health of the public including:
      (1)   Communicable and reportable disease prevention and control;
      (2)   Community health promotion; and
      (3)   Environmental health protection.
   BUREAU. The Bureau for Public Health of the Department.
   CITY. The City of Nitro, West Virginia.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Nitro.
   CITY HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The staff and facilities of the Municipal Board of
Health.
   CITY HEALTH OFFICER. The individual physician with a current West Virginia
license to practice medicine, who supervises and directs the activities of the
City Health Department services, staff and facilities and is appointed by the
Municipal Board of Health with approval by the Commissioner.
   CITY OF NITRO BOARD OF HEALTH, MUNICIPAL BOARD OF HEALTH, MUNICIPAL BOARD or
BOARD. A Board of Health created by the City Council and serving the city.
   COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of the Bureau for Public Health, who is the
State Health Officer.
   COMMUNICABLE AND REPORTABLE DISEASE PREVENTION AND CONTROL. Includes disease
surveillance, case investigation and follow-up, outbreak investigation,
response to epidemics, and prevention and control of rabies, sexually
transmitted diseases, vaccine preventable diseases, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and
other communicable and reportable diseases.
   COMMUNITY HEALTH PROMOTION. Includes assessing and reporting community
health needs to improve health status, facilitating community partnerships
including identifying the community’s priority health needs, mobilization of a
community around identified priorities, and monitoring the progress of
community health education services.
   DEPARTMENT. The West Virginia Department of Health and Human Resources.
   DIRECTOR or DIRECTOR OF HEALTH. The State Health Officer.
   ENHANCED PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICES. Services that are provided by the Municipal
Board of Health that focus on health promotion activities to address a major
health problem in the city, are targeted to a particular population and assist
individuals in the city to access the health care system, such as lead and
radon abatement for indoor air quality and positive pregnancy tracking.
   ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH PROTECTION. Includes efforts to protect the city from
environmental health risks, including, inspection of housing, institutions,
recreational facilities, sewage and wastewater facilities; inspection and
sampling of drinking water facilities; and response to disease outbreaks or
disasters.
   PERFORMANCE-BASED STANDARDS. Generally accepted, objective standards such as
rules or guidelines against which the City Health Department’s level of
performance can be measured.
   PRIMARY CARE SERVICES. Health care services, including medical care, that
emphasize first contact patient care and assume overall and ongoing
responsibility for the patient in health maintenance and treatment of disease.
PRIMARY CARE SERVICES are services that the Municipal Board of Health may offer
if that Board has determined that an unmet need for primary care services
exists in its service area.
   PROGRAM PLAN or PLAN OF OPERATION. The annual plan the Municipal Board of
Health is required to submit to the Commissioner for approval.
   SECRETARY. The Secretary of the Department.
   SERVICE AREA. The territorial jurisdiction of the Municipal Board of Health.
(Ord. 11-1, passed 1-4-2011)
§ 32.027 SERVICE AREA OF THE BOARD OF HEALTH.
   The service area of the Municipal Board of Health is the area within the
geographical boundaries of the city.
(Ord. 11-1, passed 1-4-2011)
§ 32.028 APPOINTMENT TO AND COMPOSITION OF BOARD; QUALIFICATION; NUMBER OF
APPOINTEES.
   The Municipal Board of Health shall be composed of five members selected and
appointed by vote of the City Council. Each member appointed to the Municipal
Board of Health shall be a resident of the city. No more than two members who
reside in the same municipal ward may be appointed and no more than two members
may be appointed who are personally licensed or certified in, engaged in or
actively participating in the same business, profession or occupation. No more
than three members of the Municipal Board of Health may belong to the same
political party.
(Ord. 11-1, passed 1-4-2011)
§ 32.029 TERMS OF APPOINTMENT, REAPPOINTMENT, OATH OF OFFICE AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The term of office for members selected and appointed to the Municipal
Board of Health shall be five years. Members may serve until their duly
qualified successors are selected and appointed by vote of the City Council.
Members may be reappointed for additional terms of five years. Board members’
oaths of office shall be duly recorded before entering into or discharging any
duties of the office.
   (B)   Any vacancy on the Municipal Board of Health shall be filled by
appointment by the City Council. This appointment shall be for the unexpired
term.
   (C)   The Municipal Board of Health may remove any of its members pursuant
to the provisions of its lawfully adopted bylaws and shall remove any of its
members for official misconduct, incompetence, neglect of duty, gross
immorality or the revocation of any state professional license or
certification. The Municipal Board of Health, or any of its members, may be
removed by the State Health Officer for failure or refusal to comply with
duties as set forth by statute or rule. Upon removal, a successor or successors
to the member or members removed shall immediately be appointed by the City
Council.
   (D)   The Municipal Board of Health shall determine the compensation each
member may receive for attending meetings of, and other activities for, the
Board as required by law; provided, that this compensation may not exceed $100
per day. Each member of the Municipal Board of Health may be reimbursed for all
reasonable and necessary travel and other expenses actually incurred by the
member in the performance of duties as a member of the Municipal Board.
(Ord. 11-1, passed 1-4-2011)
§ 32.030 MEETINGS, ATTENDANCE AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The Municipal Board of Health may meet as often as necessary to
orderly and efficiently execute its duties and exercise its powers; provided,
that the Board shall meet no fewer than four times per year. Members of the
Municipal Board of Health shall attend Board meetings in compliance with
attendance policies established by its bylaws or rules.
   (B)   The Municipal Board of Health is authorized to and shall adopt and may
amend bylaws or rules governing the time and place of its regular meetings,
procedures and method of conducting its meetings, including quorum, meeting
attendance policies, requirements for written minutes and Board actions as
public records, duties and election process for officers, process for filling
Board vacancies, number, duties, tenure and eligibility of members, and any
other matters affecting how the Board is organized to perform its duties. A
quorum of the Board for transacting business is a simple majority of the
constituent membership of the Board.
   (C)   The Municipal Board of Health, pursuant to its bylaws, shall elect
from its members a Chairperson. The Chairperson shall serve for a term of one
year and may be reelected for additional terms. The Chairperson may, on behalf
of the Board, sign documents, execute contracts and otherwise act for and in
the name of the Board in all matters within its lawful powers and as duly
authorized by a majority of the Board members.
(Ord. 11-1, passed 1-4-2011)
§ 32.031 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Municipal Board of Health shall:
      (1)   Provide the following basic public health services and programs in
accordance with state public health performance-based standards:
         (a)   Community health promotion including assessing and reporting
community health needs to improve health status, facilitating community
partnerships including identifying the community’s priority health needs,
mobilization of a community around identified priorities and monitoring the
progress of community health education services;
         (b)   Environmental health protection, including the promoting and
maintaining of clean and safe air, water, food and facilities and the
administering of public health laws as specified by the Commissioner as to
general sanitation, the sanitation of public drinking water, sewage and
wastewater, food and milk, and the sanitation of housing, institutions and
recreation; and
         (c)   Communicable or reportable disease prevention and control,
including disease surveillance, case investigation and follow-up, outbreak
investigation, response to epidemics, and prevention and control of rabies,
sexually transmitted diseases, vaccine preventable diseases, HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis and other communicable and reportable diseases.
      (2)   Appoint a City Health Officer to serve at the will and pleasure of
the Municipal Board of Health with approval of the Commissioner;
      (3)   Submit a general plan of operation to the Commissioner for
approval. This program plan shall be submitted annually and comply with
provisions of the Municipal Board of Health standards administrative rule;
      (4)   Provide equipment and facilities for the City Health Department
that are in compliance with federal and state law;
      (5)   Permit the Commissioner to act by and through it, as needed;
provided, that the Commissioner may enforce all municipal ordinances of the
Board’s service area relating to public health, and the rules and orders of the
Municipal Board of Health within the service area of the Municipal Board of
Health; provided however, that the Commissioner may enforce the laws, rules and
orders when, in the opinion of the Commissioner, a public health emergency
exists or when the Municipal Board of Health fails or refuses to enforce public
health laws and rules necessary to prevent and control the spread of a
communicable or reportable disease dangerous to the public health;
      (6)   Deposit all moneys and collected fees into a city account
designated for Municipal Board of Health purposes;
      (7)   Submit vouchers or other instruments approved by the Municipal
Board of Health and signed by the City Health Officer or designated
representative to the City Treasurer for payment of necessary and reasonable
expenditures from the city public health funds;
      (8)   Participate in audits, be in compliance with tax procedures
required by the state and annually develop a budget for the next fiscal year;
      (9)   Perform public health duties assigned by city ordinance consistent
with state public health laws; and
      (10)   Enforce the public health laws of this state and any other laws of
this state applicable to the Municipal Board of Health.
   (B)   The Municipal Board of Health may:
      (1)   Provide primary care services, clinical and categorical programs
and enhanced public health services;
      (2)   Employ or contract with any technical, administrative, clerical or
other persons, to serve as needed and at the will and pleasure of the Municipal
Board of Health. Staff and any contractors providing services to the Municipal
Board of Health shall comply with applicable state certification and licensure
requirements. Eligible staff employed by the Municipal Board of Health shall be
covered by the rules of the division of personnel under W. Va. Code Art. 16-2;
however, the Municipal Board of Health may, in the alternative and with the
consent and approval of the City Council, establish and adopt a merit system
for its eligible employees. The merit system may be similar to the state merit
system and may be established by the Municipal Board of Health by its order,
subject to the approval of the City Council, adopting and making applicable to
the Municipal Board of Health, all or any portion of any order, rule, standard
or compensation rate in effect in the state merit system as may be desired and
as is properly applicable;
      (3)   Adopt and promulgate, and from time to time amend, rules consistent
with state public health laws and the rules of the Department that are
necessary and proper for the protection of the general health of the city and
the prevention of the introduction, propagation and spread of disease. All
rules shall be filed with the City Recorder and shall be kept by the recording
officer in a separate book as public records;
      (4)   Accept, receive and receipt for money or property from any federal,
state or local governmental agency, from any other public source or from any
private source, to be used for public health purposes or for the establishment
or construction of public health facilities;
      (5)   Assess, charge and collect fees for permits and licenses for the
provision of public health services in accordance with state law;
      (6)   Assess, charge and collect fees for services provided by the City
Health Department; provided, that fees for services shall be submitted to and
approved by the Commissioner;
      (7)   Contract for payment with any municipality, Kanawha County or
Putnam County, or the board of education for Kanawha County or Putnam County
for the provision of health services or for the use of public health
facilities. Any contract shall be in writing and permit provision of services
or use of facilities for a period not to exceed one fiscal year. The written
contract may include provisions for annual renewal by agreement of the parties;
and
      (8)   Retain and make available child safety car seats, collect rental
and security deposit fees for the expenses of retaining and making available
child safety car seats, and conduct public education activities concerning the
use and preventing the misuse of child safety car seats; provided, that this
division (B)(8) is not intended to conflict with the provisions of W. Va. Code
17C-15-46.
   (C)   The Municipal Board of Health is charged with protecting the health
and safety, as well as promoting the interests of the citizens of the city and
state. All state funds appropriated by the Legislature for the benefit of local
boards of health shall be used for provision of basic public health services.
(Ord. 11-1, passed 1-4-2011)
§ 32.032 CITY HEALTH OFFICER; TERM OF APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The Municipal Board of Health shall appoint a full-time or part-time
City Health Officer with approval by the Commissioner. The City Health Officer
shall be a physician currently licensed in this state and knowledgeable in the
science of public health. The City Health Officer serves at the will and
pleasure of the Municipal Board of Health for a term of one year and is
eligible for reappointment at compensation determined by the Municipal Board of
Health.
   (B)   The City Health Officer may be removed from office by the Commissioner
if the City Health Officer fails or refuses to carry out the lawful orders or
rules of the Secretary in the event the Commissioner determines a public health
emergency exists or if the City Health Officer fails or refuses to enforce
public health laws and rules necessary to prevent and control the spread of
communicable or reportable diseases dangerous to the public health. Upon
removal, a successor City Health Officer shall immediately be appointed by the
Municipal Board of Health pursuant to the provisions of the state code.
(Ord. 11-1, passed 1-4-2011)
§ 32.033 POWERS AND DUTIES OF HEALTH OFFICER.
   (A)   The City Health Officer serves as the executive officer of the
Municipal Board of Health and under its supervision. The City Health Officer
shall administer the provisions of the state code, all other laws of this state
and the rules and orders of the Secretary relating to public health and
applicable to the Municipal Board of Health’s service area, municipal
ordinances of the Municipal Board of Health’s service area relating to public
health and the rules and orders of the Municipal Board of Health.
   (B)   The City Health Officer has the following additional powers and duties
which may be delegated with the approval of the Board:
      (1)   To attend Municipal Board of Health meetings as a nonvoting member.
The City Health Officer serves as Secretary at all Board meetings and is
responsible for maintaining the Municipal Board of Health’s offices, meeting
minutes and records;
      (2)   To supervise and direct the activities of the Municipal Board of
Health’s health services, employees and facilities;
      (3)   To ensure that procedures are established for the receipt of
communicable or reportable disease reports from local physicians and other
reporting sources and for the transmittal of the reports to the Commissioner;
      (4)   To perform mandatory HIV tests on persons convicted of sex-related
offenses and resident within the service area; and
      (5)   To determine when sufficient corrections have been made to warrant
removal of any restrictions or limitations placed on an individual or entity
for public health purposes by an employee of the Municipal Board of Health
(Ord. 11-1, passed 1-4-2011)
§ 32.034 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF APPOINTING AUTHORITIES FOR THE BOARD.
   (A)   The City Council shall provide financial support for the operation of
the City Health Department. The City Council may levy a municipal tax to
provide funds for the Municipal Board of Health; provided, that the tax may not
exceed $0.03 on each $100 of assessed valuation of the taxable property in the
city, according to the latest assessment.
   (B)   The City Council may appropriate and spend money from the city’s
general funds for public health purposes and pay the expenses of the operation
of the Municipal Board of Health services and facilities.
(Ord. 11-1, passed 1-4-2011)
SANITARY BOARD
§ 32.045 CREATION; POWERS AND DUTIES; COMPOSITION.
   (A)   There is hereby created in and for the city a Sanitary Board, which
shall be charged with the custody, supervision, control, administration,
operation and maintenance of the municipal sewage system, all as permitted and
provided by W. Va. Code Article 16-13. The Sanitary Board shall be composed of
the Mayor and two persons appointed by Council, one of whom shall be a
registered professional engineer; provided, that when no city sewer is under
construction, a registered professional engineer need not be a member of the
Board. The two appointed members of the Board shall each serve for a term of
three years and until his or her successor is duly appointed and has qualified,
and vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
   (B)   No officer or employee of the city, whether holding a paid or unpaid
office or position, shall be eligible to appointment on the Sanitary Board
until at least one year after the expiration of the term of his or her public
office or employment, and no person whose interest could be construed as
inconsistent with the best interests of the city shall be allowed to serve as a
member of the Sanitary Board.
(Prior Code, § 147.01)
§ 32.046 OFFICERS; COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES; BOND OF TREASURER.
   (A)   The Mayor shall act as Chairperson of the Sanitary Board, which shall
elect a Vice Chairperson from its members and shall designate a Secretary and a
Treasurer (but the Secretary and Treasurer may be one and the same), who need
not be a member or members of the Sanitary Board. The Vice Chairperson,
Secretary and Treasurer shall hold office as such at the will of the Sanitary
Board. The Chairperson and other members of the Sanitary Board shall receive
such compensation as may be provided for them, respectively, by Council, and
each shall be entitled to payment by the city for his or her reasonable
expenses incurred in the performance of his or her duties.
   (B)   The Secretary and Treasurer, or the Secretary-Treasurer, as the case
may be, shall be paid such reasonable compensation for services as from time to
time may be fixed by Council; and the Treasurer shall give bond, with qualified
corporate surety, in the amount of $15,000 conditioned for the proper
application of all money received by him or her as such for the faithful
performance of the duties of his or her office.
   (C)   All compensation and all expenses incurred by the Sanitary Board, its
officers and employees, shall be paid solely from funds authorized to be
collected and received by the Board as provided by W. Va. Code Article 16-13.
(Prior Code, § 147.02)
§ 32.047 SPECIFIC POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The construction, acquisition, improvements, equipment, custody,
operation, maintenance and administration of all works for the collection,
treatment or disposal of sewage within the city and in the sanitary district
which shall be acquired, constructed, operated or maintained by the Sanitary
Board, the employment of all engineers, architects, inspectors,
superintendents, managers, collectors, attorneys and other employees in the
judgment of the Board necessary to the execution of its powers and duties, and
the collection of all revenues from the works acquired, constructed, operated
or maintained by it, shall be under the supervision and control of the Sanitary
Board.
   (B)   In addition to the authority and powers granted to the Sanitary Board
by this subchapter, the Sanitary Board shall be invested with all other powers
and authorities provided for such Board by W. Va. Code Article 16-13.
(Prior Code, § 147.03)
§ 32.048 BYLAWS.
   The Sanitary Board shall have the power to establish the bylaws, rules and
regulations governing its members, employees, meetings and the conduct of its
business.
(Prior Code, § 147.04)
§ 32.049 ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   In addition to the specific authority granted by this subchapter, the
Sanitary Board shall make and enforce such other rules and regulations, subject
to the approval of Council, for the safe, economical and efficient management,
control and protection of the city’s public sewerage system, for the
construction and use of all other connections thereto, and for the regulation,
collection, rebating and refunding of such sewage service charges as may be
needful or necessary from time to time; provided, that such rules and
regulations shall not become effective until they have been approved by Council
by ordinance or resolution and spread upon the records of Council, as notice to
the public of the provisions thereof.
(Prior Code, § 147.05)
§ 32.050 TRANSFER OF REAL PROPERTY TO SANITARY BOARD.
   The City Council hereby authorizes the city to abandon and transfer to the
city’s regional wastewater utility, formerly known as the Nitro Sanitary Board,
the following described real property for a new pump station No. 7:
   Being a parcel or tract of land situated on Valley Avenue along the waters
of the Kanawha River, Nitro Corporation District, Kanawha County, West
Virginia, to which a more particular description is made, to-wit:
   Beginning at a point along the western right-of-way line of Fifth Street
marking the intersection with the southern right-of-way line of Valley Avenue;
thence, with southern right-of-way line of said Valley Avenue;
      N 77°50'36" W 132.00 feet to a point; thence crossing said Valley Avenue;
      N 11°53'10" E 25.00 feet to a point in the common right-of-way line of
Valley Avenue and West Virginia State Route 25; thence along said right-of-way
line;
      S 77°50'36" E 132.00 feet to a point in the western right-of-way line of
the aforesaid Fifth Street; thence with the said right-of-way line of Fifth
Street; and
      S 11°53'10" W 25.00 feet to the Point of Beginning, containing 3,300
square feet or 0.075 acres.
(Ord. passed 11-3-2009; Ord. passed 11-7-2017)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 32.065 COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall consist of ten members, all of whom
shall be residents of the city, who shall be qualified by knowledge and
experience in matters pertaining to the development of the city, and the
membership shall include representatives in business, industry and labor.
   (B)   Three-fifths of all members of the Planning Commission shall have been
residents of the city for at least one year prior to their nomination. One
member of the Planning Commission shall be the Mayor, who shall be ex officio
Chairperson, and one member of the Commission shall be a Council member.
(Prior Code, § 149.01)
§ 32.066 APPOINTMENT; TERM; EXPENSES.
   (A)   (1)   The members of the Planning Commission shall be nominated by the
Mayor and confirmed by Council. The terms of the Council member and the Mayor
shall be coextensive with the terms of office to which they have been elected
unless the Mayor and Council, at the first regular meeting of each year,
appoint others to serve as the city’s representatives. The remaining members of
the Commission shall serve respectively for terms of three years.
      (2)   Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term
only.
      (3)   Members of the Planning Commission shall serve without
compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the
performance of their official duties.
   (B)   The members of the Planning Commission, other than the Mayor and
Council member, shall be appointed as follows: during the month of January,
1976, and every three years thereafter, four members shall be appointed; during
the month of January, 1977, and every three years thereafter, four members
shall be appointed; and each member so appointed shall take office on February
1 in the year of his or her appointment.
(Prior Code, § 149.02)
§ 32.067 POWERS; DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission shall have all the powers, rights, duties,
immunities, privileges and responsibilities, and shall be subject to all
limitations and liabilities relating to municipal planning commissions, as
provided in W. Va. Code 8A-1-1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 149.03)
BUILDING COMMISSION
§ 32.080 COMMISSION CREATED.
   There is created, pursuant to W. Va. Code Chapter 8, Article 33, a Municipal
Building Commission to be known as the “city’s Building Commission”, which
shall be a public corporation having perpetual existence and, except as
hereinafter expressly limited, shall have all of the power and authority
provided in W. Va. Code Chapter 8, Article 33 for such a Commission.
(Ord. 17-1, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 32.081 MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   All property, powers and duties and the management and control of the
city’s Building Commission shall be vested in a Board consisting of
representatives, to be known as Commissioners, appointed by the City Council.
Such Board shall consist of three members, each to be appointed for a term of
five years except for the initial appointments, which shall be made as follows:
      (1)   The first Commissioner appointed shall serve a term of one year
from the date this section becomes law;
      (2)   The second Commissioner appointed shall serve a term of two years
from the date this section becomes law; and
      (3)   The third Commissioner appointed shall serve a term of three years
from the date this section becomes law.
   (B)   As the term of each such initial appointee expires, the successor to
fill the vacancy created by such expired term shall be appointed for a term of
five years. If any Commissioner appointed under this section fails or refuses
to qualify within 20 days of appointment or if the position of any Commissioner
becomes vacant for any reason prior to the expiration of his or her term of
office, a successor shall be appointed by the City Council to complete the
unexpired portion of such term.
   (C)   Each Commissioner, at the time of his or her appointment, shall be a
resident of the city. No Commissioner shall receive any compensation for his or
her services as such, but each member shall be reimbursed by the City Building
Commission for any reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in the
discharge of his or her duties as a member of the Board.
(Ord. 17-1, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 32.082 POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   Subject to the procedures and limitations set forth in this section, the
city’s Building Commission shall have plenary power and authority to:
   (A)   Sue and be sued;
   (B)   Contract and be contracted with;
   (C)   Adopt, use and alter a common seal;
   (D)   Make and adopt all necessary, appropriate and lawful bylaws and rules
and regulations pertaining to its affairs;
   (E)   Elect such officers, appoint such committees and agents, and employ
and fix the compensation of such employees and contractors as may be necessary
for the conduct of the affairs and operations of the city’s Building
Commission;
   (F)   Acquire, purchase, own and hold any property, real or personal, and
acquire, construct, equip, maintain and operate public buildings, structures,
projects and appurtenant facilities, of any type for which the City Council is
permitted by law to expend public funds;
   (G)   Apply for, receive and use grants-in-aid, donations and contributions
from any source, including, but not limited to, the United States or any of its
departments or agencies, and accept and use bequests, devises, gifts and
donations from any source whatsoever;
   (H)   Sell, encumber or dispose of any property, real or personal;
   (I)   Issue negotiable bonds, notes, debentures or other evidences of
indebtedness and provide for the rights of the holders; incur any proper
indebtedness; and issue any obligations and give any security which it may deem
necessary or advisable in connection with exercising powers as provided in this
division;
   (J)   Raise funds by the issuance of revenue bonds in the manner provided by
the applicable provisions of W. Va. Code 8-16-1 et seq., without regard, to the
extent provided in W. Va. Code 8-33-5, to the limitations specified in W. Va.
Code 8-33-5, it being hereby expressly provided that for the purpose of the
issuance and sale of revenue bonds, the city’s Building Commission is a
governing body as that term is used in W. Va. Code 8-33-5 only;
   (K)   Exercise the power of eminent domain in the manner provided in W. Va.
Code 54-1-1 et seq. for business corporations, for the purposes set forth in
division (F) above, which purposes are declared to be public purposes for which
private property may be taken or damaged;
   (L)   Lease its property or any part of its property, for public purposes,
to such persons and upon such terms as the city’s Building Commission deems
proper, but when the city is the lessee under any such lease, such lease must
contain a provision granting to the city the option to terminate such lease
during any fiscal year covered by the lease; and
   (M)   Do all things reasonable and necessary to carry out the powers
specified in this section.
(Ord. 17-1, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 32.083 FINANCIAL OBLIGATION.
   No indebtedness of any nature of the city’s Building Commission shall
constitute an indebtedness of the city or a charge against any property of the
city.
(Ord. 17-1, passed 1-3-2017)
BOARD OF LIBRARY DIRECTORS
§ 32.095 ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   As soon as may be practicable within three months after the effective
date of this code, Council shall establish a Board of Library Directors by
appointing five Library Directors, chosen from the citizens at large, with
reference to their fitness for such office; and such appointments shall be made
so that one Director’s term shall expire on the next following July 1, and so
that the terms of the other four Directors shall expire successively, one at a
time, on the four next following July 1; provided, that each Director so
appointed shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
During the month of May or June next preceding the expiration of the term of
the Director initially appointed to serve only until July 1 next following his
or her appointment, and annually thereafter, during the month of May or June,
Council shall appoint one Director to take office on July 1 in the year of his
or her appointment, who shall serve for a term of five years and until his or
her successor is appointed and qualified. Vacancies in the Board shall be
immediately reported by the Board to Council, and filled by appointment in like
manner, and, if an unexpired term, for the remainder of the term only. A
Director may be removed for just cause in the manner provided by the bylaws of
the Library Board. No compensation shall be paid or allowed any Director.
   (B)   Council hereby designates the Mayor as an ex officio member of the
city’s Library Board.
(Prior Code, § 151.01) (Ord. 87-6, passed 9-15-1986)
§ 32.096 ANNUAL MEETINGS; BYLAWS AND REGULATIONS; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Library Directors shall:
   (A)   Immediately after appointment, meet and organize by electing one
member as President and one as Secretary, and such other officers as may be
necessary. All officers shall hold office for one year and shall be eligible
for re-election;
   (B)   Adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations as are necessary for its own
guidance and for the administration, supervision and protection of the library
and all property belonging thereto as may not be inconsistent with the
provisions of this subchapter;
   (C)   Supervise the expenditure of all money credited to the Library Fund.
All money appropriated or collected for public library purposes shall be
deposited in the treasury of the city to the credit of the Library Fund, to be
paid out on the certified requisition of the Library Board, in the manner
provided by law or this code for the disbursement of other funds of the city,
or shall be deposited as the library’s Board of Directors shall direct and be
disbursed by the officer designated by that Board, such officer, before
entering upon his or her duties, to give bond payable to and in an amount fixed
by the Board of Directors of the library, conditioned for the faithful
discharge of his or her official fiscal duties. The cost of such bond shall be
paid from the Library Fund. The books, records and accounts of the Library
Board shall be subject to audit and examination by the office of the State Tax
Commissioner;
   (D)   Lease or purchase and occupy suitable quarters, or erect upon ground
secured through gift or purchase, an appropriate building for the use of such
library; and have supervision, care and custody of the grounds, rooms or
buildings constructed, leased or set apart for library purposes; and
   (E)   Employ a head librarian and, upon his or her recommendation, employ
such other assistants as may be necessary for the efficient operation of the
library.
(Prior Code, § 151.02)
§ 32.097 BOARD A CORPORATION; VESTING OF TITLE TO BEQUESTS OR DONATIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code 10-1-9, the Board of Library
Directors shall be a corporation and, as such, it may contract and be
contracted with, sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded and shall have and use
a common seal.
   (B)   The title to all bequests or donations of cash or other personal
property or real estate for the benefit of the public library under the control
of the Board of Library Directors shall be vested in that Board to be held in
trust and controlled by such Board according to the terms and for the purposes
set forth in the deed, gift, devise or bequest; provided, that the person
making the bequest or donation of cash or other personal property or real
estate for the benefit of such library shall have the right and privilege to
vest the title thereto in a trustee, or trustees, of his or her own selection,
and to provide for the selection of successor trustees, and to designate the
manner in which such fund or property shall be invested and used.
(Prior Code, § 151.03)
§ 32.098 USE OF PUBLIC LIBRARY; AUTHORITY OF BOARD TO RESTRICT USE.
   (A)   The library which is under the charge of the Board of Library
Directors shall be free for the use of all persons living within the city,
except for those charges for which provision may be made elsewhere in this
subchapter. The use of the library is subject to reasonable rules and
regulations adopted by the Board of Library Directors. The Board may extend the
privilege and use of the library to nonresidents upon such terms and conditions
as it may prescribe.
   (B)   The Board may exclude from the use of the library under its charge any
person who willfully and persistently violates any rule or regulation
prescribed for the use of the library or its facilities.
(Prior Code, § 151.04)
§ 32.099 FEES; FINES; SALE OF MATERIALS OR EQUIPMENT; DEPOSIT AND DISBURSEMENT
OF RECEIPTS.
   The Board of Library Directors may fix, establish and collect such
reasonable fees, service and rental charges as may be appropriate; may assess
fines, penalties, damages or replacement costs for the loss of, injury to or
failure to return any library property or material; and may sell surplus,
duplicated, obsolete or other unwanted materials or equipment belonging to the
library. All money received from these or other sources in the course of the
administration and operation of the library shall be deposited in the Library
Fund and shall be disbursed by the Board of Library Directors in the manner
prescribed elsewhere in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 151.05)
§ 32.100 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Board of Library Directors shall make an annual report for the fiscal
year ending June 13 to Council, stating the conditions of the library property,
the various sums of money received from the Library Fund, and all other
sources, and how such money was expended, the number of books and periodicals
on hand, the number added and withdrawn during the year, the number of books
lent, the number of registered users of such library, with such other
statistics, information and suggestions as may be deemed of general interest. A
copy of this report shall be sent to the state’s Library Commission.
(Prior Code, § 151.06)
KANAWHA VALLEY REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION AUTHORITY
§ 32.115 CITY IS PARTICIPATING MEMBER.
   Council hereby declares that this city shall henceforth act as a
participating member of the Kanawha Valley Regional Transportation Authority, a
public corporation, established pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code
Article 8-27
(Prior Code, § 153.01)
§ 32.116 CITY REPRESENTATIVES ON BOARD OF THE AUTHORITY.
   The number of representatives from each participating government on the
Board of Members of the Kanawha Valley Regional Transportation Authority shall
be as agreed upon from time to time by the governing bodies of all
participating governments; and Council shall appoint a resident of this city on
such Board each time a vacancy occurs in the city’s representation on such
Board, as provided in W. Va. Code 8-27-5.
(Prior Code, § 153.02)
§ 32.117 CERTAIN CITY SERVICES TO BE MADE AVAILABLE TO THE AUTHORITY.
   The city will make available to the Kanawha Valley Regional Transportation
Authority the services of its Planning Commission and other appropriate city
agencies upon request therefor.
(Prior Code, § 153.03)
WORLD WAR I MEMORIAL COMMISSION
§ 32.130 ESTABLISHMENT; GOALS.
   (A)   There is hereby created the World War I Memorial Commission, a
nonprofit agency of the city, and a Municipal Historic Landmarks Commission, as
provided for in W. Va. Code 8-26A-1 et seq., hereinafter referred to as “the
Commission”.
   (B)   The express goal of the Commission shall be to ensure the preservation
and maintenance of municipal landmarks hereinafter identified through
authentication and verifying the validly of artifacts, documents, media and
other source material presented to the city’s Historical Preservation
Commission, the Nitro Museum and/or any other historical vested entities. Such
preservation and maintenance of landmarks action by the World War I Commission
shall be for the purpose of causing the city to be forever recognized as a true
living memorial to World War I.
(Prior Code, § 155.01) (Ord. 11-5, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.131 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Commission shall consist of the Mayor and nine members, which shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the advise and consent of Council. The
members of such Commission shall serve without pay for three-year terms.
Expirations shall be scheduled over three, three and four per year alternately.
Members are eligible to serve additional terms when nominated and approved. The
City Treasurer and one member of Council shall be ex officio members of such
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 155.02) (Ord. 11-5, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.132 VACANCIES.
   When any vacancy occurs, due to any reason, the Mayor shall thereupon
appoint, subject to the advice and consent of Council, the absent member’s
successor, who shall serve the remaining unexpired portion of the absent
member’s term.
(Prior Code, § 155.03) (Ord. 11-5, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.133 REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES.
   The members of the Commission shall be reimbursed for all reasonable and
necessary expenses actually incurred in the performance of their duties. All
requests for reimbursement for expenses shall adhere to reimbursement for
expenses policies established by the city.
(Prior Code, § 155.04) (Ord. 11-5, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.134 OFFICERS.
   The officers of the Commission shall be President, Vice-President, Secretary
and Treasurer; such officers being elected by majority vote of the membership
thereof. An elected officer shall hold such position until the expiration of
his or her term, which shall be one year, and upon completion of the term of
office shall be eligible for reelection to another term of office. If any
vacancy occurs in any office, a successor shall be elected by the membership,
including the succeeding member that replaces the absent member.
(Prior Code, § 155.05) (Ord. 11-5, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.135 MEETINGS.
   The Commission shall hold meetings at a time and place to be designated by
the members thereof; six members being necessary to form a quorum. A majority
of votes cast shall be sufficient to decide an issue properly before the
Commission. Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern all meetings. An annual
meeting will be held in accordance with state codes for nonprofit
organizations.
(Prior Code, § 155.06) (Ord. 11-5, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.136 AUTHORITY TO PROMULGATE RULES.
   The Commission shall have authority to promulgate all rules and regulations
necessary or desirable for the proper functioning of the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 155.07) (Ord. 82-10, passed 11-16-1982)
§ 32.137 MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC.
   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and the public
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard at every meeting held.
(Prior Code, § 155.08) (Ord. 82-10, passed 11-16-1982)
§ 32.138 AUTHORITY TO EMPLOY.
   The Commission is authorized and empowered to employ, within the limits of
funds available therefor, such employees, assistants, technical personnel and
consultants as are necessary to discharge the duties and responsibilities of
the Commission, subject to the budgetary restraints as imposed by §
32.134(N).
(Prior Code, § 155.09) (Ord. 11-5, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.139 GENERAL AUTHORITY AND POWERS.
   The Commission shall have plenary power and authority, within the
jurisdictional limits of the municipality, and within the limits of available
funding, to:
   (A)   Make a survey of, and designate as historic landmarks, buildings,
structures and sites which constitute the principal, historical and
architectural sites which are of local, regional, statewide or national
significance. No building, structure or site shall be deemed to be a historic
one unless it has been prominently identified with, or best represents, some
major aspect of the cultural, political, economic, military or social history
of the locality, region, state or nation, or has had a major relationship with
the life of an historic personage or event representing some major aspect of,
or ideals related to, the history of the locality, region, state or nation;
   (B)   Prepare a register of buildings, structures and sites which meet the
requirements of division (A) above, publish lists of such properties and, with
the consent of the property owners, inspect such properties from time to time
and publish a register thereof from time to time setting forth appropriate
information concerning the registered buildings, structures and sites;
   (C)   With the consent of the property owners, certify and mark with
appropriately designed markers, buildings, structures and sites which it has
registered;
   (D)   Establish standards for the care and management of certified landmarks
and withdraw such certification for failure to maintain the standards so
prescribed;
   (E)   Acquire by purchase, gift or lease and administer registered landmarks
and easements and interests therein, both real and personal;
   (F)   Lease or sell property so acquired under the terms and conditions
designed to ensure the proper preservation of the landmark in question;
   (G)   Establish historic districts for registered landmarks, utilizing the
same guidelines set forth in division (A) above and designate the area thereof
by appropriate markers;
   (H)   Identify historical districts for registered landmarks and aid and
encourage the municipality or county in which the district or landmark is
located to adopt rules and regulations for the preservation of historical or
architectural values;
   (I)   Prepare and place historical markers on or along the highway or street
closest to the location which is intended to be identified by such marker;
   (J)   Seek the advice and assistance of individuals, groups, departments and
agencies of government who or which are conducting historical preservation
programs and coordinate the same insofar as possible;
   (K)   Seek and accept gifts, bequests, endowments and funds from any and all
sources for the accomplishment of the functions of the Commission;
   (L)   Adopt rules and regulations concerning the operation of the
Commission, the functions and responsibilities of its officers, employees,
assistants and other personnel and such other matters as may be necessary to
carry out the purpose of this subchapter;
   (M)   Adopt such other rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this subchapter, but no such rules and regulations
shall be inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter or with any plan
of the Planning Commission; and
   (N)   With the advice and consent of Council, such Commission shall be
empowered to adopt and execute a budget.
(Prior Code, § 155.10) (Ord. 82-10, passed 11-16-1982)
§ 32.140 LANDMARK AGREEMENTS WITH PROPERTY OWNERS.
   Whenever the Commission, with the consent of the property owner, certifies
property as being a registered landmark, it may seek and obtain from such
property owner an agreement as to such restrictions upon the use of the
property as the Commission finds are reasonable and are calculated to
perpetuate and preserve the features which led it to designate such property as
an historical landmark. All such agreements between such Commission and the
property owner shall be in writing, and when duly signed and acknowledged,
shall be recorded in the office of the Clerk of the County Commission of the
county wherein such landmark is located.
(Prior Code, § 155.11) (Ord. 82-10, passed 11-16-1982)
§ 32.141 NOTICE TO COUNTY ASSESSOR.
   When the Commission establishes a historic district, it shall notify the
County Assessor of the county in which such district or any part thereof is
located of the fact of such establishment and the boundaries of the district,
together with the restrictions which are applicable to the properties located
in such district which have been mutually agreed upon by such Commission and
the owners of property within such district. The agreement shall be recorded in
the same manner as the recordation of agreements between the Commission and
owners of designated landmarks entered into pursuant to the provisions of §
32.135.
(Prior Code, § 155.12) (Ord. 82-10, passed 11-16-1982)
§ 32.142 COOPERATION WITH STATE AGENCIES.
   The Commission shall cooperate and coordinate its activities with the
state’s Historical Society and the state’s Department of Culture and History,
with the view of developing a unified program for the identification, study,
preservation and protection of all historic buildings, structures and sites in
this state.
(Prior Code, § 155.13) (Ord. 82-10, passed 11-16-1982)
MUSEUM COMMISSION
§ 32.155 ESTABLISHMENT; GOAL.
   (A)   There is hereby created the city’s Museum Commission, a non-stock,
non-profit corporation, hereinafter referred to as “the Commission”.
   (B)   The express goal of the Commission is to establish, maintain and
operate a municipal museum for the purpose of educating the public through
recognition of the history of the city, and surrounding areas that contribute
to the history of the city.
   (C)   The Commission may accomplish its goal through any of the following
activities:
      (1)   The Commission may obtain, through lease, loan, purchase or gift, a
suitable setting located within the municipal boundaries of the city to be used
for the housing and public display of any and all items of either an
educational or historical nature relevant to the city’s selection as the
location for the construction and operation of a major supplier of munitions in
support of our nation’s World War I efforts;
      (2)   The Commission may obtain, through lease, loan, purchase or gift:
         (a)   Items of either an educational or historical nature relevant to
the city’s selection as the location for the construction and operation of a
major supplier of munitions in support of our nation’s World War I efforts;
         (b)   Items that explain, educate and celebrate the activities of the
city and its residents in other national military efforts; and
         (c)   Other items of an educational or historical nature relevant to
the history of the city and its surrounding area.
      (3)   The Commission may provide the citizens of the city, and all other
interested parties, opportunities to participate in those activities critical
to the success of the city’s Museum Commission;
      (4)   The Commission may provide to individuals and groups, guided tours
of the museum’s displays relevant educational brochures for the purpose of
creating an environment conducive to the furtherance of individual knowledge
and interest in the history of the city;
      (5)   The Commission may acquire funding through all legal means
available to a non- profit corporation, for the explicit purpose of developing,
supporting and maintaining the museum hereby authorized;
      (6)   The Commission may seek and accept gifts, bequests, endowments and
funds from any and all sources for the accomplishment of the functions of the
Commission;
      (7)   The Commission may seek the advice and assistance of individuals,
groups, departments and agencies of government who or which are conducting
historical preservation programs and coordinate the same insofar as possible;
      (8)   The Commission may adopt rules and regulations concerning the
operation of the Commission, the functions and responsibilities of its
officers, employees, assistants and other personnel and such other matters as
may be necessary to carry out the responsibilities of the Commission;
      (9)   The Commission may adopt such other rules and regulations as may be
deemed necessary to effectuate the purpose of the Commission, but no such rules
and regulations shall be inconsistent with the provision of this subchapter;
and
      (10)   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt and execute a budget.
(Ord. 11-6, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.156 GOVERNANCE.
   (A)   The affairs of the city’s Museum Commission shall be governed by a
Board of Directors that shall meet as determined by the articles of
incorporation, but no less than annually. The Board of Directors shall consist
of nine members; provided, that one Director shall be a member of City Council
who is recommended by the Mayor of the city and approved by the City Council;
provided however, that, the incorporator or incorporators of the Commission
shall be initial Directors, and those Directors shall appoint the remaining
Directors.
   (B)   The Directors of such Commission shall serve without pay for three-
year terms; provided, that initially, three of the Directors shall be appointed
for one-year terms, three of the Directors shall be appointed for two-year
terms and three of the Directors shall be appointed for three-year terms. The
Directors may serve consecutive terms.
   (C)   The Board of Directors shall develop and publish appropriate bylaws to
be used in the governance of the Commission.
   (D)   The Commission shall have authority to promulgate all rules necessary
or desirable for the proper functioning of the Commission.
(Ord. 11-6, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.157 VACANCIES.
   When any vacancy occurs, due to any reason, the Board of Directors shall
thereupon appoint the absent Director’s successor, who shall serve the
remaining unexpired portion of the absent Director’s term.
(Ord. 11-6, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.158 OFFICERS.
   (A)   The officers of the Commission shall be President, Vice-President,
Secretary and Treasurer; such officers being elected by majority vote of the
membership thereof. An elected officer shall hold such position until the
expiration of his or her term which shall be one year, and upon completion of
such term, the officer shall be eligible for election to another term.
   (B)   The election of officers shall be held at the annual meeting which
shall be announced to and open to the public. If any vacancy occurs in any
office, a successor shall be elected by the membership to fill the vacated
position until the completion of that term.
(Ord. 11-6, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.159 MEETINGS.
   The Commission shall hold meetings at a time and place to be designated by
the Directors thereof; six Directors being necessary to form a quorum. A
majority of votes cast shall be sufficient to decide an issue properly before
the Commission. Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern all meetings. An annual
meeting will be held in accordance with state codes for nonprofit
organizations. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and
the public shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard at every meeting held.
(Ord. 11-6, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.160 REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES.
   (A)   The Directors of the Commission shall not be paid a salary but may,
upon approval by the Board, be reimbursed for all reasonable and necessary
expenses actually incurred in the performance of their duties.
   (B)   Request for reimbursement for expenses shall adhere to established
reimbursement for expenses policies established by the city.
(Ord. 11-6, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.161 MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC.
   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and the public
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard at every meeting held.
(Ord. 11-6, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.162 AUTHORITY TO EMPLOY.
   The Commission is authorized and empowered to employ, within the limits of
funds available therefor, such employees, assistants, technical personnel and
consultants as are necessary to discharge the duties and responsibilities of
the Commission, subject to the budgetary restraints. Such employees are to
adhere to the agreed upon position job description.
(Ord. 11-6, passed 10-18-2011)
HISTORICAL PRESERVATION BOARD
§ 32.175 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created the city’s Historical Preservation Board, a
nonprofit agency of the city, and which shall hereinafter be referred to as the
Historical Preservation Board.
   (B)   The expressed goal of the Board shall be to ensure the preservation
and maintenance of municipal landmarks, to provide guidance and support to the
World War I Memorial Commission under the authority of §§
32.130 to
32.142, to provide guidance and support to the city’s Museum Board, to provide
necessary guidance and support for other activities as determined by the City
Council, to embrace historical landmarks and artifacts of history significance
to the city from surrounding areas, and to identify and provide the means to
educate and celebrate the rich history of the city.
(Ord. 11-7, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.176 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Board shall consist of the Mayor and nine members, two of which shall be
members of the World War I Board, two of which shall be members of the city’s
Museum Commission, one of which shall be a member of the City Council, and the
remainder of which shall be interested residents of the city. All members shall
be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the advice and consent of the City
Council. The members of such Board shall serve without pay for three-year
terms. Expiration shall be scheduled over three, three and four per year
alternately. The City Treasurer shall be an ex officio member. Members may
serve consecutive terms in office.
(Ord. 11-7, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.177 VACANCIES.
   When any vacancy occurs, due to any reason, the Mayor shall appoint, with
the advice and consent of the City Council, the successor to the vacated
position, and the appointed person shall serve the remaining unexpired portion
of the vacated member’s term.
(Ord. 11-7, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.178 REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES.
   The members of the Board shall be reimbursed for all reasonable and
necessary expenses actually incurred in the performance of their duties.
Request for reimbursement for expenses shall adhere to the established city
policies relating to reimbursement of expenses.
(Ord. 11-7, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.179 OFFICERS.
   The officers of the Board shall be President, Vice President, Secretary and
Treasurer; such officers being elected by majority vote of the membership
thereof. The term of office for each officer shall be one year, and each shall
be eligible for reelection. If any vacancy occurs in any office, a successor
shall be elected by the membership to complete that officer’s term of office.
(Ord. 11-7, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.180 MEETINGS.
   The Board shall hold meetings at a time and place to be designated by the
members thereof; six members being necessary to form a quorum. A majority of
votes cast by the members present at the meeting shall be sufficient to decide
an issue properly before the Board. Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern all
meetings. An annual meeting will be held in accordance with state codes for
nonprofit organizations.
(Ord. 11-7, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.181 AUTHORITY TO PROMULGATE RULES.
   The Board shall have authority to promulgate all rules and regulations
necessary or desirable for proper functioning of the Board.
(Ord. 11-7, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.182 MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC.
   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and the public shall
be afforded an opportunity to be heard as every meeting held.
(Ord. 11-7, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.183 AUTHORITY TO EMPLOY.
   The Board is authorized and empowered to employ, within the limits of funds
available therefor, such employees, assistants, technical personnel and
consultants as are necessary to discharge the duties and responsibilities of
the Board, subject to the budgetary restraints as imposed by §
32.134(N). Employees are to adhere to the agreed upon position job description.
(Ord. 11-7, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.184 GENERAL AUTHORITY AND POWERS.
   The city’s Historical Preservation Board shall:
   (A)   Recommend to the City Council for approval those organizations,
nonprofit groups and other special interest individuals who have made
application to be considered as a “historical entity” that supports the city’s
historical heritage by demonstrating and providing documentation of the goals,
objectives and ability to identify, preserve and make their finding publicly
available;
   (B)   Recommend to the City Council for approval historical landmarks, and
artifacts for historical significance that have been presented to the Board of
Directors; and
   (C)   Recommend to City Council for approval the purchase, protection and
registry of artifacts, landmarks, sites and/or other significant memorabilia to
be protected or included in the city’s Museum.
(Ord. 11-7, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.185 LANDMARK AGREEMENTS WITH PROPERTY OWNERS.
   The city’s Historical Preservation Board shall:
   (A)   Make a survey of, and designate as historic landmarks, buildings,
structures and sites which constitute the principal, historical and
architectural sites which are of local, regional, statewide or national
significance. No building, structure or site shall be deemed as historic unless
it has been prominently identified with, or best represents, some major aspect
of the cultural, political, economic, military or social history of the
locality, region, state or nation, or has had a major relationship with the
life of an historic personage or event representing some major aspect of, or
ideals related to, the history of the locality, region, state or nation;
   (B)   Prepare a register of buildings, structures and sites which meet the
requirements of division (A) above, publish lists of such properties and, with
the consent of the property owners, inspect such properties from time to time
and publish a register thereof from time to time setting forth appropriate
information concerning the registered buildings, structures and sites;
   (C)   With the consent of the property owners, certify and mark with
appropriately designed markers, buildings, structures and sites which it has
registered;
   (D)   Establish standards for the care and management of certified landmarks
and withdraw such certification for failure to maintain the standards so
prescribed;
   (E)   Acquire by purchase, gift or lease and administer registered landmarks
and easements and interests therein, both real and personal;
   (F)   Lease or sell property so acquired under the terms and conditions
designed to ensure the proper preservation of the landmark in question;
   (G)   Establish historic districts for registered landmarks, utilizing the
same guidelines set forth in division (A) above and designate the area thereof
by appropriate markers;
   (H)   Identify historical districts for registered landmarks and aid and
encourage the municipality or county in which the district or landmark is
located to adopt rules and regulations for the preservation of historical or
architectural values;
   (I)   Prepare and place historical markers on or along the highway or street
closest to the location which is intended to be identified by such marker;
   (J)   Seek the advice and assistance of individuals, groups, departments and
agencies of government who or which are conducting historical preservation
programs and coordinate the same insofar as possible; and
   (K)   Request the City Council to enter into agreements with property owners
to identify their property as a historical site, landmark of property of
historical significance in accordance with the current “Historical Registry”
guidelines.
(Ord. 11-7, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.186 NOTICE TO COUNTY ASSESSOR.
   (A)   When the Board establishes a historic district, it shall notify the
County Assessor of the county in which such district or any part thereof is
located of the fact of such establishment and the boundaries of the district,
together with the restrictions which are applicable to the properties located
in such district which have been mutually agreed upon by the Board and the
owners of property within such district. The agreement shall be recorded in the
same manner as the recordation of agreements between the Board and owners of
designated landmarks entered into pursuant to the provisions of §
32.135.
   (B)   The city’s Historical Preservation Board shall adhere to the state and
county codes relating to identifying and registering any and all property as
property accepted as in the “Historic Registry”.
(Ord. 11-7, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 32.187 COOPERATION WITH STATE AGENCIES.
   (A)   While maintain a working relationship, the city’s Historical
Preservation Board shall cooperate, and maintain and coordinate its activities
with the state’s Historical Society and the state’s Department of Culture and
History, with the view to developing a unified program for the identification,
study, preservation and protection of all historic buildings, structures and
sites in this state.
   (B)   The city’s Historical Preservation Board will establish and maintain
working relationship with the state’s Historical Preservation Office to ensure
compliance with national, state regulations, and keep current on new
innovations in Historical Preservation.
(Ord. 11-7, passed 10-18-2011)
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 32.200 ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby authorized the creation and establishment of a public agency
to be known as “the city’s Development Authority”, which shall have the
authority to promote, develop and advance the business, prosperity and economic
welfare of the city; to encourage and assist through loans, investments or
other business transactions in the locating of a new business and industry
within the municipal boundaries of the city; to rehabilitate and assist
existing businesses and industries within the municipal boundaries of the city;
to stimulate and promote the expansion of all kinds of business and industrial
activity which will tend to advance business and industrial development and
maintain the economic stability of the city; provide maximum opportunities for
employment, encourage thrift and improve the standard of living of the
residents of the city; to cooperate and act in conjunction with other
organizations, federal, state or local, in the promotion and advancement of
industrial, commercial, agricultural and recreational developments within the
city; and to furnish money and credit, land and industrial sites, technical
assistance and such other aid as may be deemed requisite to approved and
deserving applicants for the promotion, development and conduct of all kinds of
business activity within the city.
(Prior Code, § 159.01) (Ord. 90-6, passed 10-2-1990)
LAND REUSE AUTHORITY
§ 32.215 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Land Reuse Authority
Act”.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.216 PURPOSE.
   The city finds that there exists a continuing need to strengthen and
revitalize the economy and that it is in the best interests of the city to
assemble or dispose of public property in a coordinated manner to foster the
development of that property and to promote economic growth. It is declared to
be a valid public purpose for a Land Reuse Authority created under this
subchapter to acquire, assemble, dispose of and quiet title to property. It is
further declared to be a valid public purpose for the Land Reuse Authority
created under this subchapter to provide for the financing of the acquisition,
assembly, disposition and quieting of title to property, and to exercise other
powers granted under this subchapter. The city finds that the Land Reuse
Authority and powers conferred by this subchapter constitute a necessary
program and serve a necessary public purpose.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.217 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The board of directors of a land reuse agency also known herein as
the City of Nitro Land Reuse Authority.
   DECONSTRUCT. To attempt to remove salvageable pieces of a housing unit prior
to or as part of demolition or renovation.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. A bank, savings association, operating subsidiary of
a bank or savings association, credit union, association licensed to originate
mortgage loans or an assignee of a mortgage or note originated by such an
institution.
   LAND REUSE AGENCY or LAND REUSE AUTHORITY or AUTHORITY. The City of Nitro
Land Reuse Authority.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Nitro.
   REAL PROPERTY. All lands, including improvements and fixtures on them and
property of any nature appurtenant to them or used in connection with them and
every estate, interest and right, legal or equitable, in them, including terms
of years and liens by way of judgment, mortgage or otherwise, and indebtedness
secured by the liens.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.218 CREATION AND EXISTENCE.
   The City Land Reuse Authority is hereby constituted under authority of W.
Va. Code 31-18E-1 et seq. The name of the agency shall be the “City of Nitro
Land Reuse Authority”. The number of Board members shall be five, all of whom
shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of Council in compliance with the
requirements of §
32.220.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.219 MEETINGS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC; PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   All matters before the Board, except those exempt under the applicable open
meetings laws, shall be considered and voted on in an opening meeting. Any
matter put before a vote by the Board shall be first subject to the provision
of a public hearing on the issue. The public hearing requirement shall be met
where the Chair provides an opportunity for any person in attendance to speak
on the issue prior to vote.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.220 COMPOSITION OF BOARD.
   (A)   Eligibility to serve on Board.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, a public officer is
eligible to serve as a Board member, and the acceptance of the appointment
neither terminates nor impairs that public office;
      (2)   A municipal employee is eligible to serve as a Board member;
      (3)   The Board shall include at least one voting member who:
         (a)   Is a resident of the city;
         (b)   Is not a public official or municipal employee; and
         (c)   Maintains membership with a recognized civic organization within
the city.
      (4)   A member removed under this section is ineligible for reappointment
to the Board unless the reappointment is confirmed unanimously by the Board;
      (5)   As used in this subsection, the term PUBLIC OFFICER means an
individual who is elected to office.
   (B)   Officers. The members of the Board shall select annually from among
their members a Chair, Vice Chair, Secretary, Treasurer and other officers as
the Board determines.
   (C)   Rules. The Board shall establish rules on all of the following:
      (1)   Duties of officers;
      (2)   Attendance and participation of members in its regular and special
meetings;
      (3)   A procedure to remove a member by a majority vote of the other
members for failure to comply with a rule; and
      (4)   Other matters necessary to govern the conduct of a land reuse
agency.
   (D)   Vacancies. A vacancy on the Board shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment. Upon removal under this section, the position
becomes vacant.
   (E)   Compensation. Board members serve without compensation. The Board may
reimburse a member for expenses actually incurred in the performance of duties
on behalf of the land reuse agency.
   (F)   Meetings.
      (1)   The Board shall meet as follows:
         (a)   In regular session according to a schedule adopted by the Board;
         (b)   In special session:
            1.   As convened by the Chair; or
            2.   Upon written notice signed by a majority of the members.
      (2)   A majority of the Board, excluding vacancies, is a quorum. Physical
presence is required under this division (F)(2).
   (G)   Voting.
      (1)   Except as set forth in division (G)(2) or (G)(3) below or elsewhere
in this subchapter, action of the Board must be approved by the affirmative
vote of a majority of the Board present and voting.
      (2)   Action of the Board on the following matters must be approved by a
majority of the entire Board membership:
         (a)   Adoption of bylaws;
         (b)   Adoption of rules under division (C) above;
         (c)   Hiring or firing of an employee or contractor of the land reuse
agency. This function may, by majority vote of the entire Board membership, be
delegated by the Board to a specified officer or committee of the land reuse
agency;
         (d)   Incurring of debt;
         (e)   Adoption or amendment of the annual budget; or
         (f)   Sale, lease, encumbrance or alienation of real property or
personal property with a value of more than $25,000.
      (3)   A resolution under §
32.228, relating to dissolution of the agency, must be approved by two-thirds
of the entire Board membership.
      (4)   A member of the Board may not vote by proxy.
      (5)   A member may request a recorded vote on any resolution or action of
the land reuse agency.
   (H)   Immunity. The city shall not be liable personally on the bonds or
other obligations of the land reuse agency pursuant to W. Va. Code 31-18E-5 et
seq. Rights of creditors of the Authority are solely against the Authority.
   (I)   Board member terms. Each Board member shall be appointed for a term of
three years and may serve no more than three terms. Board members shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of Council.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.221 STAFFING.
   (A)   Employees. The Board may employ or enter into a contract for an
executive director, counsel and legal staff, technical experts and other
individuals and may determine the qualifications and fix the compensation and
benefits of those employees.
   (B)   Contracts. The Board may enter into a contract with the city for:
      (1)   The city to provide staffing services to the Authority; or
      (2)   The Authority to provide staffing services to the city.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.222 POWERS OF AUTHORITY.
   The City Land Reuse Authority is a public body, corporate and politic,
exercising public and essential governmental functions, and having all the
powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this subchapter, including, but not limited to, the following:
   (A)   To adopt, amend and repeal bylaws for the regulation of its affairs
and the conduct of its business;
   (B)   To sue and be sued in its own name and be a party in a civil action.
This division (B) includes an action to clear title to property of the
Authority;
   (C)   To adopt a seal and to alter the same at pleasure;
   (D)   To borrow from federal government funds, from the state, from private
lenders or from the city upon its consent, as necessary, for the operation and
work of the Land Reuse Agency;
   (E)   To issue negotiable revenue bonds and notes according to the
provisions of this subchapter;
   (F)   To procure insurance or guarantees from the federal government or the
state of the payment of debt incurred by the Land Reuse Agency and to pay
premiums in connection with the insurance or guarantee;
   (G)   To enter into contracts and other instruments necessary, incidental or
convenient to the performance of its duties and the exercise of its powers.
This division (G) includes intergovernmental cooperation agreements for the
joint exercise of powers under this subchapter;
   (H)   To enter into contracts and intergovernmental cooperation agreements
with other governmental entities for the performance of functions by the
entities on behalf of the Authority or by the Authority on behalf of the
entities;
   (I)   To make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary or
convenient to the exercise of the powers of the Authority. Any contract or
instrument signed shall be executed by and for the Authority if the contract or
instrument is signed, including an authorized facsimile signature, by:
      (1)   The Chair or Vice Chair of the Authority; and
      (2)   Either:
         (a)   The Secretary or Assistant Secretary of the Authority; or
         (b)   The Treasurer or Assistant Treasurer of the Authority.
   (J)   To procure insurance against losses in connection with the real
property, assets or activities of the Authority;
   (K)   To invest money of the land reuse agency at the discretion of the
Board in instruments, obligations, securities or property determined proper by
the Board and to name and use depositories for its money;
   (L)   To enter into contracts for the management of, the collection of rent
from or the sale of real property of the Authority;
   (M)   To design, develop, construct, demolish, reconstruct, deconstruct,
rehabilitate, renovate, relocate and otherwise improve real property or rights
or interests in real property;
   (N)   To fix, charge and collect rents, fees and charges for the use of real
property of the Authority and for services provided by the Authority;
   (O)   To grant or acquire licenses, easements, leases or options with
respect to real property of the land reuse agency;
   (P)   To enter into partnerships, joint ventures and other collaborative
relationships with municipalities, counties and other public and private
entities for the ownership, management, development and disposition of real
property;
   (Q)   To organize and reorganize the executive, administrative, clerical and
other departments of the Authority and to fix the duties, powers and
compensation of employees, agents and consultants of the Authority; and
   (R)   To do all other things necessary or convenient to achieve the
objectives and purposes of the Authority or other law related to the purposes
and responsibility of the Authority.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.223 ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   Title to property. The Authority shall hold in its own name all real
property it acquires.
   (B)   Tax exemption.
      (1)   Except as set forth in division (B)(2) below, the real property of
the Authority and its income and operations are exempt from property tax
pursuant to W. Va. Code 31-18E-9(b).
      (2)   Division (B)(1) above does not apply to real property after the
fifth consecutive year in which the real property is continuously leased to a
private third party. However, real property continues to be exempt from
property taxes if it is leased to a nonprofit or governmental agency at
substantially less than fair market value.
   (C)   Methods of acquisition. The Authority may acquire real property or
interests in real property by any means on terms and conditions and in a manner
it considers proper; provided, that the Authority may not acquire any interest
in oil, gas or minerals which have been severed from the realty.
   (D)   Acquisitions from municipalities or counties.
      (1)   The Authority may acquire real property by purchase contracts,
lease purchase agreements, installment sales contracts and land contracts and
may accept transfers from the city, or the Counties of Putnam and Kanawha for
property within the city limits, upon terms and conditions as agreed to by the
Authority and the municipality or county.
      (2)   A municipality or county may transfer to the Authority real
property and interests in real property of the municipality or county on terms
and conditions and according to procedures determined by the municipality or
county as long as the real property is located within the jurisdiction of the
Authority.
   (E)   Maintenance. The Authority shall maintain all of its real property in
accordance with the statutes of the state and ordinances of the city.
   (F)   Prohibition.
      (1)   Subject to the provisions of division (F)(2) below, the Authority
may not own or hold real property located outside the jurisdictional boundaries
of the city.
      (2)   The Authority may be granted Authority pursuant to an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement with the city or Putnam or Kanawha
County to manage and maintain real property located within the jurisdiction of
the municipality or county.
   (G)   Acquisition of tax delinquent properties.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter to the
contrary, pursuant to this subchapter or otherwise by intergovernmental
cooperation agreement, the Authority may acquire an interest in tax delinquent
property through the provisions of W. Va. Code Ch. 11-a. Notwithstanding the
provisions of W. Va. Codes Ch. 11-a, Art. 3, § 8, if no person present at the
tax sale bids the amount of the taxes, interest and charges due on any
unredeemed tract or lot or undivided interest in real estate offered for sale,
the sheriff shall, prior to certifying the real estate to the auditor for
disposition pursuant to W. Va. Code Ch. 11-a, Art. 3, § 44, provide a list of
all of said real estate within the Authority’s jurisdiction to the Authority
and the Authority shall be given an opportunity to purchase the tax lien and
pay the taxes, interest and charges due for any unredeemed tract or lot or
undivided interest therein as if the Authority were an individual who purchased
the tax lien at the tax sale, all of which procedures are set forth in W. Va.
Code 31-18E-9(g).
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of West Virginia Code to the
contrary, if authorized by the city, or otherwise by intergovernmental
cooperation agreement, the Authority shall have the right of first refusal to
purchase any tax-delinquent property which is within the city municipal limits,
and has an assessed value of $25,000 or less or has been condemned; provided,
that the Authority satisfies the requirements of division (G)(3) below. A list
of properties which meet the criteria of this division (G) shall regularly be
compiled by the Sheriff of the county, and the Authority may purchase any
qualifying tax-delinquent property for an amount equal to the taxes owed and
any related fees before such property is placed for public auction. Such
authority is in accordance with W. Va. Code 31-18E-9(g)(2).
      (3)   When the Authority exercises a right of first refusal in accordance
with division (G)(2) above, the Authority shall, within 15 days, provide
written notice to all owners of real property that is adjacent to the tax-
delinquent property. Any such property owner shall have a period of 120 days
from the receipt of notice, actual or constructive, to exercise a right to
purchase the tax-delinquent property from the Authority for an amount equal to
the amount paid for the property by the Authority; provided, that in the event
more than one adjacent land owner desires to purchase the tax-delinquent
property, it shall be sold to the adjacent property owner offering the highest
bid. It is the duty of the adjacent property owner to establish that he or she
is the actual owner of property that is adjacent to the tax-delinquent property
and all state and local taxes and all fees on his or her adjacent property are
current and non-delinquent. All such procedures are in compliance with W. Va.
Code 31-18E-9(g), and are subject to the sunset provisions of W. Va. Code 31-
18E-9(g)(4).
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.224 DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   Public access to inventory. The Authority shall maintain and make
available for public review and inspection an inventory of real property held
by the Authority.
   (B)   Power. The Authority may convey, exchange, sell, transfer, lease,
grant or mortgage interests in real property of the Authority in the form and
by the method determined to be in the best interests of the Authority.
   (C)   Consideration.
      (1)   The Authority shall determine the amount and form of consideration
necessary to convey, exchange, sell, transfer, lease as lessor, grant or
mortgage interests in real property.
      (2)   Consideration may take the form of monetary payments and secured
financial obligations, covenants and conditions related to the present and
future use of the property, contractual commitments of the transferee and other
forms of consideration as determined by the Board to be in the best interest of
the Authority.
   (D)   Policies and procedures.
      (1)   The Board shall determine and state in the Authority policies and
procedures the general terms and conditions for consideration to be received by
the Authority for the transfer of real property and interests in real property,
including, but not limited to, a process for distribution of any proceeds to
any claimants, taxing entities and the Authority.
      (2)   Requirements which may be applicable to the disposition of real
property and interests in real property by municipalities or counties shall not
be applicable to the disposition of real property and interests in real
property by the Authority.
   (E)   Ranking of priorities.
      (1)   The Authority may establish a hierarchical ranking of priorities
for the use of real property conveyed by the Authority, including use for:
         (a)   Purely public spaces and places;
         (b)   Affordable housing;
         (c)   Conservation areas; and
         (d)   Retail, commercial and industrial activities.
      (2)   The priorities established may be for the entire land reuse
jurisdiction or may be set according to the needs of different neighborhoods or
other locations within the land reuse jurisdiction, or according to the nature
of the real property.
   (F)   Land use plans. The Authority shall consider all duly adopted land use
plans and make reasonable efforts to coordinate the disposition of Authority
real property with the land use plans.
   (G)   The Board may delegate to officers and employees the Authority to
enter into and execute agreements, instruments of conveyance and other related
documents pertaining to the conveyance of real property by the Authority.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.225 FINANCING OF THE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   General rule. The Authority may receive funding through grants and
loans from:
      (1)   The federal government;
      (2)   The state;
      (3)   A municipality or county; and
      (4)   Private or other public sources.
   (B)   Funding. The Authority may receive and retain payments for services
rendered, for rents and leasehold payments received, for consideration for
disposition of real and personal property, for proceeds of insurance coverage
for losses incurred, for income from investments and for an asset and activity
lawfully permitted to a land reuse agency under this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.226 BORROWING AND ISSUANCE OF BONDS.
   (A)   Authority.
      (1)   The Authority may issue a bond for any of its corporate purposes in
accordance with this subchapter and the Authority set forth in W. Va. Code 31-
18E-12.
      (2)   The principal and interest of a bond is payable from the
Authority’s general revenue.
      (3)   The bond may be secured by any of the following:
         (a)   A pledge of revenue. This division (A)(3)(a) includes a grant or
contribution from:
            1.   The federal government or a federal agency or instrumentality;
or
            2.   The state, a state agency or an instrumentality of the state.
         (b)   A mortgage of property of the Authority.
   (B)   Nature. The bond is a negotiable instrument under the provisions of W.
Va. Code Ch. 46, Art. 8.
   (C)   Tax exempt. A bond and the income from the bond is exempt from
taxation by:
      (1)   The state; and
      (2)   A political subdivision.
   (D)   Procedure.
      (1)   A bond must be authorized by resolution of the Board and shall be a
limited obligation of the Authority.
      (2)   The principal and interest, costs of issuance and other costs
incidental to the bond are payable solely from the income and revenue derived
from the sale, lease or other disposition of the assets of the Authority. The
Authority may secure the bond by a mortgage or other security device covering
all or part of the project from which the pledged revenues may be derived.
      (3)   A refunding bond issued under this section:
         (a)   Is payable from:
            1.   A source described in this subchapter; or
            2.   The investment of the proceeds of the refunding bonds.
         (b)   Is not an indebtedness or pledge of the general credit of a
political subdivision within the meaning of a constitutional or statutory
limitation of indebtedness and shall contain a recital to that effect.
      (4)   A bond must comply with the authorizing resolution as to:
         (a)   Form;
         (b)   Denomination;
         (c)   Interest rate;
         (d)   Maturity; and
         (e)    Execution.
      (5)   A bond may be subject to redemption at the option of and in the
manner determined by the Board in the authorizing resolution.
   (E)   City election. The city may elect to guarantee, insure or otherwise
become primarily or secondarily obligated on the indebtedness of a land reuse
agency, subject, however, to all other provisions of law of this state
applicable to municipal or county indebtedness.
   (F)   Sale.
      (1)   A bond shall be issued, sold and delivered in accordance with the
terms and provisions of the authorizing resolution. The Board, to effectuate
its best interest, may determine the manner of sale, public or private, and the
price of the bond.
      (2)   The resolution issuing a bond must be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the jurisdiction in which the land reuse agency is
located.
   (G)   Liability.
      (1)   Neither the members of the Authority nor a person executing the
bond shall be liable personally on the bonds by reason of the issuance of the
bond.
      (2)   The bond or other obligation of the Authority related to a bond
shall not be a debt of a municipality, county or of the state. A statement to
this effect shall appear on the face of the bond or obligation.
      (3)   On the bond or other obligation of the Authority related to a bond,
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The state has no liability. This division (G)(3) applies to the
revenue and property of the state; and
         (b)   The city has no liability. This division (G)(3) applies to the
revenue and property of the city.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.227 PUBLIC RECORDS AND PUBLIC ACCESS.
   (A)   Public records. The Board shall keep minutes and a record of its
proceedings.
   (B)   Public access. The Authority is subject to W. Va. Code Ch. 6, Art. 9-
A, relating to open meetings, and W. Va. Code Ch. 29-B, relating to public
records.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.228 DISSOLUTION OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   General rule. The Authority may be dissolved as a public body
corporate and politic upon compliance with all of the following:
      (1)   Sixty calendar days advance written notice of consideration of a
resolution to request dissolution must be:
         (a)   Given to the city which created the land reuse agency;
         (b)   Published in a local newspaper of general circulation; and
         (c)   Sent by certified mail to the trustees of outstanding bonds of
the Authority.
      (2)   Satisfaction of all outstanding liabilities; and
      (3)   Approval of a resolution requesting dissolution.
   (B)   Authority. Upon receipt of a proper resolution described in division
(A) above, the city may dissolve the Land Reuse Agency by adoption of an
ordinance or order. If approved, the governing body of the city shall file a
certified copy of the ordinance or order with the Secretary of State and notify
the state’s Housing Development Fund of the dissolution of the Authority. The
Secretary of State shall cause the termination of the existence of the
Authority to be noted on the record of incorporation. Upon the filing, the
Authority shall cease to function.
   (C)   Transfer of assets. Upon dissolution of the Authority, real property,
personal property and other assets of the Authority become the assets of the
city.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.229 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   (A)   Ethics Act. The acts and decisions of members of the Board and of
employees of the Authority are subject to W. Va. Code Ch. 6-b (the Ethics
Statute).
   (B)   Supplemental rules and guidelines. The Board may adopt:
      (1)   Supplemental rules addressing potential conflicts of interest; and
      (2)   Ethical guidelines for members of the Board and land reuse agency
employees.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.230 EXPEDITED QUIET TITLE PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Authorization.
      (1)   The Authority may file an action in circuit court to quiet title to
real property in which the Authority has an interest.
      (2)   The Authority may join in a single complaint to quiet title to one
or more parcels of real property.
      (3)   For purposes of an action under this section, the Authority shall
be deemed to be the holder of sufficient legal and equitable interests and
possessory rights so as to qualify the land reuse agency as an adequate
complainant in the action.
   (B)   Procedural requirements.
      (1)   Prior to the filing of an action to quiet title, the Authority must
conduct an examination of title to determine the identity of any person
possessing a claim or interest in or to the real property.
      (2)   Service of the complaint to quiet title shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements to serve a civil complaint generally,
including that service to interested parties be made as follows:
         (a)   By first class mail to the identity and address reasonably
ascertainable by an inspection of public records;
         (b)   In the case of occupied real property, by first class mail,
addressed to “occupant”;
         (c)   By posting a copy of the notice on the real property;
         (d)   By publication; and
         (e)   As ordered by the court.
      (3)   As part of the complaint to quiet title, the Authority must file an
affidavit identifying:
         (a)   Persons discovered under division (B)(1) above; and
         (b)   The form of service under division (B)(2) above.
   (C)   Hearing.
      (1)   The court shall schedule a hearing on the complaint within 90 days
following filing of the complaint and as to all matters upon which an answer
was not filed by an interested party.
      (2)   The court shall issue its final judgment within 120 days of the
filing of the complaint.
   (D)   Procedures. The procedures set forth herein are under the Authority of
W. Va. Code 31-18E-16.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.231 CONSTRUCTION, INTENT AND SCOPE.
   This subchapter shall be construed liberally to effectuate the legislative
intent and the purposes as complete and independent authorization for the
implementation of this subchapter, and all powers granted shall be broadly
interpreted to effectuate the intent and purposes and not as a limitation of
powers.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.232 ANNUAL AUDIT AND REPORT.
   (A)   The Authority shall annually, within 120 days after the end of the
fiscal year, submit an audit of income and expenditures, together with a report
of its activities for the preceding year, to the state’s Housing Development
Fund.
   (B)   A duplicate of the audit and the report shall be filed with the city.
(Ord. passed 5-7-2019)
§ 32.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   No person shall violate or fail to comply with any of the rules or
regulations made and promulgated by the Sanitary Board. Any person, on
conviction of any such violation, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99. Each day that any person continues the violation of any of the rules
and regulations made and promulgated by the Sanitary Board shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (C)   (1)   Any person who willfully obstructs the City Health Officer, or
any public health nurse, sanitarian or any other person employed by the
Municipal Board of Health and charged with the enforcement of any public health
law, in the performance of that person’s legal duties in enforcing the law, is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of an
amount not to exceed state law.
      (2)   Any person who willfully violates any of the provisions of §§
32.025 to
32.034, or any of the rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to the
provisions, for which a penalty is not otherwise provided, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of an amount not
to exceed state law.
(Prior Code, § 147.99) (Ord. 11-1, passed 1-4-2011)
CHAPTER 33: CITY POLICIES
Section
Elections
   
33.001   Date of elections; terms of office
   
33.002   Election official
   
33.003   Persons entitled to vote; permanent registration of voters
   
33.004   Voting by absentees
   
33.005   Nomination of municipal officials
   
33.006   Filing fee; disposition
   
33.007   Publication of list of candidates prior to general election
   
33.008   Election precincts
   
33.009   Precinct polling places
   
33.010   Nonpartisan election
   
33.011   Ballot Commissioners
   
33.012   Ballots and election supplies; duties of officials
   
33.013   Voting hours; challenges; applicability of state laws
   
33.014   Ascertaining results; contest; tie vote
   
33.015   Applicability of state election laws
   
33.016   Election costs
   
33.017   City Attorney to instruct election officials
   
33.018   Petitions for certificates of candidacy
Purchasing Procedures
   
33.030   Purchasing Director
   
33.031   Purchasing procedures
   
33.032   Competitive bidding procedure
   
33.033   Requisition and invoice review
   
33.034   Emergency purchases
Sale of City Property
   
33.045   Findings
   
33.046   Sale or lease of property to a government agency
   
33.047   Sale or lease of property having a value under $10,000
   
33.048   Sale or lease of property having a value of $10,000 or more
State of Emergency
   
33.060   When state of emergency deemed to exist
   
33.061   Declaration of emergency by Mayor
   
33.062   Specific restrictions authorized
   
33.063   Extension, alteration and rescission of proclamation
   
33.064   Compliance with restrictions
   
33.065   Authority to request state forces
   
33.066   End of emergency period
Freedom of Information Act
   
33.080   Findings
   
33.081   Scope
   
33.082   Definitions
   
33.083   Processing requests
   
33.084   Alternative dispositions of requests
   
33.085   Time to respond to a request; extension of time to respond
   
33.086   Fees
   
33.087   Exemptions
 
   
33.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Absentee voting in municipal elections, see W. Va. Code 3-3-13
   Confidentiality of returns, see W. Va. Code 11-10-5d
   Crimes against the peace, see W. Va. Code Art. 61-6
   Integration of municipal elections with systems of permanent registration,
see W. Va. Code 8-5-13
   Municipal elections, see W. Va. Code 3-1-2a
   Municipal precinct registration records, see W. Va. Code 3-1-27
   Municipal voting precincts, see W. Va. Code 3-1-6
   Purchasing, competitive bidding, see W. Va. Code 8-12-10
   Special elections, see W. Va. Code 8-5-15a
ELECTIONS
§ 33.001 DATE OF ELECTIONS; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   Regular elections for the purpose of selecting municipal officials shall be
held quadrennially on the first Tuesday in June, beginning with the year 1984.
Terms of office of all officials shall commence on July 1, following election.
(Prior Code, § 107.01) (Ord. 83-5, passed 5-17-1983)
§ 33.002 ELECTION OFFICIAL.
   The chief election official of the city shall be the City Recorder, who
shall perform such duties as required by ordinance and by W. Va. Code Chapter
3.
(Prior Code, § 107.02)
§ 33.003 PERSONS ENTITLED TO VOTE; PERMANENT REGISTRATION OF VOTERS.
   (A)   Only persons who are bona fide residents of the city and are
registered to vote as provided by law shall be entitled to vote in any
municipal election, and the provisions of the “Permanent Registration Law”,
being W. Va. Code 8-5-13, so far as applicable to municipalities, is hereby
adopted to govern any election in the city.
   (B)   The municipal registration records for the Kanawha County and Putnam
County precincts which are within the city, as they are kept and maintained by
the county courts of those counties, shall be the official registration of
voters for any municipal election, and only those persons so registered shall
be eligible to vote.
(Prior Code, § 107.03)
§ 33.004 VOTING BY ABSENTEES.
   Any qualified elector of the city may vote at city elections by absentee
ballot in the manner provided and in accordance with the procedure outlined by
W. Va. Code Article 3-3, except that the duties required of the Circuit Clerk
and the County Clerk therein shall be done and performed by the City Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 107.04)
§ 33.005 NOMINATION OF MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS.
   Nominations for the offices of Mayor, City Recorder and Council member at
large shall be made by certificate of candidacy supported by petition addressed
to Council and signed by a minimum of 25 qualified electors in the city; and
for the office of ward Council member, by a minimum of 20 qualified electors of
the ward from which the candidate for Council seeks election. Such certificates
for nomination shall be filed with the City Recorder upon forms provided by the
city, and shall be verified by the person so nominated. All such nominating
petitions shall be examined by Council and, if found to be bona fide, in proper
form and signed by the required number of electors, the persons so nominated
shall be certified as candidates for the particular offices sought.
(Prior Code, § 107.05) (Ord. 00-2, passed 2-15-2000)
§ 33.006 FILING FEE; DISPOSITION.
   Every person who becomes a candidate for any elective office in the city
shall, at the time of filing his or her certificate of candidacy, pay a filing
fee of $10. All money received for such fees shall be certified by the City
Recorder to the City Treasurer for credit to the General City Fund.
(Prior Code, § 107.06)
§ 33.007 PUBLICATION OF LIST OF CANDIDATES PRIOR TO GENERAL ELECTION.
   At least ten days before any city election at which candidates for any city
office are to be voted on, the City Recorder shall cause to be published the
nominations of persons for offices regularly certified to be voted upon at such
election.
(Prior Code, § 107.07)
§ 33.008 ELECTION PRECINCTS.
   Election precincts for the holding of city elections within that area of the
city lying within Kanawha County shall coincide with and bear the same
designations as those precincts within the city established by the Board of
Commissioners of Kanawha County; and election precincts for the holding of city
elections within that area of the city lying within Putnam County shall
coincide with and bear the same designations as those precincts within the city
established by the Board of Commissioners of Putnam County.
(Prior Code, § 107.08)
§ 33.009 PRECINCT POLLING PLACES.
   It shall be the duty of Council in each year in which an election is to be
held in the city to make provision for the holding thereof, and to that end,
among other duties, to provide a suitable polling place for each precinct and
to require the City Recorder to publish a list of the precinct polling places
not less than ten days prior to the election.
(Prior Code, § 107.09)
§ 33.010 NONPARTISAN ELECTION.
   Regular elections for selecting the municipal officials shall be by
nonpartisan ballot, or by voting machine upon which no party designation of any
candidate shall appear.
(Prior Code, § 107.10)
§ 33.011 BALLOT COMMISSIONERS.
   (A)   The City Recorder and two persons appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by Council shall constitute a Board of Ballot Commissioners. Ballot
Commissioners shall be appointed for terms of four years each and shall perform
the duties of such Commissioners at all regular and special elections held in
the city.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Board of Ballot Commissioners to provide
printed ballots for every election at which paper ballots are to be used, and
cause to be printed on the appropriate ballot the names of all candidates
certified to be voted upon for municipal office and to provide printed ballots
for special elections.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Board of Ballot Commissioners to provide
ballot labels for every election at which voting machines are to be used, and
cause to be printed thereon the names of all candidates certified to be voted
upon for municipal office and to provide printed ballot labels for special
elections.
(Prior Code, § 107.11)
§ 33.012 BALLOTS AND ELECTION SUPPLIES; DUTIES OF OFFICIALS.
   (A)   Upon the certification of the candidates as provided in §
33.005, it shall be the duty of the City Recorder to have the ballots or ballot
labels, as the case may be, printed, and to procure and have available before
the day of such election all necessary supplies, including oaths for
Commissioners and Clerks, poll books, tally sheets, ballot boxes, voting
machines, booths, forms for certifying returns and whatever further supplies
are needed for holding the election and making the return thereof. All such
ballots, ballot labels and supplies shall be delivered by the City Recorder to
one or more of the Commissioners of Election at each of the precincts of the
city.
   (B)   Council shall, at least two weeks prior to any election, appoint such
number of Commissioners of Election and Poll Clerks as may be required by law
for the several voting precincts within the city. The Commissioners and Clerks,
after the closing of the polls, shall complete the tabulation of the results
and shall then join in certifying and attesting the returns of the election and
make out a certificate of the result. At least five days before any such
election, the City Recorder shall publish a list of election officers so
appointed.
(Prior Code, § 107.12)
§ 33.013 VOTING HOURS; CHALLENGES; APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAWS.
   (A)   The hours for holding an election shall be the same as for state
elections.
   (B)   Challenging of the right of any person to vote shall be in the manner
provided by law for state elections.
(Prior Code, § 107.13)
§ 33.014 ASCERTAINING RESULTS; CONTEST; TIE VOTE.
   Council shall be ex officio a Board of Canvassers and shall ascertain and
declare the result of every election. They shall convene within five days
(Sunday excepted) after any election for that purpose. All contests shall be
heard and decided by Council. In case two or more persons voted upon for a
particular office in any election shall have the highest and an equal number of
votes so that the election to the office is not decided by the returns, Council
shall decide the tie by the election of one of such persons. The procedure to
be followed by Council hereunder shall be governed so far as applicable by the
state law. (Prior Code, § 107.14)
§ 33.015 APPLICABILITY OF STATE ELECTION LAWS.
   The provisions of W. Va. Code Chapter 3, insofar as they are not
incompatible with nonpartisan elections and insofar as they can be made
applicable to any municipal election, whether for the nomination or election of
candidates for municipal offices or for a referendum on any question to be
submitted to the electorate of the city, shall govern all city elections, and
the powers and duties provided by state law for County Clerks and Clerks of
Circuit Courts shall devolve upon the City Recorder and the powers and duties
provided by state law for county courts shall devolve upon Council, except as
may be provided otherwise by any home rule charter or home rule ordinance or by
this code or other ordinance of Council.
(Prior Code, § 107.15)
§ 33.016 ELECTION COSTS.
   All necessary cost and expense attendant upon the holding and conducting of
any city election and ascertaining and certifying the results thereof shall be
paid out of the Treasury of the city; subject, however, to the provisions of W.
Va. Code 3-7-9, whereby the costs of an election contest shall be chargeable to
the contestant if the results of the election are not materially changed.
(Prior Code, § 107.16)
§ 33.017 CITY ATTORNEY TO INSTRUCT ELECTION OFFICIALS.
   As soon as may be practicable following the appointment of Commissioners and
Clerks of Election, and not less than two days prior to the holding of any city
election, the City Attorney shall hold a meeting for all Commissioners and
Clerks of Election, the City Recorder and his or her assistants and the Chief
of Police or his or her representative, at which time the City Attorney shall
give a comprehensive explanation of the election laws to those in attendance to
enable them to exercise their powers and perform their duties thereunder
properly and in an efficient manner.
(Prior Code, § 107.17)
§ 33.018 PETITIONS FOR CERTIFICATES OF CANDIDACY.
   In each quadrennial election of officials for the city, the City Recorder
shall first accept petitions for certificates of candidacy for Mayor, Recorder,
Council at Large and Council members for Wards I, II, III and IV on the second
Monday of March in that year with the last date of acceptance of these
petitions being the last Friday of March at the close of the city business day.
The last day of withdrawal of petitions for candidacy shall be the first Monday
of April in the election year. On the first Tuesday in April in the election
year, said petitions for candidacy shall be examined by Council to determine
proper residency and as registered voters with the correct number of signatures
on the petitions (i.e., Mayor, Recorder and Council at Large shall have 25
signatures and ward Council members shall have 20 signatures). A filing fee of
$10 shall be required from each petitioner paid at the time of filing. A
drawing for ballot position in each category as listed herein, (i.e., Mayor,
Recorder, Council at Large and each ward listed after certification by Council
in that same meeting).
(Prior Code, § 107.18) (Ord. 96-02, passed 3-5-1996)
PURCHASING PROCEDURES
§ 33.030 PURCHASING DIRECTOR.
   The City Treasurer shall be the ex-officio City Purchasing Agent with
authority to designate any qualified city employee Deputy Purchasing Agent to
exercise the powers and perform the duties of the City Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 111.01) (Ord. 82-8, passed 10-5-1982; Ord. passed 4-15-2025)
§ 33.031 PURCHASING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Establishment of minimum dollar limits required for competitive
bidding for construction services, the purchase of equipment, supplies,
materials, and commodities as follows:
      (1)   Sealed competitive bids shall be required for the purchase of:
         (a)   All contracts for construction projects or improvements
estimated to cost more than $50,000, or more;
         (b)   All purchases of supplies, materials, or commodities, equipment,
machinery, or parts related thereto of any kind, including, but not limited to,
vehicles, trucks, and rolling stock, estimated to cost $25,000 or more.
   (B)   All items purchased not subject to competitive bidding shall be
subject to the following informal price quotation policy:
      (1)   Informal competitive bidding/pricing.
         (a)   All heads of departments, agencies or other designated spending
units of city government shall have the authority to purchase any and all
supplies, materials, equipment or services needed for the orderly and efficient
operation of their areas of responsibility, provided such purchase does not
exceed the sum of $500.
         (b)   The Mayor, and subsequent to consulting with the City Treasurer
that there are sufficient funds available, shall have the authority to purchase
any and all supplies, materials, equipment or services needed for the orderly
and efficient operation of the city, provided such purchase does not exceed the
sum of $15,000. All quotes, written or verbal will be documented and attached
to the requisition or a purchase order.
         (c)   All contracts which are not required to be bid, in excess of
$15,000 and less than $25,000, will require a minimum of three written quotes
prior to making purchases and must be approved by the Mayor or the City
Treasurer; provided that all contracts in excess of $15,000 must be approved by
Council.
         (d)   The Mayor and/or the City Treasurer may, in an appropriate case,
make exceptions to the requirement of obtaining written quotations as required
herein.
         (e)   No competitive bids shall be required for any purchases by the
city except as required in this section.
      (3)   In the event the Mayor, the City Treasurer shall designate a
purchase from a bidding supplier, not the lowest bidder, he or she shall, on
the rear of the requisition form, set out his or her reasons for so doing.
      (4)   It shall be the policy of the city at all times, unless otherwise
necessary, to select the lowest responsible bid.
   (C)   State contracts. The City Treasurer is authorized to purchase, without
utilizing the bidding procedure required by this subchapter and for use by the
city, supplies, materials, goods, commodities, equipment and services available
under and through use of the state-wide contracts maintained by the Purchasing
Division of the state’s Department of Administration.
   (D)   Federal contracts. The City Treasurer is authorized to purchase,
without utilizing the bidding procedure required by this subchapter and for use
by the city, supplies, materials, goods, commodities, equipment and services
available under and through use of purchasing programs administered by the
Federal General Services Administration.
   (E)   Kanawha County contracts. The City Treasurer is authorized to
purchase, without utilizing the bidding procedure required by this subchapter
and for use by the city, supplies, materials, goods, commodities, equipment and
services available under and through use of purchasing programs administered by
the Kanawha County Commission.
(Prior Code, § 111.02) (Ord. passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 13-4, passed 7-16-2013;
Ord. passed 6-21-2022; Ord. passed 4-15-2025)
§ 33.032 COMPETITIVE BIDDING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Notice. Whenever the head of any department, agency or other
designated spending unit desires to purchase supplies, materials, equipment or
services valued at $25,000 or more, or construction projects or improvements
valued at $50,000 or more, he or she shall first submit a requisition form to
the City Treasurer. Such form shall contain the following information:
      (1)   A brief description of items desired for purchase;
      (2)   Specifications to be met by supplier in regard to items;
      (3)   The proposed date of delivery; and
      (4)   A statement setting forth balance of account credited to the
department, agency or spending unit that there are sufficient funds on hand to
the credit of such department as provided for in the city budget to pay for
such purchase, provided that such bids are not in excess of the proposed
maximum allowable purchase.
   (B)   Publication. After receiving the requisition form as set forth in
division (A) above, and after first securing the approval of Council for the
proposed purchase, the City Treasurer shall solicit sealed bids which shall be
obtained by public notice published as a Class II legal advertisement in
compliance with W. Va. Code 59-3-1, and the publication area for such notice
shall be Kanawha and Putnam Counties. Notice shall be published within 14 days
next preceding the final date for submitting bids. Such notice may also be
published by any other medium the Director may deem advisable and the Director
may also solicit sealed bids by sending requests by mail to prospective
suppliers.
      (1)   Contents of notice. All notices to bidders shall contain a brief
description of the materials, supplies, equipment or services sought to be
purchased. The place where the specifications for such supplies, materials,
equipment and services can be examined and where official city bid forms may be
secured shall be the offices of the City Treasurer. The last date in which bids
shall be received, together with the date, time, place and when the bids shall
be opened and a statement setting forth that the city shall have the right to
refuse and reject any and all bids, or any portion thereof, so made and any
other information the Director shall deem appropriate under the circumstances.
      (2)   Bids. For mailed and hand-delivered bid packets, bid envelopes
shall have conspicuously printed on the face, “DO NOT OPEN. SEALED BID
ENCLOSED” and/or any other language he or she shall deem appropriate. Email
bids containing sensitive information may be submitted by a secure handling
process only by emailing bids to: bids@cityofnitro.org of which only the City
Recorder has access to this email address.
   (C)   Awarding bid. The Mayor or City Recorder shall, at the next regularly
scheduled Council meeting, after the bids have been received, present such
sealed bids for the inspection of Council, together with any recommendations he
or she may have in regard to the awarding of such bid. Thereupon, Council, by
majority vote, shall determine from which the city shall purchase the items set
forth in the bids with consideration first being given to the lowest reputable
bidder.
(Prior Code, § 111.03) (Ord. 82-8, passed 10-5-1982; Ord. passed 4-15-2025)
§ 33.033 REQUISITION AND INVOICE REVIEW.
   The City Treasurer or his or her representative shall examine both
requisition invoices and related papers submitted to him or her to determine
the necessity and timing of the purchase to which it relates, the costs thereof
and specifications therefor, and all other factors to be considered with
respect to the advisability of such purchases; and to see that all procedures
followed were in strict compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.04) (Ord. 82-8, passed 10-5-1982; Ord. passed 4-15-2025)
§ 33.034 EMERGENCY PURCHASES.
   (A)   In the event a bona fide emergency situation arises, due to unforeseen
causes, which necessitates the purchase of goods, materials or supplies of a
value of $15,000 or more and there is insufficient time to solicit for
competitive bids for such purchases, then the Mayor shall call a special
meeting of Council.
   (B)   Council shall, at such meeting, by majority vote of the members
present, determine if an emergency exists and shall cause their vote to be
recorded in the official minutes of such meeting.
   (C)   In the event Council determines an emergency situation does exist, it
shall direct the City Treasurer to purchase the goods, materials and supplies
required without competitive bids being required and may make any
recommendations or restrictions or conditions upon such purchase which it may
deem proper under the circumstances then and there existing.
   (D)   A quorum for any special meeting called under the provisions of this
section shall consist of not less than five voting members of Council.
(Prior Code, § 111.05) (Ord. 82-8, passed 10-5-1982; Ord. passed 4-15-2025)
SALE OF CITY PROPERTY
§ 33.045 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Personal property owned by the city is retained by the city even
though the value of the property has been substantially diminished due to
obsolescence, damage or destruction.
   (B)   Real property owned by the city continues to be retained even though
the city no longer uses the property and has no plans for future use of the
property.
   (C)   W. Va. Code 1-5-3 authorizes a municipality to acquire by purchase,
transfer or exchange any real property owned by any public body, or to dispose
of by sale, transfer or exchange to or with any other public body any real
property owned by it; provided, that the public bodies take into consideration:
      (1)   The lack of need for such property by the public body holding title
thereto;
      (2)   The need for such property by the public body desiring to acquire
title thereto; and
      (3)   The benefits to be derived by the public as a result of such
acquisition or disposition; provided however, that the transaction is first
approved in writing by the Board of Public Works.
   (D)   W. Va. Code 8-12-18 authorizes a municipality:
      (1)   To sell, lease as lessor or dispose of any of its real or personal
property or any interest therein or any part thereof, as authorized in W. Va.
Code 1-5-1 et seq., to the state or any agency or instrumentality thereof, for
a public purpose for an adequate consideration, without considering alone the
present commercial or market value of such property; and
      (2)   To sell any of its real or personal property or any interest
therein or any part thereof for a fair and adequate consideration, the property
to be sold at public auction at a place designated by the governing body.
   (E)   The Municipal Home Rule Board, under the authority provided in W. Va.
Code 8-1-5a, approved the City’s Home Rule, Phase II Application which
included, among other actions, authority to sell property valued at less than
$10,000 without going through the auction process.
   (F)   The City Council hereby determines that rather than continue to retain
the real and personal property that is of little value to the city, the city
may dispose of the property in the following manner.
(Ord. 15-, passed 6-2-2015)
§ 33.046 SALE OR LEASE OF PROPERTY TO A GOVERNMENT AGENCY.
   (A)   The city is authorized to sell, lease as lessor or dispose of any of
its real or personal property or any interest therein or any part thereof, as
authorized in W. Va. Code 1-5-1 et seq. and 8-12-18, to the United States of
America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or to the state or any agency
or instrumentality thereof, for an adequate consideration, without considering,
alone the present commercial or market value of such property.
   (B)   In all other cases involving a lease, the city is hereby authorized to
lease as lessor any of its real or personal property or any interest therein,
or any part thereof, for a fair and adequate consideration and for a term not
exceeding 50 years.
   (C)   Every sale or lease, as authorized by this section may occur, the sale
or lease shall be authorized by resolution of the City Council, which
resolution may specify terms and conditions which must be contained in such
sale or lease; provided, that before any proposed lease is authorized by
resolution of the City Council, a public hearing on the proposed sale or lease
shall be held by the City Council after notice of the date, time, place and
purpose of the public hearing has been published as a Class I legal
advertisement in compliance with the provisions of W. Va. Code 59-3-1 et seq.
(Ord. 15-, passed 6-2-2015)
§ 33.047 SALE OR LEASE OF PROPERTY HAVING A VALUE UNDER $10,000.
   In all cases involving a sale of city-owned real or personal property having
a market value of less than $10,000, the city is authorized to sell any such
property or any interest therein or any part thereof for a fair and adequate
consideration and to accomplish such sale without the use of the public auction
procedure; provided, that the following requirements are satisfied.
   (A)   Personal property is to be inspected by a knowledgeable city employee
for the purpose of determining the condition of the property.
   (B)   Real property shall be inspected by a knowledgeable person chosen by
the Mayor for the purpose of determining the condition and value of the real
property.
   (C)   The market value of the personal property to be sold shall be
established through use of reputable publications that provide a loan value for
the property, (i.e., N.A.D.A. Official Used Car Guide, Kelly’s Blue Book and
the like for motor vehicles).
   (D)   The market value of real property to be sold shall be established in
the manner used by real estate sales agents.
   (E)   Insofar as motor vehicles are concerned, if the fair market value is
less than the average loan value, the vehicle may be sold for less than the
average loan value.
   (F)   If the loan value for other property cannot be established, the City
Treasurer shall determine a market value based in large part upon due
consideration being given to current market prices of similar property.
   (G)   Every sale of city-owned real or personal property having a market
value of less than $10,000 shall be authorized by resolution of the City
Council, which resolution may specify terms and conditions of any such sale;
provided, that before any proposed sale is authorized by resolution of the City
Council, a public hearing on the proposed sale shall be held by the City
Council, after notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public
hearing, together with a brief description of the property to be sold, has been
published as a Class I legal advertisement in compliance with the provisions of
W. Va. Code 59-3-1 et seq. and the publication area shall include the city.
(Ord. 15-, passed 6-2-2015)
§ 33.048 SALE OR LEASE OF PROPERTY HAVING A VALUE OF $10,000 OR MORE.
   In all cases involving a sale of city-owned real or personal property having
a value of $10,000 or more, the city is authorized to sell any such property or
any interest therein or any part thereof for a fair and adequate consideration;
provided, that the property shall be sold at public auction at a place
designated by the City Council; provided however, that before making any sale,
notice of the time, terms and place of sale, together with a brief description
of the property to be sold, shall be published as a Class II legal
advertisement in compliance with the provisions of W. Va. Code 59-3-1 et seq.
and the publication area shall include the city. The provisions of this section
shall not be construed as being applicable to any transaction involving the
trading in of municipally owned property on the purchase of new or other
property for the city.
(Ord. 15-, passed 6-2-2015)
STATE OF EMERGENCY
§ 33.060 WHEN STATE OF EMERGENCY DEEMED TO EXIST.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, a state of emergency shall be deemed to
exist whenever, during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting,
catastrophe or similar public civil emergency, for any reason, municipal public
safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate
protection for lives or property.
(Prior Code, § 543.01)
§ 33.061 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY BY MAYOR.
   (A)   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the city
or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor is hereby
empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence
of such state of emergency, and, in order to more effectively protect the lives
and property of people within the city, to place in effect any or all of the
restrictions authorized by this subchapter.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit, by such
proclamation, the application of all or any part of such restrictions to any
area specifically designated or described within the city and to specific hours
of the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part of such restrictions
law enforcement officers, firefighters and other public employees, physicians,
nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical facilities; on-duty military
personnel, whether state or federal; on-duty employees of public utilities,
public transportation companies, and newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting
and television broadcasting corporations; and such other classes of persons as
may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary
to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the city.
(Prior Code, § 543.02)
§ 33.062 SPECIFIC RESTRICTIONS AUTHORIZED.
   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor may
impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions:
   (A)   Prohibit or regulate the possession of one’s own premises of
explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind, and prohibit
the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof:
   (B)   Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine or
intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption off
one’s own premises;
   (C)   Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil or
participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon any
public property;
   (D)   Prohibit or regulate the sale or use of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha or
any other explosive or flammable fluids or substances;
   (E)   Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street or upon any other
public property, except by those in search of medical assistance, food or other
commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-being of themselves or their
families or some member thereof;
   (F)   Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any
business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of
business, places of entertainment and other places of public assembly; and
   (G)   Establish hours during which a curfew shall be in effect.
(Prior Code, § 543.03)
§ 33.063 EXTENSION, ALTERATION AND RESCISSION OF PROCLAMATION.
   Any proclamation of emergency promulgated pursuant to this subchapter may be
extended, altered or rescinded in any particular during the continued or
threatened existence of a state of emergency by the issue of a subsequent
proclamation.
(Prior Code, § 543.04)
§ 33.064 COMPLIANCE WITH RESTRICTIONS.
   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, no person shall
violate any provision of any restriction imposed by any proclamation authorized
by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 543.05)
§ 33.065 AUTHORITY TO REQUEST STATE FORCES.
   If, in the sound discretion of the Mayor, it appears that the emergency is,
or that the threatened emergency is likely to be, of such proportions that the
means available to the city to maintain law and order within the police
jurisdiction of the city are insufficient for such purpose, the Mayor shall
promptly and by the most expeditious means of communication, inform the
Governor of the situation and request that the necessary police or military
forces of the state be provided promptly; and if, during an actual state of
emergency the Mayor finds that the civil courts within the police jurisdiction
of the city are unable to perform their lawful duties and that, by reason of
widespread lawlessness, writs and other process cannot be served or executed,
the Mayor shall inform the Governor of his or her findings and may recommend to
him or her that a state of marital law be proclaimed within the police
jurisdiction of the city.
(Prior Code, § 543.06)
§ 33.066 END OF EMERGENCY PERIOD.
   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency or all or any
part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when
directed to do so by Council.
(Prior Code, § 543.07)
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
§ 33.080 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds that the fundamental philosophy of the American
constitutional form of representative government is the principle that
government is the servant of the people, and not the master of them. It
therefore is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city, that all
persons are, unless otherwise expressly provided by law, entitled to full and
complete information regarding the affairs of government and the official acts
of those who represent them as public officials and employees. The City
Council, in order to assure that the city in a timely manner provides complete
and correct information relating to the business of the city, does hereby enact
this subchapter to standardize procedures within the city associated with
processing Freedom of Information Act requests.
(Ord. 09-04, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 33.081 SCOPE.
   This subchapter applies to all employees of the city, any individual or
organization charged with producing city FOIA responses, and contracted
organizations and individuals as their contracts may require compliance with
this subchapter or city policies generally.
(Ord. 09-04, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 33.082 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions ascribed herein are applicable unless the context in which
used clearly requires a different meaning. Additionally, the definitions in W.
Va. Code 29B-1-1 et seq. are equally applicable to this subchapter unless the
context in which the term is used clearly requires a different meaning.
   ADDRESSEE. The person to whom the FOIA request is addressed.
   CITY. The City of Nitro, West Virginia and includes its departments.
   CUSTODIAN. The Mayor or the person designated by the Mayor to be the
custodian.
   DEPARTMENT. The following units of the city: Mayor, Recorder, Treasurer,
Fire Department, Police Department and Public Works Department.
   FOIA. The West Virginia Freedom of Information Act (W. Va. Code 29B-1-1 et
seq.).
   FOIA REQUEST. A written statement or question, including an e-mail, to the
city for inspection or copying of one or more of the city’s records.
   LEGAL COUNSEL. The attorney so designated by the Mayor.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the city, or his or her designee.
   PUBLIC RECORD. Includes any writing containing information prepared or
received by the city, the content or context of which, judged either by content
or context, relates to the conduct of the public’s business.
   REQUESTER. A person filing a FOIA request for city records.
   WRITING. Includes any books, papers, maps, photographs, cards, tapes,
recordings or other documentary materials regardless of physical form or
characteristics.
(Ord. 09-04, passed 5-19-2009; Ord. passed 5-19-2015)
§ 33.083 PROCESSING REQUESTS.
   (A)   FOIA requests shall be addressed to the Mayor, as custodian of the
records requested. If a FOIA request is received by a Department employee, he
or she shall immediately refer the FOIA request to his or her department head
who shall immediately forward the FOIA request to the Mayor. The FOIA request
shall then be processed as directed in this section and §
33.084.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a FOIA request, the Mayor shall:
      (1)   Record the date the FOIA request was received and establish a file
for the FOIA request;
      (2)   Forward the FOIA request to the appropriate department head for
collection of the requested information:
         (a)   If a department head, or his or her designee, thinks a FOIA
request was misdirected by the Mayor’s Office to the Department, he or she
shall immediately call the Mayor’s Office for instructions; or
         (b)   When the requested information has been collected, the
department head shall immediately forward the information to the Mayor.
      (3)   If the request is for records that may be in more than one
Department, the FOIA request also shall be forwarded to the other relevant
department heads. The Mayor shall select a lead Department to collect the
requested records from all relevant Departments and inform the other relevant
department heads regarding the identity of the designated lead Department;
      (4)   Send the appropriate department head the copies of any records in
the Mayor’s Office that are responsive to the FOIA request; and
      (5)   If the FOIA request is related to a potentially controversial or
sensitive matter, send a copy of the FOIA request to the Legal Counsel and, if
necessary, request guidance from the legal counsel for a determination of the
applicability of W. Va. Code 29B-1-4 relating to information exempt from FOIA
or other provisions of law, court orders or court recognized privileges, such
as attorney- client, attorney work-product, deliberative process and the like.
(Ord. 09-04, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 33.084 ALTERNATIVE DISPOSITIONS OF REQUESTS.
   (A)   The disposition of a FOIA request may be accomplished by:
      (1)   Notifying the requester in writing that the FOIA request lacks
reasonable specificity to identify the records requested;
      (2)   Notifying the requester in writing that the requested records are
not possessed by the city;
      (3)   Notifying the requester in writing where the requested records may
be obtained from the city’s website or other websites;
      (4)   Notifying the requester in writing of the time and place at which
he or she may inspect and make copies of records;
      (5)   Furnishing copies of the requested records in accordance with the
law and this subchapter, as well as providing an invoice stating the fee that
is due;
      (6)   Responding to the requester in writing when the requested records
are relevant to a suit or grievance against the city; or
      (7)   Denying the request in writing, in whole or in part.
   (B)   The response shall include statements that notify the requester:
      (1)   The reasons for the denial, if the requested records are not
provided;
      (2)   That the responsibility of the city to produce the requested
records is at an end; and
      (3)   That the requester may institute proceedings in the Circuit Court
of the jurisdiction where the Records are kept (i.e., the Circuit Court of
Kanawha County).
   (C)   A copy of the response, whether it provides the requested information
or denies the request for information, shall be maintained in the office of the
Recorder.
(Ord. 09-04, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 33.085 TIME TO RESPOND TO A REQUEST; EXTENSION OF TIME TO RESPOND.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, a response to a FOIA
request must be made within five days of receipt of the request by the city,
not including the day of receipt, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
   (B)   If the custodian determines that the requested records cannot be
retrieved and copied before the response is due, the custodian shall:
      (1)   Process the FOIA request in conformance with §
33.084;
      (2)   Attempt to contact the requester by telephone or e-mail to:
         (a)   Provide any fee information required by §
33.086;
         (b)   Explain why the response cannot be timely prepared; and
         (c)   Provide an estimated time when the response will be ready.
      (3)   Send a letter or e-mail to the requester, documenting any telephone
conversation, including any fee information required by §
33.086; and
      (4)   If there was no telephone conversation or e-mail reply, send a
letter to the requester containing the information and request that would have
been provided in the telephone call.
(Ord. 09-04, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 33.086 FEES.
   (A)   The fees for copies of requested records are as follows:
      (1)   The first five pages or fewer are provided at no charge on eight
and one-half by 11 inches or eight and one-half by 14 inch paper;
      (2)   Each additional page is to be furnished at a charge of $0.50 per
page printed on eight and one-half by 11 inches or eight and one-half by 14
inch paper; and
      (3)   Records reproduced on larger paper, tape recordings, videos or any
other type of format other than the method described in division (A)(2) above,
are provided at actual cost, of the larger paper, recording tape, video or
other types of format other than the format described in division (A)(2) above.
   (B)   For records provided on disk furnished by the requester or by e-mail,
there is no fee.
   (C)   For responses containing less than six pages of copies, there will be
no fee assessed to the requester.
   (D)   The City Recorder shall have the discretion to determine if no fee
shall be charged for a follow-up request because incorrect, inadequate or
inaccurate information was provided in the response to the original FOIA
request.
   (E)   Fees may be waived only by the City Recorder.
   (F)   The fee when received shall be forwarded to City Treasurer. All
correspondence, including e-mail, and the response to the requester, shall be
filed with and retained by the custodian. Additionally, the recorder shall, in
accordance with W. Va. Code 29B-1-3a, provide all information as required by
the office of the West Virginia Secretary of State.
   (G)   All fees charged for accident reports and photographs, whether on a
disk or otherwise, shall be subject to the fee requirements imposed under the
police service fee ordinance enacted March 17, 2009.
(Ord. 09-04, passed 5-19-2009; Ord. passed 5-19-2015)
§ 33.087 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The following categories of information are specifically exempt from
disclosure under the provisions of the state’s Freedom of Information Act (W.
Va. Code 29B-1-1 et seq.) and this subchapter:
      (1)   Trade secrets, as used in this section, which may include, but are
not limited to, any formula, plan pattern, process, tool, mechanism, compound,
procedure, production data or compilation of information which is not patented
which is known only to certain individuals within a commercial concern who are
using it to fabricate, produce or compound an article or trade or a service or
to locate minerals or other substances, having commercial value, and which
gives its users an opportunity to obtain business advantage over competitors;
      (2)   Information of a personal nature such as that kept in a personal,
medical or similar file, if the public disclosure thereof would constitute an
unreasonable invasion of privacy, unless the public interest, by clear and
convincing evidence, requires disclosure in the particular instance; provided,
that nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as precluding an individual
from inspecting or copying his or her own personal, medical or similar file;
      (3)   Test questions, scoring keys and other examination data used to
administer a licensing examination, examination for employment or academic
examination;
      (4)   Records of law-enforcement agencies that deal with the detection
and investigation of crime and the internal records and notations of such law-
enforcement agencies which are maintained for internal use in matters relating
to law enforcement;
      (5)   Information specifically exempted from disclosure by statute;
      (6)   Records, archives, documents or manuscripts describing the location
of undeveloped historic, prehistoric, archaeological, paleontological and
battlefield sites or constituting gifts to any public body upon which the donor
has attached restrictions on usage or the handling of which could irreparably
damage such record, archive, document or manuscript;
      (7)   Information contained in or related to examination, operating or
condition reports prepared by, or on behalf of, or for the use of any agency
responsible for the regulation or supervision of financial institutions, except
those reports which are by law required to be published in newspapers;
      (8)   Internal memoranda or letters received or prepared by any public
body;
      (9)   Records assembled, prepared or maintained to prevent, mitigate or
respond to terrorist acts or the threat of terrorist acts, the public
disclosure of which threaten the public safety or the public health;
      (10)   Those portions of records containing specific or unique
vulnerability assessments or specific or unique response plans, data, databases
and inventories of goods or materials collected or assembled to respond to
terrorist acts; and communication codes or deployment plans of law enforcement
or emergency response personnel;
      (11)   Specific intelligence information and specific investigative
records dealing with terrorist acts or the threat of a terrorist act shared by
and between federal and international law- enforcement agencies, state and
local law enforcement and other agencies within the Department of Military
Affairs and Public Safety;
      (12)   National security records classified under federal executive order
and not subject to public disclosure under federal law that are shared by
federal agencies and other records related to national security briefings to
assist state and local government with domestic preparedness for acts of
terrorism;
      (13)   Computing, telecommunications and network security records,
passwords, security codes or programs used to respond to or plan against acts
of terrorism which may be the subject of a terrorist act;
      (14)   Security or disaster recovery plans, risk assessments, tests or
the results of those tests;
      (15)   Architectural or infrastructure designs, maps or other records
that show the location or layout of the facilities where computing,
telecommunications or network infrastructure used to plan against or respond to
terrorism are located or planned to be located;
      (16)   Codes for facility security systems; or codes for secure
applications for such facilities referred to in division (A)(15) above;
      (17)   Specific engineering plans and descriptions of existing public
utility plants and equipment; and
      (18)   Customer proprietary network information of other
telecommunications carriers, equipment manufacturers and individual customers,
consistent with 47 U.S.C. § 222.
   (B)   As used in divisions (A)(9) through (A)(18), the term TERRORIST ACT
means an act that is likely to result in serious bodily injury or damage to
property or the environment and is intended to:
      (1)   Intimidate or coerce the civilian population;
      (2)   Influence the policy of a branch or level of government by
intimidation or coercion;
      (3)   Affect the conduct of a branch or level of government by
intimidation or coercion; or
      (4)   Retaliate against a branch or level of government for a policy or
conduct of the government.
   (C)   Nothing in the provisions of divisions (A)(9) through (A)(18) should
be construed to make subject to the provisions of this subchapter any evidence
of an immediate threat to public health or safety unrelated to a terrorist act
or the threat thereof which comes to the attention of a public entity in the
course of conducting a vulnerability assessment response or similar activity.
(Ord. 09-04, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 33.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   No officer or employee of the city shall purchase or offer to purchase
any supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services for or on behalf of
the city in violation of any provision of §§
33.030 to
33.034; and any person convicted of any such violation shall be personally
liable for the costs involved in addition to any fine and imprisonment that may
be adjudged against him or her, and the city shall be absolved of any and all
liability for any such purchases or offer to purchase.
(Prior Code, § 111.06)
   (C)   (1)   Any officer, employee or agent of the city or any former
officer, employee or agent of the city who divulges facts or information
obtained from returns or tax statements other than for the purpose of
administering such tax shall be subject to a fine of an amount not to exceed
state law or imprisonment for a term not to exceed state law, or both, together
with costs of prosecution.
      (2)   Any officer, employee or agent of the city, or any former officer,
employee or agent of the city who makes unauthorized disclosure of information
received from the State Tax Commissioner under authority of this section shall
be subject to a fine of an amount not to exceed state law or imprisonment for a
term not to exceed state law, or both, together with costs of prosecution.
      (3)   For the purposes of this Business and Taxation Code, UNAUTHORIZED
DISCLOSURE means the release to any person of any tax information obtained by
the city from the State Tax Commissioner unless:
         (a)   The person receiving the information is the authorized counsel
of the state or the city and shall be using the information only for the
purpose of administering business and occupation tax, sales tax, single
location businesses or liquor sales tax; or
         (b)   The person who filed the return has authorized, in writing its
release, thereby waiving his or her right to secrecy.
(Prior Code, § 750.01)
(Ord. 82-8, passed 10-5-1982; Ord. 93-05, passed 9-21-1993)
CHAPTER 34: CITY EMPLOYEES
Section
   [Reserved]
   Editor’s Note:
      A copy of the personnel manual can be found in the Personnel Director’s
office.
CHAPTER 35: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Court established
   
35.02   Municipal Judge
   
35.03   Jurisdiction, powers and duties
   
35.04   Municipal Court Clerk
   
35.05   Who may issue city warrants
   
35.06   Sessions; bailiff
   
35.07   Compulsory attendance of witnesses
   
35.08   Bail bonds and cash deposits in lieu thereof
   
35.09   Requisites and disposition of cash deposits posted in lieu of bail bond
   
35.10   Unauthorized acceptance or approval of cash bond; bond in felony cases
   
35.11   Persons prohibited to be surety on bail bonds
   
35.12   Court costs, fees and fines
   
35.13   Appeals and appeal bonds
   
35.14   Contempt
   
35.15   Defendant may be ordered to pay fine and costs
   
35.16   Ability to pay; assistance to defendant; false swearing
   
35.17   Payment may be made condition of probation or suspension of sentence
   
35.18   Defendant to be on good behavior until fine and costs are paid
   
35.19   Procedure upon default in payment; confinement for willful default
   
35.20   Failure to appear in Municipal Court
Personal Income Tax Refund Offset Program
   
35.35   Findings
   
35.36   Definitions
   
35.37   Establishment of basis for program participation
   
35.38   Establishing participation in the refund offset program
   
35.39   Expenditure of funds received
 
   
35.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Costs for crime victims reparation fund, see W. Va. Code 14-2A-4
   Costs for funding law enforcement training academies, see W. Va. Code 30-29-
4
   Establishment, see W. Va. Code 8-10-2
   General rights of appeal, see W. Va. Code 8-34-1
   Payment by credit card, see W. Va. Code 8-10-2a
   Search warrant, see W. Va. Code 62-1A-1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 COURT ESTABLISHED.
   There shall be in the city a court, which shall be called the Municipal
Court, to be held by the Municipal Judge of the city.
(Prior Code, § 173.01)
§ 35.02 MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be the Municipal Judge and, in the absence of the
Mayor, the City Recorder shall exercise the functions of the Municipal Judge;
provided, that the Mayor may at any time, pursuant to the provisions of W. Va.
Code 8-10-2, appoint a member in good standing of the bar of Putnam or Kanawha
County to the office of Municipal Judge or, in the exercise of sound discretion
if a suitable member of the bar is not available for such office, may appoint a
qualified person who is not a member of the bar to the office of the Municipal
Judge.
   (B)   The Municipal Judge shall not receive any money belonging to the state
or to individuals, unless he or she shall give the bond and security required
of a magistrate, and all of the provisions of W. Va. Code Chapter 50, relating
to money received by magistrates, shall apply to like money received by the
Municipal Judge.
(Prior Code, § 173.02)
§ 35.03 JURISDICTION, POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Municipal Court and the Municipal Judge shall have the
jurisdiction, exercise the powers and perform the duties specified for mayors,
municipal courts and municipal judges, respectively, in W. Va. Code 8-10-1 and
8-10-2, as amended and in effect on November 4, 1974; provided, that neither
the Municipal Court nor the Municipal Judge shall have any jurisdiction in
civil cases or causes of action.
   (B)   The powers and duties of the Municipal Judge shall include, among
other subjects not mentioned herein, the following.
      (1)   Trial docket. He or she shall produce each day at the opening of
the court a docket on which shall be entered all cases set for trial on that
day. The cases shall be numbered progressively on the docket, and the papers in
each case numbered to correspond. The title of every case entertained by the
Municipal Judge shall be entered upon the docket, setting forth the name of the
defendant, the charge against him or her, the name of the officer arresting him
or her, and the disposition made by the Municipal Judge of the case, and the
disposition made by him or her of the defendant, whether discharged, committed
to the custody of some officer and the reason therefor, or imprisoned and, if
imprisoned, the term of imprisonment, and whether admitted to bail or committed
to answer indictment. In each case continuances, if any may be granted, shall
be noted; also the amount of all fines imposed, all costs thereto attached and
to whom payable. The docket shall be indexed in the names of the defendants.
      (2)   Appeal docket: transcript. He or she shall keep an appeal docket,
in which shall be duly recorded all the proceedings had in any case in which an
appeal shall have been made to a Circuit Court, and upon appeal being
perfected, he or she shall make out and certify to the court to which the
appeal is taken a full transcript of the proceeding had in the case, for which
he or she shall be entitled to collect from the defendant a transcript fee as
may be authorized by law.
      (3)   Fines, costs, processes and oaths. He or she shall tax all costs in
the Municipal Court and make out all executions for fines, penalties and costs
imposed by him or her, make out and issue all processes of the court and sign
them as Judge, and administer oaths.
      (4)   Rules of procedure. He or she shall have authority to promulgate
and enforce rules of procedure not inconsistent with the State Constitution or
the statute or common law of the state, or this city code or other ordinance of
the city, or any rule of court established pursuant to state law and which is
applicable to municipal courts.
(Prior Code, § 173.03)
§ 35.04 MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK.
   The city vests in the Municipal Court Clerk, only in the absence of the
Municipal Judge, the power and authority to issue warrants for arrest, to
administer oaths and to accept and approve sureties and bonds. Such person
shall be appointed by confirmation of the governing body of the city. Likewise,
such authority may also be subsequently removed by action of the governing
body.
(Prior Code, § 173.04) (Ord. 04-01, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 35.05 WHO MAY ISSUE CITY WARRANTS.
   In addition to the Municipal Judge, the Mayor and the City Recorder shall
have authority to issue warrants for all offenses committed against this code
and other city ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 173.05)
§ 35.06 SESSIONS; BAILIFF.
   (A)   The Municipal Court shall hold not less than two regular sessions each
month, at such reasonable hours as shall be specified by the Municipal Judge in
a suitable court room in the city provided by Council; and all sessions shall
be open to the public; provided, that the Municipal Judge may hold hearings and
conduct proceedings in his or her chambers when, in his or her sound
discretion, it is appropriate so to do and is consistent with law.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall designate a police officer to attend each
session of the Municipal Court to serve as bailiff of the court, to preserve
order and decorum in the court room and in the immediate vicinity thereof, and
to execute all processes and orders directed to him or her by the Municipal
Judge.
(Prior Code, § 173.06) (Ord. 80-5, passed 11-25-1980)
§ 35.07 COMPULSORY ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES.
   The Municipal Judge and, by his or her authority, the Municipal Court Clerk,
shall have authority to issue subpoenas for and compel the attendance of any
person who may be required to testify as a witness, either for the city, or for
a defendant in any pending case. Any person, having so been summoned, who shall
willfully refuse to attend as required by such summons shall be punished as
provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 173.07)
§ 35.08 BAIL BONDS AND CASH DEPOSITS IN LIEU THEREOF.
   (A)   Except as may be provided otherwise in any case by the provisions of
W. Va. Code Chapter 62, Article 1C, as amended and in effect November 4, 1974,
whenever any person is arrested for any violation of an ordinance of the city
or for any offense of which the Municipal Judge has jurisdiction, it shall be
lawful for the Municipal Judge, City Recorder, Municipal Court Clerk, Mayor,
Chief of Police and the desk sergeant or person in charge of police
headquarters to admit such person to bail upon the execution of a bond to the
city in such an amount as in the discretion of the officer will secure the
prisoner’s presence, conditioned that the accused will appear upon a day named,
before the Municipal Judge of the city, to await trial; and every such bond
taken shall be filed as soon as practicable with the Municipal Court Clerk by
the officer approving and taking such bond; and the Municipal Judge, City
Recorder, Municipal Court Clerk, Mayor, Chief of Police and the desk sergeant
or person in charge, of police headquarters shall each have the power to
approve any bond taken under the provisions of this section, precedence being
given to the ranking officer present at police headquarters when such bond is
presented. No person shall be accepted as surety upon any penal bond unless he
or she shall acknowledge the bond before some official duly authorized by this
code or by state law to administer an oath, and shall make oath that he or she
is the owner in fee of real estate situated in Kanawha or Putnam County and
worth the amount of the bond over and above his or her debts and liabilities;
but the officers hereinbefore named in this section are hereby authorized and
empowered to accept a deposit in cash of an amount which, in the judgment of
the officer accepting the deposit, will be sufficient to cause the prisoner’s
appearance upon the day required of him or her before the Municipal Judge to
await trial upon the charge against him or her. The amount of such deposit
shall not be less than a sum sufficient in the judgment of the officer
accepting the same to satisfy any reasonable fine and costs which may be
imposed by the Municipal Judge. In the event any person so released upon bond
or such deposit shall fail to appear before the Municipal Judge for trial at
the appointed time, or, having appeared, shall leave the court without awaiting
trial, his or her bond shall be forfeited thereby to the city, and if a cash
deposit has been made to secure his or her release, the sum so deposited shall
be delivered to the Municipal Judge as soon as may be practicable, not later
than the following morning, and by him or her promptly turned in to the City
Treasury to the credit of the General Fund and accounted for by him or her in
the same manner that fines collected by him or her are accounted for; and in
the event of the forfeiture of a penal bond, the City Treasurer shall forthwith
take the steps necessary at law for the collection thereof.
   (B)   Bail bond cards issued by the American Automobile Association to its
members shall be accepted for traffic violations in accord with the terms of
such cards.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the admission
of a person to bail upon his or her own recognizance when such is authorized by
law and when the officer, in the exercise of sound discretion, considers it
proper so to do.
(Prior Code, § 173.08)
§ 35.09 REQUISITES AND DISPOSITION OF CASH DEPOSITS POSTED IN LIEU OF BAIL
BOND.
   No cash bond shall be accepted by any officer authorized to accept such bond
unless the prisoner and the officer authorized to accept it are present at
police headquarters or at the place where the prisoner is held in custody. The
money deposited as security for any person’s appearance shall be deposited with
the desk sergeant at police headquarters, to be by him or her safely kept until
the next regular session of the Municipal Court, when it shall be turned over
by the desk sergeant who received it to the Judge of the Municipal Court, and
by the Judge disposed of as required by the bond, this section and §
35.08.
(Prior Code, § 173.09)
§ 35.10 UNAUTHORIZED ACCEPTANCE OR APPROVAL OF CASH BOND; BOND IN FELONY CASES.
   If any officer shall accept or approve any cash bond at any place or in any
other manner than is herein provided for and authorized, such unauthorized
acceptance or approval shall constitute good cause for his or her suspension or
removal, or the reprimand or fining of such officer after a hearing on the
charge by Council. In case of the arrest of any person upon a charge of a
felony, the bond for his or her release, if approved, shall only be approved by
the Municipal Judge, or the Judge of the Circuit Court of Kanawha County or
Circuit Court of Putnam County, and no other officer of the city shall be
authorized to admit to bail any person charged with felony.
(Prior Code, § 173.10)
§ 35.11 PERSONS PROHIBITED TO BE SURETY ON BAIL BONDS.
   No practicing attorney, officer of the Municipal Court, or member of the
police force shall be accepted as surety on any bond provided for in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 173.11)
§ 35.12 COURT COSTS, FEES AND FINES.
   (A)   The Municipal Court Judge shall collect on behalf of the city such
court costs, fees and/or fines as authorized by state law and these codified
ordinances.
   (B)   In addition to any other fines, costs or fees that may be imposed, the
following fines, costs and fees, as authorized and required by state law, shall
be assessed and collected by the Municipal Court:
      (1)   Crime Victims Compensation Fund fee, as provided in W. Va. Code 14-
2A-4, as amended, shall be:
         (a)   Eight dollars which shall be assessed on all misdemeanor pleas
or convictions except violations of municipal parking ordinances or non-moving
violations; plus
         (b)   Twenty percent of the assessed fine on each DUI conviction or
plea.
      (2)   Law Enforcement Training Fund fee, as provided in W. Va. Code 30-
29-4, as amended, shall be $2 which shall be assessed on all cases except
violations of municipal parking ordinances;
      (3)   Regional Jail and Correctional Facility Development Fund fee, as
provided in W. Va. Code 8-11-1, as amended, shall be $42 which shall be
assessed on all moving traffic violations;
      (4)   DUI fine as provided in W. Va. Code 8-11-1b, as amended, shall be
an amount not to exceed state law which shall be assessed on all DUI
convictions;
      (5)   Municipal cost as authorized in W. Va. Code 8-11-1, as amended,
shall be an amount not to exceed state law which shall be assessed on all
cases; and
      (6)   Community Corrections Act fee, as provided in W. Va. Code 62-11C-4
(d), as amended, shall be an amount not to exceed state law which shall be
assessed on all criminal cases except violations of parking ordinances.
   (C)   When applicable, and in addition to any other fines, costs or fees
that may be imposed, the following fines, costs and fees, as authorized and
required by state law, shall be assessed and collected by the Municipal Court:
      (1)   Litter Control Fund fine, as provided in W. Va. Code 22-15A-4, as
amended, shall consist of all of the following:
         (a)   A fine of an amount not to exceed state law;
         (b)   A civil penalty of an amount not to exceed state law;
         (c)   Two dollar Law Enforcement Training Fund fee;
         (d)   Eight dollar Crime Victims Compensations Fund fee; plus
         (e)   Ten dollar Community Corrections Fund fee.
      (2)   Home confinement fee, provided by W. Va. Code 62-11C-4(c), as
amended, shall be a fee as set by Council from time to time, per day.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DUI. Driving under the influence as provided in W. Va. Code 17C-5-2 or
20-7-18b and §
70.055 of this code.
      NON-MOVING VIOLATION. Invalid automobile registration; expired inspection
sticker; invalid driver’s license; defective equipment; improper equipment;
improper weight, height, length or width; and improper registration.
(Prior Code, § 173.12) (Ord. 12-8, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 35.13 APPEALS AND APPEAL BONDS.
   From any judgment of imprisonment or for a fine of an amount not to exceed
state law under this code or any other ordinance of the city the person against
whom it is rendered may, within ten days after the date thereof, appeal to a
court of competent jurisdiction in the county wherein the offense was committed
upon entering into a recognizance with surety deemed sufficient in a penalty
double the amount of fine and costs with the condition that the party appealing
will appear before such court on the first day of the next term thereof to
answer for the offense against the city with which he or she stands charged,
and not thence depart without leave of such court and will perform and satisfy
any judgment which may be rendered against him or her by the court on appeal.
And in case a fine not exceeding $10 is assessed, the person against whom it is
assessed may object thereto, and insist upon the increase thereof to a certain
sum exceeding $10, and judgment shall be given for such increased sum, and an
appeal allowed, if one is desired, from such judgment.
(Prior Code, § 173.13)
§ 35.14 CONTEMPT.
   (A)   When punishment authorized. The Municipal Judge may issue attachments
for contempt, and punish summarily, only in the following cases:
      (1)   Misbehavior in the presence of his or her court, or so near thereto
as to obstruct the administration of justice;
      (2)   Violence or threats of violence to the Municipal Judge or any
officer, witness or party going thereto, attending or returning from court, for
or in respect of any act or proceeding had or to be had in such court;
      (3)   Misbehavior of any officer in his or her official capacity, in
respect to any act or judicial proceeding had or pending before the Municipal
Judge, or any process, order or notice therein; and
      (4)   Disobedience or resistance of an officer, witness, party or other
person to any lawful process, judgment, order or notice of the Municipal Judge.
   (B)   Arrest and prosecution. An order to arrest may be issued by the
Municipal Judge on which the person charged with the contempt may be taken and
brought before him or her, or such person may be taken in custody by any
officer or any person upon the oral order of the Municipal Judge and held to
answer for the contempt. An opportunity must be given the person charged to be
heard in defense or explanation of his or her conduct, and the Municipal Judge
may thereupon discharge him or her, or adjudge him or her guilty of the
contempt and punish him or her therefor, by fine or imprisonment or both. The
fine nor the imprisonment shall not exceed state law. The Municipal Judge shall
not impose a fine for contempt unless the defendant be present in court, or
shall have been served with a rule of the court to show cause, on some certain
day, and shall have failed to appear and show cause.
   (C)   Judgment and commitment. The conviction for contempt, specifying the
particular circumstances of the offense and judgment thereon, must be entered
by the Municipal Judge in his or her docket. A warrant of commitment for the
term of imprisonment adjudged may be issued by the Municipal Judge commanding
an officer to take the offender to the jail or other place designated for the
imprisonment of city prisoners, and the keeper thereof to imprison him or her
therein for such term. The judgment may include, in addition to fines, all
costs in the case, including costs of arresting and keeping in prison the
offender.
(Prior Code, § 173.14)
§ 35.15 DEFENDANT MAY BE ORDERED TO PAY FINE AND COSTS.
   Whenever a person is convicted in the Municipal Court of a violation of this
code or other ordinance or any rule, regulation, notice or order promulgated
pursuant to authority thereof, and such person is sentenced to pay a fine, and
it shall appear to the court on its own motion or on motion of the defendant
that such defendant is unable to pay such fine forthwith, the court may order
the defendant to pay such fine and any costs which the defendant may be
required to pay in installments or upon such other terms and conditions or
within such period of time as may enable the defendant to pay such fine and
costs.
(Prior Code, § 173.15)
§ 35.16 ABILITY TO PAY; ASSISTANCE TO DEFENDANT; FALSE SWEARING.
   (A)   In determining whether a defendant is unable to pay a fine forthwith,
the court may require such defendant to file a petition, under oath, with the
court, upon a form provided by the court, setting forth the financial condition
of the defendant.
   (B)   Such form shall be a questionnaire, and shall include, but shall not
be limited to: the name and residence of the defendant; his or her occupation,
if any; his or her family status and the number of persons dependent upon him;
his or her monthly income; whether or not his or her dependents are employed
and, if so, their approximate monthly income; his or her banking accounts, if
any; real estate owned by the defendant, or any interest he or she may have in
real estate; income produced therefrom; any independent income accruing to the
defendant; tangible and intangible personal property owned by the defendant, or
in which he or she may have an interest; and a statement listing the
approximate indebtedness of the defendant to other persons. Such form shall
also include a payment plan of the defendant, if the court should exercise its
discretion in permitting the payment of such fine and costs in installments or
other conditions to be fixed by the court. At the end of such form there shall
be printed in bold face type, in a distinctive color the following: “THIS
STATEMENT IS MADE UNDER OATH. ANY FALSE STATEMENT OF A MATERIAL FACT TO ANY
QUESTION CONTAINED HEREIN SHALL CONSTITUTE FALSE SWEARING AND SHALL BE AN
OFFENSE AGAINST THIS SECTION. THE MAXIMUM PENALTY IS NOT TO EXCEED STATE LAW OR
IMPRISONED FOR A TERM NOT TO EXCEED STATE LAW, OR BOTH.” A copy of the petition
shall be retained by the defendant.
   (C)   If the defendant is unable to read or write, the court, or the Clerk,
may assist the defendant in completing the petition and require him or her to
affix his or her mark thereto. The consequences of the making of a false
statement shall be explained to such defendant.
   (D)   Any defendant who shall knowingly make a false statement of a material
fact to any question contained in the questionnaire authorized by this section
shall be guilty of false swearing under this section and, upon conviction,
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding that imposed by state law or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed state law, or both.
(Prior Code, § 173.16)
§ 35.17 PAYMENT MAY BE MADE CONDITION OF PROBATION OR SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE.
   If a defendant is sentenced to pay a fine and payment of the fine or fine
and costs is ordered to be made on an installment basis or on other conditions
under the provisions of §
35.15 and if the defendant is also placed on probation or imposition of the
execution of sentence is suspended, the court may make payment of the fine a
condition of probation or suspension of sentence.
(Prior Code, § 173.17)
§ 35.18 DEFENDANT TO BE ON GOOD BEHAVIOR UNTIL FINE AND COSTS ARE PAID.
   If a defendant is permitted to pay a fine or fine and costs on an
installment basis, or under such other conditions as the court shall fix under
the provisions of §
35.15, the court may require as a condition that the defendant be of peace and
good behavior until the fine and costs are paid.
(Prior Code, § 173.18)
§ 35.19 PROCEDURE UPON DEFAULT IN PAYMENT; CONFINEMENT FOR WILLFUL DEFAULT.
   When any person sentenced to pay a fine defaults in the payment of any such
fine or of any installment thereof, the court may issue a summons for such
person to appear before the court for a hearing on the question of whether such
person’s failure to pay the fine or any installment was attributable to
intentional refusal to comply with the prior order of the court or to a lack of
a good faith effort to comply therewith. The court may, after hearing, order
that the person in default be allowed additional time for payment, may reduce
or remit the amount of the fine or the unpaid portion thereof in whole or in
part, or upon a finding that the default was intentional or due to the lack of
a good faith effort to comply with the prior order of the court, may order such
person confined for such period up to 30 days as the court in its discretion
shall determine.
(Prior Code, § 173.19)
§ 35.20 FAILURE TO APPEAR IN MUNICIPAL COURT.
   Any person who has been issued a citation or summons to appear, or arrested,
and thereafter released upon his or her personal recognizance or otherwise
admitted to bail, and who shall willfully and without just cause fail to appear
at a duly scheduled hearing or trial in Municipal Court, shall be subject to a
complaint and a warrant for failure to appear that shall be added to original
charges. Such person is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more
than $500, or sentenced to jail for no more than ten days, or both. Court costs
as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 1-15-2008; Ord. passed 1-21-2025)
PERSONAL INCOME TAX REFUND OFFSET PROGRAM
§ 35.35 FINDINGS.
   The City Council hereby finds the following:
   (A)   There exists a need for additional avenues to aid the Municipal Court
in the collection of unpaid fines, fees and court costs, the total amount of
which continues to increase;
   (B)   The State Legislature in response to the growing need for financial
support, established a program, with the aid of the state’s Tax Department, to
assist municipal courts to collect unpaid municipal fines, forfeitures,
penalties, restitution, fees and court costs; and
   (C)   Therefore, the City Council does hereby establish and confer upon the
city’s Municipal Court the authority to participate in the Municipal Court
Income Tax Refund Offset Program established in accordance with W. Va. Code 8-
10-2b, and all rules and procedures promulgated for its administration.
(Ord. 10-4, passed 7-20-2010)
§ 35.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Nitro, West Virginia.
   CRIMINAL OFFENSE. A violation of any of the provisions of any city or county
ordinance or state statute that results in the Municipal Court levying a fine,
costs, forfeiture, penalty or restitution payable:
      (1)   To the city in the form of payment of delinquent municipal service
fees, emergency services user fees, or other legitimate charges imposed by the
city as a result of the ordinance violation, including a motor vehicle
violation; or
      (2)   To a person or the city for an economic or financial loss caused by
the person against whom the fine, costs, forfeiture, penalty or restitution is
imposed.
   LICENSEE. The person against whom costs, fines, forfeitures and penalties
have been imposed.
   MUNICIPAL COURT. The Municipal Court of the city.
   MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK. The Clerk of the Municipal Court.
   REFUND OFFSET PROGRAM. The Municipal Court Income Tax Refund Offset Program
authorized in W. Va. Code 8-10-2b and administered by the state’s Tax
Department through 110 C.S.R. 40, Withholding or Denial of Personal Income Tax
Refunds From Taxpayers Who Owe Municipal Costs, Fines, Forfeitures or
Penalties.
(Ord. 10-4, passed 7-20-2010)
§ 35.37 ESTABLISHMENT OF BASIS FOR PROGRAM PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   If a person convicted in the Municipal Court of a criminal offense, as
defined in W. Va. Code 17B-3-3c, fails to pay all costs, fines, forfeitures,
restitution or penalties imposed by the municipal court within 180 days after
the date the judgment was imposed, the Municipal Court Clerk or, upon a
judgment rendered on appeal, the Circuit Clerk shall notify the state’s
Division of Motor Vehicles of the failure to pay.
   (B)   At the time the judgment is imposed, the judge shall provide the
person with written notice that failure to pay all costs, fines, forfeitures,
restitution or penalties:
      (1)   May, under the State Tax Department Refund Offset Program, result
in the withholding of any income tax refund due the person; and
      (2)   Shall result in the suspension of the person’s license or privilege
to operate a motor vehicle in the state and that the suspension could result in
the cancellation of, the failure to renew or the failure to issue an automobile
insurance policy providing coverage for the person or the person’s family.
   (C)   Payment shall be stayed during any period an appeal from the
conviction which resulted in the imposition of costs, fines, forfeitures,
restitution or penalties is pending.
   (D)   The notice of the failure to pay costs, fines, forfeitures,
restitution or penalties may not be given where the Municipal Court, upon
application of the person against whom the costs, fines, forfeitures,
restitution or penalties were imposed and that was filed prior to the
expiration of the 180-day period, enters an order finding that the person is
financially unable to pay all or a portion of the costs, fines, forfeitures,
restitution or penalties. However, where the Municipal Court finds that the
person is financially unable to pay a portion of the costs, fines, forfeitures,
restitution or penalties, the Municipal Court may require the person to pay the
remaining portion, and shall notify the Division of Motor Vehicles of the
person’s failure to pay if not paid within the period of time ordered by the
court.
   (E)   If a person charged with a criminal offense fails to appear or
otherwise respond in the Municipal Court, the Municipal Court Clerk shall
notify the Division of Motor Vehicles of that failure within 15 days after the
scheduled date to appear unless the person sooner appears or otherwise responds
in the Municipal Court to the satisfaction of the Judge.
   (F)   If the licensee fails to respond to the Division of Motor Vehicles
order of suspension within 90 days of receipt of the certified letter, the
Municipal Court Clerk shall notify the Tax Commissioner that the licensee has
failed to pay the costs, fines, forfeitures, restitution and penalties assessed
by the court or has failed to respond to the citation.
(Ord. 10-4, passed 7-20-2010)
§ 35.38 ESTABLISHING PARTICIPATION IN THE REFUND OFFSET PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Municipal Court shall:
      (1)   Complete and file with the state’s Tax Department the Application
to Participate in Municipal Court Income Tax Refund Offset Program, Form WV/
MUN-1;
      (2)   Execute a memorandum of understanding with the State Tax Department
that sets forth the duties and responsibilities of both the State Tax
Department and the Municipal Court under the refund offset program;
      (3)   Participate in the testing of the file exchange process and
training; and
      (4)   Perform all other activities necessary to assure full participation
in the refund offset program.
   (B)   To receive refund offsets, the Municipal Court shall provide to the
State Tax Commissioner, in an electronic format prescribed by the State Tax
Commissioner, a listing, by Social Security number, of the unpaid municipal
costs, fines, forfeitures, restitution or penalties eligible to be offset under
the provisions of W. Va. Code 8-10-2b. This listing shall contain:
      (1)   The taxpayer’s Social Security number;
      (2)   The taxpayer’s name;
      (3)   The taxpayer’s last known mailing address;
      (4)   The amount of the unpaid municipal costs, fines, forfeitures or
penalties;
      (5)   An optional external control number used by the court;
      (6)   The FIPS (Federal Information Processing System) Code for the
municipality in which the court is located; and
      (7)   Any other information required by the State Tax Commissioner.
(Ord. 10-4, passed 7-20-2010)
§ 35.39 EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS RECEIVED.
   Upon receipt of funds from the State Tax Department, the Municipal Court
shall distribute applicable costs, fines, forfeitures and penalties owed to:
   (A)   The municipality;
   (B)   The Regional Jail Authority Fund;
   (C)   The Crime Victims Compensation Fund;
   (D)   The Community Corrections Fund;
   (E)   The Governor’s subcommittee on law-enforcement training; or
   (F)   Any other fund or payee that may be applicable.
(Ord. 10-4, passed 7-20-2010)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   If any such person was admitted to bail or released after being
arrested for, charged or convicted of a misdemeanor and shall thereafter be
convicted for a violation of the provision of §
35.20, such persons shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined an
amount not to exceed state law or confined for a term not to exceed state law,
or both such fine and confinement.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 1-15-2008)
CHAPTER 36: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
36.001   Property, personnel and organization
   
36.002   Chief of Police
   
36.003   Authority to command; obedience to orders
   
36.004   Powers and duties of department and members
   
36.005   Civil service continued in effect
   
36.006   Civil Service Commission
   
36.007   Rules and regulations
   
36.008   Law enforcement training; reimbursement
Reserve Police Unit
   
36.020   Reserve unit established
   
36.021   Squad organization; appointments
   
36.022   Duties of Reserve Lieutenant
   
36.023   Duties of Reserve Sergeants
   
36.024   Duties of Reserve Director
   
36.025   Recruitment and selection process for reserve members
   
36.026   Status of reserve unit and members
   
36.027   Authority and responsibility of reserve unit and members
   
36.028   Compensation
   
36.029   Uniforms and equipment
   
36.030   Rules also applicable to reserve unit
Police Officer’s Pension and Relief Fund
   
36.045   Powers and duties of Board of Trustees
   
36.046   Composition; term; vacancy; records
   
36.047   Maintenance of Fund
   
36.048   Administration of Fund
   
36.049   Applicability of state law
City Jail
   
36.060   Designation of city jail
   
36.061   City Jailer
   
36.062   Reception of prisoners
   
36.063   Medical care for persons confined; costs
   
36.064   Prohibited giving of articles to prisoners
   
36.065   Prevention of escape
   
36.066   Jail rules
Authorized Fees
   
36.080   Imposition; rate
Statutory reference:
   Appointment of special police, see W. Va. Code 8-10-1
   Civil service, see W. Va. Code 8-14-6 et seq.
   Hours of duty; holidays, see W. Va. Code 8-14-2, 8-14-2a
   Parking lot or building officers, see W. Va. Code 8-14-5a
   Pension and relief fund, see W. Va. Code Art. 8-22
   Police bonds, see W. Va. Code 61-7-5
   Powers and duties, see W. Va. Code 8-14-1, 8-14-3
   School zone officers, see W. Va. Code 8-14-5
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.001 PROPERTY, PERSONNEL AND ORGANIZATION.
   The Police Department shall have such property and equipment, and such
personnel, holding such ranks, as may from time to time be authorized by
Council. The organization and deployment of the Police Department shall be as
prescribed in the rules and regulations of the Department promulgated pursuant
to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 143.01)
§ 36.002 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The office of Chief of Police is hereby established. The Chief of Police
shall be the commanding officer of the Police Department and, under the general
direction of the Mayor, he or she shall be responsible to the Mayor and Council
for the administration, training, discipline, morale and effective deployment
and utilization of the members of the Department and for the maintenance and
effective deployment and utilization of the property and equipment of the
Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 143.02)
§ 36.003 AUTHORITY TO COMMAND; OBEDIENCE TO ORDERS.
   Authority within the Police Department shall flow from the Chief of Police
through the other officers and police officers downward in order of rank and
seniority within rank; and subordinates shall have the powers and perform the
duties of their immediate superiors when such superiors are absent or disabled.
Each member of the Police Department shall obey all lawful orders of his or her
superiors in the chain of command.
(Prior Code, § 143.03)
§ 36.004 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT AND MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Police Department and the members thereof shall, under the overall
direction of the Mayor and the immediate direction of the Chief of Police,
protect persons and property and preserve law and order within the city, and
for such purposes all police officers shall have the powers and authority
conferred on municipal police officers by state law.
   (B)   Members of the Police Department shall be vigilant in the enforcement
of the laws of the state as they may be applicable within this city and the
enforcement of the provisions of the codified ordinances and other ordinances
of the city. They shall cooperate with other city officers and employees.
(Prior Code, § 143.04)
§ 36.005 CIVIL SERVICE CONTINUED IN EFFECT.
   The appointment, promotion, reduction, removal and reinstatement of all
officers (except the Chief of Police), police officers and other employees of
the city’s Police Department on and after the effective date of the codified
ordinances shall continue to be governed by the provisions of W. Va. Code
Article 8-14.
(Prior Code, § 143.05)
§ 36.006 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   The police officers’s Civil Service Commission existing immediately prior to
the effective date of the codified ordinances is hereby continued in full force
and effect; and all of the pertinent provisions of W. Va. Code 8-14-6 to 8-14-
20, inclusive, and 8-14-22 and 8-14-23 are hereby adopted by Council and made
applicable to the city’s Police Department and to the members thereof and
applicants for membership therein.
(Prior Code, § 143.06)
§ 36.007 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Mayor, in consultation with the Chief of Police, shall prepare and may
from time to time amend rules and regulations not inconsistent with state law,
the codified ordinances or other ordinances or resolutions of Council, for the
organization and government of the Police Department and the personnel and
property thereof. When such rules and regulations and any amendments thereof
have been approved by ordinance or resolution of Council and, having been so
approved, have been placed on file in the office of the City Recorder and a
true copy thereof having been placed on file at Police Department headquarters
for the information of all members of the Department, it shall be unlawful for
any member of the Police Department to violate or fail to comply with any such
rule or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 143.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 36.008 LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING; REIMBURSEMENT.
   Pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code 30-29-8, as amended, on and after
the effective date of this section, all law enforcement officers shall, before
attendance at a law enforcement officers training academy, be required to enter
into a written agreement with the city, which agreement shall require and
specify that if such employee should voluntarily discontinue employment with
the city within one year immediately following completion of such training
curriculum, such employee shall be obligated to pay to the city the pro rata
portion of the sum of such compensation which is equal to that part of such
year which employee has chosen not to remain in the employ of the city.
(Prior Code, § 143.071) (Ord. 98-05, passed 8-18-1998)
RESERVE POLICE UNIT
§ 36.020 RESERVE UNIT ESTABLISHED.
   A reserve police unit is hereby established as an organizational unit of the
city’s Police Department, and shall be headed by a Director who shall be a
sworn, full-time member of the regular Police Department, designated by the
Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 143.08)
§ 36.021 SQUAD ORGANIZATION; APPOINTMENTS.
   The reserve police unit shall consist of a Reserve Lieutenant and three
squads, each squad consisting of one Reserve Sergeant and four reserve patrol
officers. The Reserve Lieutenant shall be appointed by the Chief of Police, and
each Reserve Sergeant and reserve patrol officer shall be appointed from within
the unit by the Director with the approval of the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 143.09)
§ 36.022 DUTIES OF RESERVE LIEUTENANT.
   (A)   The Reserve Lieutenant shall be responsible for executing orders
issued by the Director for the efficient operation of his or her unit and men
under his or her supervision. The Lieutenant shall preside, or designate a
Reserve Sergeant to preside, at all meetings of the reserve police unit. The
Lieutenant shall be responsible for maintaining complete records of this unit,
making frequent reports to the Director or Chief of Police as designated or
requested.
   (B)   The Reserve Lieutenant shall endeavor to fill all requests for
details, special or otherwise. He or she shall keep in close contact with
members under his or her supervision, noting carefully any change in address,
telephone numbers and availability of reserve members during the 24 hours of
each day.
(Prior Code, § 143.10)
§ 36.023 DUTIES OF RESERVE SERGEANTS.
   Each squad of the reserve police unit shall be under the supervision of a
Reserve Sergeant who shall acquaint himself or herself with all members within
the section and shall maintain a listing of names, telephone numbers, addresses
and availability of section members for all requests for assistance and
emergencies.
(Prior Code, § 143.11)
§ 36.024 DUTIES OF RESERVE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director of the reserve police unit shall be responsible for the
execution of all orders and rules governing the police reserve. The Director
shall have the power to enforce all orders, written or verbal, issued by the
Chief of Police and, in addition, he or she shall have control of all property
of the city that may be assigned to the reserve police unit.
   (B)   The Director shall have control, management and direction over all
members of the reserve police unit, with authority to detail any member of such
service as may be necessary, together with the power to remove, discharge,
suspend or reduce in rank any member for insubordination or dereliction of
duty, but in no event shall the Director take such action until the member has
been furnished with a written statement of the reason for such action. Members
shall have the right of appeal to the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 143.12)
§ 36.025 RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION PROCESS FOR RESERVE MEMBERS.
   The Director shall be responsible for the administration of recruitment and
selection process for reserve members. The rules and regulations and staffing
process utilized by the city’s Police Department Civil Service Commission shall
be used as a guideline, where applicable or practical.
(Prior Code, § 143.13)
§ 36.026 STATUS OF RESERVE UNIT AND MEMBERS.
   (A)   The reserve police unit shall be maintained for the purpose of
assisting regularly appointed police officers in preserving law and order
within the jurisdiction of the city and for such other functions as may come
within the scope of such a reserve unit.
   (B)   The reserve police unit shall function only upon the request of the
Police Department and only under the control of the Police Department. The rank
and authority of individual reserve members pertain only to the reserve. A
reserve member has no jurisdiction over any regular police officer regardless
of rank or title, and when on duty shall be subordinate to the regular police
officer.
(Prior Code, § 143.14)
§ 36.027 AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY OF RESERVE UNIT AND MEMBERS.
   (A)   The reserve police unit, including members of such, shall render
volunteer police service upon occasions when, in the opinion of the Chief of
Police, such augmentation of the regular Department is essential to the public
welfare and safety.
   (B)   Reserve members shall exercise police powers when circumstances make
it expedient to preserve order or protect life and property pending the arrival
of regular police officers. The purpose of the reserve police unit shall be to
cooperate with and assist the Police Department, without compensation to the
members, in the enforcement of law and order during augmentation of the regular
Department and during any and all police emergencies, except those under the
responsibility of the city’s Emergency Services Organization.
   (C)   The reserve police unit shall be used only for traffic control during,
for example, parades and sport events, and handling crowds at rallies, fairs
and other events as determined by the Chief of Police. The reserve police unit
shall not perform such duties as routine police patrol, police telephone or
radio communications, or investigative activity, except during emergencies
where total manpower is essential for the public safety and welfare, and only
after approval of the Chief of Police.
   (D)   A reserve police officer has authority only while in uniform. When off
duty, the member reverts to his or her civilian status. When a situation arises
that requires police attention while a reserve officer is off duty and out of
uniform, a regular police officer must be summoned before the reserve officer
can perform any police function.
(Prior Code, § 143.15)
§ 36.028 COMPENSATION.
   Any form of compensation paid to the reserve police unit must be used to buy
equipment or supplies for the reserve unit.
(Prior Code, § 143.16)
§ 36.029 UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   When providing an authorized police service, every reserve police
officer must be in complete uniform as specified for reserve police officers.
No uniforms will be furnished by the city.
   (B)   A reserve police unit insignia or patch shall be worn on the left
sleeve of the outside garment.
   (C)   The regulation reserve police badge shall be worn on the left breast
of the outside garment.
   (D)   A regulation police cap shall be worn in place of any hat.
   (E)   No reserve rank or insignia may be worn on any part of the uniform
while working out of police headquarters on details with regular police
officers.
   (F)   The equipment of each reserve officer shall consist of a whistle,
baton, flashlight, pencil and notebook.
   (G)   No equipment shall be furnished by the city.
(Prior Code, § 143.17)
§ 36.030 RULES ALSO APPLICABLE TO RESERVE UNIT.
   (A)   The rules and regulations governing the operation of the regular
Police Department of the city shall also be applicable to members of the
reserve police unit. A reserve officer may be suspended or dismissed for
violation of such rules of conduct or regulations.
   (B)   The appointment and continuance on the reserve police unit of the
various members of the reserve shall depend upon their willingness and ability
to attend all calls of duty, scheduled training and compliance with the rules
and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 143.18)
POLICE OFFICER’S PENSION AND RELIEF FUND
§ 36.045 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   There is hereby created a Board of Trustees which shall administer and
distribute the Police Officers’s Pension and Relief Fund established and
maintained under the provisions of this chapter, and which shall be a
corporation by the name and style of “The Board of Trustees of the Police
Officers’s Pension and Relief Fund of the City of Nitro, West Virginia”, by
which name it may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, contract and be
contracted with, take and hold real estate and personal estate for the use of
the Police Officers’s Pension and Relief Fund and have and use a common seal,
but in the absence of such seal, the private seal of the President of the
corporation shall be equivalent to such common seal. This Board of Trustees may
also, in its corporate name, do and perform any and all other acts and
businesses pertaining to the trust created hereby or by any conveyance, devise
or dedication made for the uses and purposes of such Board.
(Prior Code, § 143.19)
§ 36.046 COMPOSITION; TERM; VACANCY; RECORDS.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees of the Police Officers’s Pension and Relief
Fund, (hereinafter in this chapter referred to as “the Board of Trustees” or
“the Board”), shall consist of the Mayor and four paid members of the Police
Department, and such paid members shall serve for a term of four years each and
until their successors are duly elected and qualified. One paid member of the
Police Department shall be elected annually upon the second Monday in March,
and all votes cast at such election shall be counted and canvassed by the then
existing members of such Board, who after such election shall announce the
result, and the paid member of the Police Department receiving the highest
number of votes shall be declared to have been elected; and in the case of a
tie vote being received by any two paid members for the office of trustee, such
tie vote shall be decided by casting lots, or in any other way which may be
agreed upon by the persons for whom such tie vote was cast. The result of such
election shall be entered in the record of the proceedings of the Board. In
case of vacancy by death, resignation or otherwise among the paid members so
elected, the remaining members shall choose the successor, or successors, until
the next annual election, at which later time all vacancies shall be filled.
The Board shall give due notice of such election to all paid members of the
Police Department annually during the month of February.
   (B)   The presiding officer of the Board of Trustees shall be the Mayor, and
the Secretary thereof shall be appointed by the Board. It shall be the duty of
such Secretary to keep a full and permanent record of all the proceedings of
the Board, and the trustees may fix his or her compensation for this work,
which shall be paid out of the funds of the Police Officer’s Pension and Relief
Fund.
(Prior Code, § 143.20)
§ 36.047 MAINTENANCE OF FUND.
   The Police Officers’s Pension and Relief Fund shall be maintained as
follows.
   (A)   By an annual levy of ($0.01) on each $100 of all real and personal
property as listed for taxation in the city.
   (B)   From each member of the Police Department there shall be assessed and
collected, each month, the sum of 6% of the actual salary or compensation of
such member, and the amount so collected shall become a regular part of the
Police Officers’s Pension and Relief Fund.
   (C)   The Board of Trustees is authorized to take by gift, grant, devise or
bequest any money, or real or personal property upon such terms as to the
investment and expenditure thereof, as may be fixed by the grantor, or
determined by the trustee.
(Prior Code, § 143.21)
§ 36.048 ADMINISTRATION OF FUND.
   The Board of Trustees of the Police Officers’s Pension and Relief Fund shall
administer such Fund in accordance with the applicable provisions of W. Va.
Code Article 8-22.
(Prior Code, § 143.22)
§ 36.049 APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW.
   The provisions of W. Va. Code 8-22-19 to 8-22-27 shall be applicable to the
Police Officers’s Pension and Relief Fund established by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 143.23)
CITY JAIL
§ 36.060 DESIGNATION OF CITY JAIL.
   The space provided for the confinement of prisoners at the City Hall is
hereby designated as the city jail.
(Prior Code, § 143.24)
§ 36.061 CITY JAILER.
   The City Jailer, under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police, shall
use all the necessary and lawful means to properly provide for and protect
prisoners confined in the city jail. He or she shall keep the jail clean and
well ventilated, properly heated and lighted, and in good sanitary condition at
all times, and free from bugs and vermin.
(Prior Code, § 143.25)
§ 36.062 RECEPTION OF PRISONERS.
   The City Jailer shall receive all persons committed to the city jail by the
Municipal Judge or law enforcement officers and he or she shall, before any
prisoner is locked up, register in a book to be kept for that purpose, the
name, age, height and color of each prisoner received, and such other facts as
may be necessary or required by Council, and shall make a record of all
articles of value taken from the prisoner before confinement.
(Prior Code, § 143.26)
§ 36.063 MEDICAL CARE FOR PERSONS CONFINED; COSTS.
   Whenever any person confined in the city jail is sick or injured, the City
Jailer shall procure such medical services as may be immediately required, and
promptly notify the public health authority charged by law with the duty of
caring for such person under the circumstances of the case; and for this
purpose the Chief of Police shall maintain at the telephone commonly used by
the City Jailer a list of names and telephone numbers of those public health
physicians and medical attendants who are subject to call under the provisions
of this section. The cost of medicines and medical supplies furnished in each
case shall be charged against the confined person for whose benefit such were
procured and he or she shall pay such charge either in money or by work at the
same rate required for the payment of fines and costs.
(Prior Code, § 143.27)
§ 36.064 PROHIBITED GIVING OF ARTICLES TO PRISONERS.
   No person shall deliver or make available to any prisoner lawfully confined
in the city jail any intoxicating drink or any narcotic, drug or other article
of any kind, without the permission of the City Jailer; provided, that this
section shall not be applicable to any physician or registered nurse in
providing medical care to a prisoner.
(Prior Code, § 143.28) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 36.065 PREVENTION OF ESCAPE.
   The Chief of Police and City Jailer shall use all the necessary and lawful
means to prevent escape of the prisoners confined in the jail.
(Prior Code, § 143.29)
§ 36.066 JAIL RULES.
   The Chief of Police, in consultation with the City Jailer, shall prepare and
may from time to time amend rules for the administration of the city jail and
the government of the inmates of and visitors to the jail; provided, that such
rules not be inconsistent with state law, the codified ordinances or other
ordinance or resolution of Council. Such rules shall be submitted through the
Mayor to Council, and when approved by resolution of Council and a true copy of
such rules is placed at each entrance to the jail and at a conspicuous place
readily accessible to the view of the inmates, no visitor or inmate of the jail
shall violate or fail to comply with any such rule.
(Prior Code, § 143.30) Penalty, see §
10.99
AUTHORIZED FEES
§ 36.080 IMPOSITION; RATE.
   (A)   There is hereby levied and shall be collected by the Police Department
the following fees for the specified activity:
      (1)   For providing to any person, other than another law enforcement
agency, a copy of any motor vehicle accident report maintained by the Police
Department: $25;
      (2)   For providing a computer disk containing pictures relating to a
motor vehicle accident or any other incident investigated by the Police
Department: $20; and
      (3)   For taking the fingerprints of any person other than a person who
is the subject of a pending criminal investigation or who is being charged with
a crime: $10; provided, that there shall be no fee collected for the taking of
fingerprints from a child whose age is 12 years or younger, or from special
needs individuals participating in a special identification program.
   (B)   All fees collected under the authority of this section shall be
deposited in the Police Department Training and Continuing Education Fund and
used when providing training and continuing education of members of the city’s
Police Department.
   (C)   The fees herein imposed are to be collected on and after April 1,
2009.
(Ord. 09-02, passed 3-17-2009)
CHAPTER 37: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
37.01   Property, personnel and organization
   
37.02   Fire Chief
   
37.03   Authority to command; obedience to orders
   
37.04   Civil Service Commission
   
37.05   Rules and regulations
   
37.06   Firefighters prohibited from working for other municipalities
Reserve Fire Unit
   
37.20   Reserve unit established
   
37.21   Reserve squad organization; appointments
   
37.22   Duties of Reserve Lieutenant
   
37.23   Duties of Reserve Sergeants
   
37.24   Duties of Reserve Director
   
37.25   Recruitment and selection process for probationary reserve members
   
37.26   Status of reserve unit and members
   
37.27   Authority and responsibility of reserve unit and members; compensation
   
37.28   Uniforms and badges
   
37.29   Rules also applicable to reserve unit
Firefighter’s Pension and Relief Fund
   
37.40   Powers and duties of Board of Trustees
   
37.41   Composition; term; vacancy; records
   
37.42   Maintenance of Fund
   
37.43   Applicability of state law
   
37.44   Administration of Fund
Alarm System Registration
   
37.55   Definitions
   
37.56   Alarm system registration
   
37.57   False alarm
 
   
37.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of local fire departments, see W. Va. Code Art. 29-3A
   Civil service, see W. Va. Code 8-15-11 et seq.
   Fire protection contracts, see W. Va. Code 8-15-3, 8-12-5(56)
   Paid fire departments, see W. Va. Code 8-15-9 et seq.
   Pension and relief fund, see W. Va. Code Art. 8-22
   Power of governing body, see W. Va. Code 8-15-1
   Volunteer fire companies, see W. Va. Code 8-15-4 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.01 PROPERTY, PERSONNEL AND ORGANIZATION.
   The Fire Department shall have such property, equipment and apparatus, and
such personnel, holding such ranks as may from time to time be authorized by
Council. The organization and deployment of the Fire Department shall be as
prescribed in the rules and regulations of the Department promulgated pursuant
to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 145.01)
§ 37.02 FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   The office of Fire Chief is hereby established. The Fire Chief shall
be the Chief of the Fire Department and the commanding officer thereof, and
shall be responsible to the Mayor and Council for the administration, training,
discipline, morale and effective deployment and utilization of the members of
the Department and for the maintenance and effective deployment and utilization
of the property, equipment and apparatus of the Fire Department.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall have all such powers as may be necessary and
lawful to meet the responsibilities imposed upon him or her by this section,
including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   He or she shall have absolute command, control, management,
assignment to duties and supervision of every officer, member and employee of
the Fire Department during a fire and at all practices and drills, and during
all hours when such personnel are on duty;
      (2)   He or she shall have absolute control, authority and command of the
police officers present at the scene of any fire during the time and
continuance of any fire or conflagration, and all orders issued by him or her
to such police officers, and to other persons present, shall be by them
explicitly obeyed and performed;
      (3)   He or she shall have supervision over the engine houses, trucks and
all apparatus and equipment belonging to the Fire Department. He or she shall
be responsible for the serviceable condition of all equipment belonging to the
Fire Department, and he or she shall be responsible that every piece of fire
apparatus is equipped at all times with the necessary wrenches and all other
equipment belonging to that piece of apparatus and necessary in the successful
fighting of fire;
      (4)   He or she shall have supervision over all repairs to apparatus and
the charge of all supplies, and shall issue them upon his or her own discretion
or upon the authority of Council to the units of the Fire Department, taking
from them the receipt of the commanding officer of the unit to which the
supplies are issued. He or she shall have sole control, management and command
at fires and alarms of fire over all apparatus and equipment belonging to the
Fire Department. Whenever any purchases are to be made, or the fire apparatus
used by the Department requires attention or repairs, he or she shall make a
report and recommendations to Council unless the repairs needed are of such
character that will require immediate attention;
      (5)   He or she shall have authority to direct the pulling down or
destroying of any fence, house, building or other thing, if deemed necessary to
prevent the spreading of a fire; and
      (6)   He or she shall be responsible for the keeping of necessary records
for the Fire Department, which shall be subject to the inspection of the Mayor
and members of Council at any time. Such record shall list and note, inter
alia, the state of repair of all property belonging to the Fire Department. He
or she shall record and report monthly to Council a statement of all fires
occurring since the previous report, the units and personnel responding to
alarms, the loss and insurance as far as ascertained, the causes of any such
fires, together with such suggestions as he or she may deem advisable to bring
the number of fires to a minimum. He or she shall also keep at his or her
office such books or other records as Council may prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 145.02)
§ 37.03 AUTHORITY TO COMMAND; OBEDIENCE TO ORDERS.
   Authority within the Fire Department shall flow from the Fire Chief through
the Assistant Fire Chief and other officers and firefighters downward in order
of rank and seniority within rank; and subordinates shall have the powers and
perform the duties of their immediate superiors when such superiors are absent
or disabled. Each member of the Fire Department shall obey all lawful orders of
his or her superiors in the chain of command.
(Prior Code, § 145.03)
§ 37.04 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   The firefighters’s Civil Service Commission existing immediately prior to
the effective date of the codified ordinances is hereby continued in full force
and effect; and all of the pertinent provisions of W. Va. Code 8-15-11 through
8-15-27, inclusive, are hereby adopted by Council and made applicable to the
regular members of the Fire Department who are paid on a full-time basis from
city funds, and to applicants for such regular membership.
(Prior Code, § 145.04)
§ 37.05 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor, in consultation with the Fire Chief, shall prepare and may
from time to time amend rules and regulations not inconsistent with state law,
the codified ordinances or other ordinance or resolution of Council, for the
organization and government of the Fire Department and the personnel and
property thereof. When such rules and regulations and any amendments thereof
have been approved by ordinance or by resolution of Council and, having been so
approved, have been placed on file in the office of the City Recorder and a
true copy thereof having been placed on file at Fire Department headquarters
for the information of all members of the Department, no member of the Fire
Department shall violate or fail to comply with any such rule or regulation.
   (B)   Until such time as rules and regulations are promulgated and approved
as provided in division (A) above, the rules and regulations of the Fire
Department adopted by Council on February 6, 1968, which are on file in the
office of the City Recorder, shall continue in full force and effect to the
extent that they are not in conflict or incompatible with any provision of the
codified ordinances; and the senior captain of the Fire Department as of the
effective date of this code shall be ex officio Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 145.05)
§ 37.06 FIREFIGHTERS PROHIBITED FROM WORKING FOR OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   The prohibition against employees of the Fire Department from performing
firefighting or related duties for entities other than the city shall be in
effect from the date of passage of this section.
(Ord. 02-07, passed 9-16-2002)
RESERVE FIRE UNIT
§ 37.20 RESERVE UNIT ESTABLISHED.
   A reserve fire unit is hereby established as an organizational unit of the
city’s Fire Department and shall be headed by a Director who shall be a sworn,
full-time member of the regular Fire Department, designated by the Mayor and
Council.
(Prior Code, § 145.06)
§ 37.21 RESERVE SQUAD ORGANIZATION; APPOINTMENTS.
   The reserve fire unit shall consist of a Reserve Lieutenant and three
squads, each squad consisting of one Reserve Sergeant and six reserve
firefighters; and the Reserve Lieutenant and the three Reserve Sergeants shall
be appointed by the Director and approved by Council.
(Prior Code, § 145.07)
§ 37.22 DUTIES OF RESERVE LIEUTENANT.
   (A)   The Reserve Lieutenant shall be responsible for executing orders
issued by the Director for the efficient operation of his or her unit and
people under his or her supervision. The Lieutenant shall preside, or designate
a Reserve Sergeant to preside, at all meetings of the reserve fire unit. The
Lieutenant shall be responsible for maintaining complete records of the unit
and making frequent reports to the Director or Fire Chief as designated or
requested.
   (B)   The Reserve Lieutenant shall endeavor to fill all requests for
details, special or otherwise. He or she shall keep in close contact with
members under his or her supervision, noting carefully any change in address,
telephone numbers and availability of reserve members during the 24 hours of
each day.
(Prior Code, § 145.08)
§ 37.23 DUTIES OF RESERVE SERGEANTS.
   Each squad of the reserve fire unit shall be under the supervision of a
Reserve Sergeant who shall acquaint himself or herself with all members within
the section and shall maintain a listing of names, telephone numbers, addresses
and availability of section members, for all requests for assistance and
emergencies.
(Prior Code, § 145.09)
§ 37.24 DUTIES OF RESERVE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director shall have control, management and direction over all
members of the reserve fire unit with authority to detail any member of such
service as may be necessary, together with the power to remove, discharge,
suspend or reduce in rank any member for insubordination or dereliction of
duty, but in no event shall the Director take such action until the member has
been furnished with a written statement of the reasons for such action. Members
shall have the right of appeal to the Fire Chief.
   (B)   The Director shall be responsible for the execution of all orders and
rules governing the reserve firefighters, and he or she shall have the power to
enforce all orders, written or verbal, issued by the Fire Chief. In addition,
he or she shall have control of all property of the city that may be assigned
to the reserve fire unit.
(Prior Code, § 145.10)
§ 37.25 RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION PROCESS FOR PROBATIONARY RESERVE MEMBERS.
   The Director and the Fire Chief shall be responsible to the Mayor for the
administration of recruitment and selection process for probationary reserve
members. The rules and regulations and staffing process utilized by the city’s
Fire Department Civil Service Commission shall be used as a guideline, where
applicable or practical. Each member shall serve a probationary period not to
exceed 90 days with final approval by the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 145.11)
§ 37.26 STATUS OF RESERVE UNIT AND MEMBERS.
   (A)   The reserve fire unit shall be maintained for the purpose of assisting
regularly appointed firefighters in fighting fire within the corporate limits
of the city and for such other functions as may come within the scope of such a
reserve unit.
   (B)   The reserve fire unit shall function only upon the request of the Fire
Department and only under the control of the Fire Department. The rank and
authority of individual reserve members pertain only to the reserve. A reserve
member has no jurisdiction over any regular firefighters regardless of rank or
title, and when on duty shall be subordinate to the regular firefighters.
(Prior Code, § 145.12)
§ 37.27 AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY OF RESERVE UNIT AND MEMBERS; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The reserve fire unit, including members of such, shall render
volunteer service upon occasions when, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, such
augmentation of the regular Department is essential to the public welfare and
safety.
   (B)   The purpose of the reserve fire unit shall be to cooperate with and
assist the Fire Department.
   (C)   Any form of compensation paid to the reserve unit shall be established
under order of Council.
   (D)   A reserve firefighter has authority only while on duty. When off duty,
a member reverts to his or her civilian status.
(Prior Code, 145.13)
§ 37.28 UNIFORMS AND BADGES.
   (A)   Bunker suits, boots and helmets will be furnished by the city as
deemed necessary by Council.
   (B)   The regulation reserve firefighter badge shall be worn on the left
breast of the outside garment when on duty.
(Prior Code, § 145.14)
§ 37.29 RULES ALSO APPLICABLE TO RESERVE UNIT.
   (A)   The rules and regulations governing the operation of the regular Fire
Department of the city shall also be applicable to the members of the reserve
fire unit. A reserve firefighter may be suspended or dismissed for violation of
such rules of conduct or regulations.
   (B)   The appointment and continuance on the reserve unit of the various
members of the reserve shall be at the will and pleasure of the Mayor and
Council.
(Prior Code, § 145.15)
FIREFIGHTER’S PENSION AND RELIEF FUND
§ 37.40 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   There is hereby created a Board of Trustees which shall administer and
distribute the Firefighters’s Pension and Relief Fund established and
maintained under the provisions of this chapter, and which shall be a
corporation by the name and style of “The Board of Trustees of the
Firefighters’s Pension and Relief Fund of the City of Nitro, West Virginia”, by
which name it may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, contract and be
contracted with, take and hold real estate and personal estate for the use of
the Firefighters’s Pension and Relief Fund and have and use a common seal; but
in the absence of such seal, the private seal of the President of the
corporation shall be equivalent to such common seal. This Board of Trustees may
also, in its corporate name, do and perform any and all other acts and
businesses pertaining to the trust created hereby or by any conveyance, devise
or dedication made for the uses and purposes of such Board.
(Prior Code, § 145.16)
§ 37.41 COMPOSITION; TERM; VACANCY; RECORDS.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees of the Firefighters’s Pension and Relief Fund
(hereinafter in this chapter referred to as “the Board of Trustees” or “the
Board”), shall consist of the Mayor and four paid members of the Fire
Department, and such paid members shall serve for a term of four years each and
until their successors are duly elected and qualified. One paid member of the
Fire Department shall be elected annually upon the second Monday in March, and
all votes cast at such election shall be counted and canvassed by the then
existing members of such Board, who after such election shall announce the
result, and the paid member of the Fire Department receiving the highest number
of votes shall be declared to have been elected; and in the case of a tie vote
being received by any two paid members for the office of trustee, such tie vote
shall be decided by casting lots, or in any other way which may be agreed upon
by the persons for whom such tie vote was cast. The result of such election
shall be entered in the record of the proceedings of the Board. In case of
vacancy by death, resignation or otherwise among the paid members so elected,
the remaining members shall choose the successor, or successors, until the next
annual election at which latter time all vacancies shall be filled. The Board
shall give due notice of such election to all paid members of the Fire
Department annually during the month of February.
   (B)   The presiding officer of the Board of Trustees shall be the Mayor, and
the Secretary thereof shall be appointed by the Board. It shall be the duty of
such Secretary to keep a full and permanent record of all the proceedings of
the Board, and the trustees may fix his or her compensation for this work which
shall be paid out of the funds of the Firefighters’s Pension and Relief Fund.
(Prior Code, § 145.17)
§ 37.42 MAINTENANCE OF FUND.
   The Firefighters’s Pension and Relief Fund shall be maintained as follows.
   (A)   By an annual levy of $0.01 on each $100 of all real and personal
property as listed for taxation in the city.
   (B)   From each member of the Fire Department there shall be assessed and
collected, each month, the sum of 6% of the actual salary or compensation of
such member, and the amount so collected shall become a regular part of the
Firefighters’s Pension and Relief Fund.
   (C)   The Board of Trustees is authorized to take by gift, grant, devise or
bequest any money, or real or personal property upon such terms as to the
investment and expenditure thereof, as may be fixed by the grantor, or
determined by the trustees.
(Prior Code, § 145.18)
§ 37.43 APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW.
   The provisions of W. Va. Code 8-22-19 and 8-22-21 to 8-22-27 shall be
applicable to the Firefighters’s Pension and Relief Fund established by this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 145.19)
§ 37.44 ADMINISTRATION OF FUND.
   The Board of Trustees of the Firefighters’s Pension and Relief Fund shall
administer such Fund in accordance with the applicable provisions of W. Va.
Code Article 8-22.
(Prior Code, § 145.20)
ALARM SYSTEM REGISTRATION
§ 37.55 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Equipment installed in a structure and designed to signal:
      (1)   An illegal entry or other activity for which the Police Department
is requested to respond; provided, that the alarm system activated may be
either a silent or audible alarm, but does not include an automobile alarm; or
      (2)   The Putnam County 911, the Kanawha County 911 or the city’s Fire
Department and that indicates a fire in the structure to which the city’s Fire
Department is required to respond.
   ALARM USER. Any person, company or other entity whose business premises or
residence within the city is protected by an alarm system within the city.
   FALSE ALARM. An alarm not resulting from an unauthorized entry, robbery or
where no other crime was committed or attempted at the premises and includes a
fire alarm when there is no fire. An alarm caused by power failure shall not be
deemed a FALSE ALARM unless the power outage lasts longer than the alarm
system’s battery backup. A FALSE ALARM does not include an alarm that activates
during violent weather or an alarm the is activated maliciously.
   REPORTING PERIOD. Each 12-month period described in the first sentence of §
37.57.
(Prior Code, § 753.01) (Ord. 12-9, passed 11-8-2012)
§ 37.56 ALARM SYSTEM REGISTRATION.
   (A)   An alarm user shall register its alarm system with the city by
completing and filing a registration form prepared by:
      (1)   The city’s Police Department if the alarm is for the purpose of
signaling illegal activity requiring a law enforcement response; or
      (2)   The city’s Fire Department if the alarm is for the purpose of
signaling a the occurrence of a fire requiring a Fire Department response.
   (B)   The alarm registration form shall be provided to businesses at the
time of the initial registration for a business license and when each business
renews its business license. City residents shall be notified of the
registration requirement by publication of the requirement on the city’s
website.
   (C)   Registration shall be free and must be renewed on or by July 1 of each
year. Notwithstanding general penalties set forth in this subchapter, an alarm
user who fails to register an alarm system or renew a registration after
receipt of one written notices from either the city’s Police Department or the
city’s Fire Department, as appropriate, of the obligation to do so shall
thereafter be subjected to a fine not to exceed state law on each occasion on
which such alarm system records a false alarm and remains unregistered or the
registration has not been renewed.
   (D)   The registration form shall provide a record of the company or firm
that installed the alarm system, the names and telephone numbers of contact
people or key holders to call when an alarm is activated, and information
concerning the maintenance and inspection of the alarm system. The registration
application shall also confirm whether the alarm system includes an audible
alarm or siren, and, if so, whether such alarm system has an automatic 15-
minute shutoff switch. The alarm user shall notify the city’s Police Department
or the city’s Fire Department, as applicable, of any changes in any information
set forth in its application within 30 days of each such change.
Notwithstanding the general penalties set forth in this subchapter, each such
failure to notify the city’s Police Department or the city’s Fire Department,
as applicable, of such changes shall result in a fine of an amount not to
exceed state law.
(Prior Code, § 753.02) (Ord. 12-9, passed 11-8-2012)
§ 37.57 FALSE ALARM.
   The city’s Police Department and the city’s Fire Department shall each
maintain records regarding false alarms for each alarm system for consecutive
12-month periods, initially beginning on the date the alarm system is
registered.
(Prior Code, § 753.99) (Ord. 12-9, passed 11-8-2012) Penalty, see §
37.99
§ 37.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   After an alarm system is registered, the alarm user owning such
alarm shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law upon the occurrence of
the fourth false alarm recorded by such alarm system during any reporting
period. Subsequent reports of false alarms during the reporting period shall
result in a fines not to exceed state law for each occurrence
      (2)   The City Building Inspector shall, within 90 days after an alarm
user is fined for a false alarm, inspect the alarm system to assure that it is
functioning properly.
(Prior Code, § 753.99) (Ord. 12-9, passed 11-8-2012)
CHAPTER 38: TAXATION
Section
Business and Occupation Taxes
   
38.001   Definitions
   
38.002   Interstate and foreign commerce revenue excluded in measuring tax
   
38.003   Administration of subchapter
   
38.004   Imposition of privilege tax
   
38.005   Production of coal and other natural resource products
   
38.006   Manufacturing, compounding or preparing products; processing of food
excepted
   
38.007   Business of selling tangible property; sales exempt
   
38.008   Public service or utility business
   
38.009   Business of contracting
   
38.010   Business of operating amusements
   
38.011   Service business or calling not otherwise specifically taxed
   
38.012   Business of furnishing property for hire
   
38.013   Small loan and industrial loan businesses
   
38.014   Banking and other financial business
   
38.015   Exemptions
   
38.016   [Repealed]
   
38.017   Computation of tax; remittance
   
38.018   Return and remittance by taxpayer
   
38.019   Erroneous computation
   
38.020   Failure to make return; assessment by City Treasurer when return
believed deficient
   
38.021   Jeopardy assessments
   
38.022   Notice of assessment; petition for reassessment; hearing
   
38.023   Appeal; correction of assessment; injunction
   
38.024   Tax year
   
38.025   Tax cumulative
   
38.026   Payment; penalty for nonpayment
   
38.027   Lien of tax due and unpaid
   
38.028   Enforcement of collection
   
38.029   Payment when person sells out or quits business; lien; liability of
successor
   
38.030   Recording of tax liens
   
38.031   Collection by distraint; suit to enforce lien
   
38.032   Authority of Council to revoke city licenses, as additional penalty
   
38.033   Economic development tax credit
Consumer Sales and Service Tax, Use Tax and Streamlined Sales Tax
   
38.045   Council findings
   
38.046   Definitions
   
38.047   Imposition of consumers sales and service tax
   
38.048   Imposition of use tax
   
38.049   Calculation of tax on fractional parts of a dollar
   
38.050   Municipal sales and service and use tax bases
   
38.051   Exceptions
   
38.052   Credit for local taxes lawfully paid to another municipality
   
38.053   Local rate and boundary changes
   
38.054   State level administration
   
38.055   Administrative procedures
   
38.056   Criminal penalties apply
   
38.057   Automatic updating
   
38.058   Deposit of taxes collected in special revenue fund
   
38.059   Taxes imposed in addition to the state consumers sales and service and
use taxes
License Taxes
   
38.070   Conditions precedent to doing business
   
38.071   License application and issuance; payment of tax and fees; records
   
38.072   False statements prohibited; returns confidential
   
38.073   Separate license required for each fixed place and each class of
business
   
38.074   Display of license
   
38.075   Duplicate licenses
   
38.076   License a personal privilege; change of name, location, ownership and
the like
   
38.077   License does not legalize unlawful acts
   
38.078   Zoning ordinance compliance; responsibility of applicants
   
38.079   Collection by proceedings in court
   
38.080   Prosecution for violations; city to seek injunctions
   
38.081   Suspension and revocation of licenses; public hearings upon appeal
   
38.082   Licenses required; license taxes imposed
   
38.083   Imposition of tax
   
38.084   Definitions
   
38.085   Payment
   
38.086   Residential rental license requirements
Hotel/Motel Occupancy Tax
   
38.100   Definitions
   
38.101   Imposition
   
38.102   Rate
   
38.103   Collection when sale on credit
   
38.104   Consumer to pay tax; duties of hotel operator
   
38.105   Exemptions for government agencies or employees
   
38.106   Disposition of proceeds
   
38.107   Annual reports by convention and visitor’s bureaus
   
38.108   Liability of hotel operator for failure to collect or remit
   
38.109   Total amount collected to be remitted
   
38.110   Returns and remittances generally
   
38.111   Administrative procedures generally
   
38.112   Violations
   
38.113   Interest and penalties
   
38.114   Priority of tax in receivership, bankruptcy, and similar proceedings
   
38.115   Liability of officers of associations or corporations
   
38.116   Records
Public Utility Tax
   
38.130   Definitions
   
38.131   Tax imposed upon certain transactions with certain public utilities
   
38.132   Imposition; amount of tax
   
38.133   Collection; payment
   
38.134   Records to be kept by users; inspection thereof
   
38.135   Exempted transactions
   
38.136   Nonliability of utility; refunds; rules and regulations
   
38.137   Enforcement
 
   
38.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Personal Income Tax Refund Offset Program, see §§
35.35 through
35.39
Statutory reference:
   Authority to tax, see W. Va. Code 8-13-4, 8-13-5, 8-13-13, 11-12-4
   Collection of taxes, see W. Va. Code 8-13-15 et seq.
   Public utilities tax, see W. Va. Code 8-13-5a
BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAXES
§ 38.001 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this subchapter, the term PERSON or the term COMPANY, herein
used interchangeably, includes any individual, firm, copartnership, joint
adventure, association, corporation, trust or any other group or combination
acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number, unless the
intention to give a more limited meaning is disclosed by the context; and, for
the purposes of this subchapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   BANKING BUSINESS or FINANCIAL ORGANIZATION. Any bank, banking association,
trust company, industrial loan company, small loan company or licensee,
building and loan association, savings and loan association, credit union,
finance company, investment company, investment broker or dealer and any other
similar business organization at least 90% of the assets of which consists of
intangible personal property and at least 90% of the gross receipts of which
consists of dividends, interest and other charges derived from the use of money
or credit.
   BUSINESS. Includes all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with
the object of gain or economic benefit, either direct or indirect. BUSINESS
shall not include a casual sale by a person who is not engaged in the business
of selling the type of property involved in such casual sale. BUSINESS includes
the production of natural resources or manufactured products which are used or
consumed by the producer or manufacturer and includes the activities of a
banking business or financial organization.
   CONTRACTING. Includes the furnishing of work, or both materials and work, in
the fulfillment of a contract for the construction, alteration, repair,
decoration or improvement of a new or existing building or structure, or any
part thereof, or for the alteration, improvement or development of real
property.
   GROSS INCOME. The gross receipts of the taxpayer, other than a banking or
financial business, received as compensation for personal services and the
gross receipts of the taxpayer derived from trade, business, commerce or sales
and the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of tangible property (real
or personal), or service, or both, and all receipts by reason of the investment
of the capital of the business engaged in, including rentals, royalties, fees,
reimbursed costs or expenses or other emoluments however designated and
including all interest, carrying charges, fees or other like income, however
denominated, derived by the taxpayer from repetitive carrying of accounts, in
the regular course and conduct of his or her business, and extension of credit
in connection with the sale of any tangible personal property or service, and
without any deductions on account of the cost of property sold, the cost of
materials used, labor costs, taxes, royalties paid in cash or in kind or
otherwise, interest or discount paid or any other expense whatsoever. GROSS
INCOME of a banking or financial business is specified in §
38.014.
   GROSS PROCEEDS OF SALES.
      (1)   The value, whether in money or other property, actually proceeding
from the sale of tangible property without any deduction on account of the cost
of property sold or expenses of any kind.
      (2)   The terms GROSS INCOME and GROSS PROCEEDS OF SALES shall not be
construed to include:
         (a)   Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;
         (b)   The proceeds of sale of goods, wares or merchandise returned by
customers when the sale price is refunded either in cash or by credit;
         (c)   The amount allowed as “trade-in value” for any article accepted
as part payment for any article sold;
         (d)   Excise taxes imposed by this state; or
         (e)   Money or other property received or held by a professional
person for the sole use and benefit of a client or another person or money
received by the taxpayer on behalf of a bank or other financial institution for
the repayment of a debt of another.
   SALE, SALES OR SELLING. Includes any transfer of ownership of, or title to,
property, whether for money or in exchange for other property.
   SELLING AT WHOLESALE or WHOLESALE SALES. Includes:
      (1)   Sales of any tangible personal property for the purpose of resale
in the form of tangible personal property;
      (2)   Sales of machinery, supplies or materials which are to be directly
consumed or used by the purchaser in the conduct of any business or activity
which is subject to the tax imposed by this subchapter; and
      (3)   Sales of any tangible personal property to the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities or to the state, its institutions
or political subdivisions.
   SERVICE BUSINESS OR CALLING. Includes all activities engaged in by a person
for other persons for a consideration, which involve the rendering of a service
as distinguished from the sale of tangible property, but shall not include the
service rendered by an employee to his or her employer. This term shall
include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Persons engaged in manufacturing, compounding or preparing for
sale, profit or commercial use, articles, substances or commodities which are
owned by another or others;
      (2)   Persons engaged as independent contractors in producing natural
resource products which are owned by another or others, as personal property,
immediately after the same are severed, extracted, reduced to possession and
produced; and
      (3)   The repetitive carrying of accounts, in the regular course and
conduct of business, and extension of credit in connection with the sale of any
tangible personal property or service, except as to persons taxed pursuant to
the provisions of §
38.014.
   TAX YEAR or TAXABLE YEAR. Either the calendar year, or the taxpayer’s fiscal
year when permission is obtained from the Treasurer to use same as the tax
period in lieu of the calendar year.
   TAXPAYER. Any person liable for any tax hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 711.01)
§ 38.002 INTERSTATE AND FOREIGN COMMERCE REVENUE EXCLUDED IN MEASURING TAX.
   The measure of the tax assessed in this subchapter shall not include gross
income derived from commerce between this state and other states of the United
States or between this state and foreign countries.
(Prior Code, § 711.02)
§ 38.003 ADMINISTRATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   The administration of this subchapter is vested in and shall be exercised by
the City Treasurer, who shall prescribe forms and reasonable rules of procedure
in conformity with this subchapter, subject to the approval of Council, for the
making of returns and for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the
taxes imposed hereunder; and the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
subchapter in any of the courts of the state shall be under the exclusive
jurisdiction of the City Treasurer who shall require the assistance of and act
through the City Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 711.03)
§ 38.004 IMPOSITION OF PRIVILEGE TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby levied and shall be collected annual privilege taxes
against the persons, on account of the business and other activities, and in
the amounts to be determined by the application of rates against values or
gross income as set forth in §§
38.005 to
38.014.
   (B)   If any person liable for any tax under §§
38.005 to
38.014 shall ship or transport his or her products or any part thereof out of
the city without making sale of such products, the value of the products in the
condition or form in which they exist immediately before transportation out of
the city shall be the basis for the assessment of the tax imposed in those
sections. The City Treasurer shall prescribe equitable and uniform rules for
ascertaining such value.
   (C)   In determining value, however, as regards sales from one to another of
affiliated companies or persons, or under other circumstances where the
relation between the buyer and seller is such that the gross proceeds from the
sales are not indicative of the true value of the subject matter of the sale,
the City Treasurer shall prescribe uniform and equitable rules for determining
the values upon which such privilege tax shall be levied, corresponding as
nearly as possible to the gross proceeds from the sale of similar products of
like quality or character where no common interest exists between the buyer and
the seller but the circumstances and conditions are otherwise similar.
   (D)   Gross income included in the measure of the tax under §§
38.005 to
38.014, except in the case of production of natural gas, shall neither be added
nor deducted in computing the tax levied under the other sections of this
subchapter.
   (E)   A person exercising any privilege taxable under §§
38.005 to
38.014 and engaging in the business of selling his or her natural resources or
manufactured products at retail in this city shall be required to make returns
of the gross proceeds of such retail sales and pay the tax imposed in §
38.007 for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling such natural
resources or manufactured products at retail in this city. But any person
exercising any privilege taxable under §§
38.005 to
38.014 and engaging in the business of selling his or her natural resources or
manufactured products to manufacturers, wholesalers or jobbers, and in the case
of limestone, sand, gravel or other mineral products, to commercial consumers,
shall not be required to pay the tax imposed in §
38.007 for the privilege of selling such natural resource products or
manufactured products as wholesale.
   (F)   Manufacturers exercising any privilege taxable under §
38.006 shall not be required to pay the tax imposed in §
38.007 for the privilege of selling their manufactured products for delivery
outside of the city, but the gross income derived from the sale of such
manufactured products outside of the city shall be included in determining the
measure of the tax imposed on such manufacturer in §
38.007.
   (G)   A person exercising privileges taxable under the other sections of
this subchapter, producing coal, oil, natural gas, minerals, timber or other
natural resource products, the production of which is taxable under §
38.005, and using or consuming the same in his or her business, shall be deemed
to be engaged in the business of mining and producing coal, oil, natural gas,
minerals, timber or other natural resource products for sale, profit or
commercial use, and shall be required to make returns on account of the
production of the business showing the gross proceeds or equivalent in
accordance with uniform and equitable rules for determining the value upon
which such privilege tax shall be levied, corresponding as nearly as possible
to the gross proceeds from the sale of similar products of like quality or
character by other taxpayers, which rules the City Treasurer shall prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 711.04)
§ 38.005 PRODUCTION OF COAL AND OTHER NATURAL RESOURCE PRODUCTS.
   (A)   Upon every person engaging or continuing within the city in the
business of producing for sale, profit or commercial use any natural resource
products, the amount of such tax shall be equal to the value of the articles
produced as shown by the gross proceeds derived from the sale thereof by the
producer, except as hereinafter provided, multiplied by the respective rates as
follows: coal, 0.8%; limestone or sandstone, quarried or mined, timber, 1.2%;
oil, sand, gravel or other mineral product not quarried or mined, blast
furnace, 2.4%; other material resource product, 1.6%. The measure of this tax
is the value of the entire production in this city, regardless of the place of
sale or the fact that delivery may be made to points outside of the city;
provided, that for the purposes of the production of oil classification, and
the production of natural gas classification, as set forth in this section,
multiple co- owners of oil or natural gas, in place, lessees thereof, or others
being vested with title and ownership to part or all of the oil and gas, as
personal property, immediately after severance, extraction, reduction to
possession and production, except royalty recipients, in kind, shall be deemed
to be a “group or combination acting as a unit” and one “person”, as defined in
§
38.001, if not otherwise defined therein, whenever engaged in the business of
producing oil or natural gas through common use, by joint or separately
executed contracts, of the same independent contractor, driller or operator’s
services; and notwithstanding provisions of private contracts for separate
deposit of gross receipts in separate members’ accounts or for members of such
group or combination to take in kind any proportionate part of such natural
resources.
   (B)   Lessees, sublessees or other denominated lessees are considered to be
producers of all of the oil or natural gas produced, regardless of any payment,
in kind, to lessors, sublessors or other denominated lessors of a part of such
natural resources as rents or royalties. Recipients of royalties or rents, in
kind, in cash or otherwise are taxable on their gross income pursuant to the
provisions of §
38.007.
(Prior Code, § 711.05) (Ord. 85-3, passed 4-16-1985)
§ 38.006 MANUFACTURING, COMPOUNDING OR PREPARING PRODUCTS; PROCESSING OF FOOD
EXCEPTED.
   Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of
manufacturing, compounding or preparing for sale, profit or commercial use,
either directly or through the activity of others in whole or part, any article
or articles, substance or substances, commodity or commodities, or electric
power produced by public utilities or others and not taxed under other
provisions of this subchapter, substance, commodities or electric power
manufactured, compounded or prepared for sale, as shown by the gross proceeds
derived from the sale thereof by the manufacturer or person compounding or
preparing the same except as hereinafter provided, multiplied by a rate of
0.3%; provided, that on and after July 1, 2015, the tax imposed by this section
shall be 0.12%. The measure of this tax is the value of the entire product
manufactured, compounded, or prepared in this city for sale, profit or
commercial use, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that deliveries may
be made to points outside the city. However, the dressing and processing of
food by a person, firm or corporation, which food is to be sold on a wholesale
basis by such person, firm or corporation shall not be considered as
manufacturing or compounding, but the sale of these products on a wholesale
basis shall be subject to the same tax as is imposed on the business of selling
at wholesale as provided in §
38.007.
(Prior Code, § 711.06) (Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.007 BUSINESS OF SELLING TANGIBLE PROPERTY; SALES EXEMPT.
   Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of
selling any tangible property whatsoever, real or personal, including the sale
of food, and the services incident to the sale of food in hotels, restaurants,
cafeterias, confectionaries and other public eating houses, except sales by any
person engaging or continuing in the business of horticulture, agriculture or
grazing, of selling stocks, bonds or other evidence of indebtedness, there is
hereby levied, and shall be collected a tax equivalent to 0.4% of the gross
income of the business, except that in the case of selling at wholesale (or
jobber) the tax shall be equal to 0.12%, of the gross income of the business;
provided, that on and after July 1, 2015, the tax imposed by this section shall
be equal to 0.06% of gross proceeds derived from engaging in this city in the
business of selling tangible personal property at wholesale on and after said
date.
(Prior Code, § 711.07) (Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.008 PUBLIC SERVICE OR UTILITY BUSINESS.
   Upon any person engaging or continuing within this city in any public
service or utility business, except railroad, railroad car, express, pipe line,
telephone and telegraph companies, water carriers by steamboat or steamship and
motor vehicle carriers, there is likewise hereby levied and shall be collected
taxes on account of the business engaged in equal to the gross income of the
business multiplied by the respective rates as follows: street and inter-urban
and electric railways, 1%; water companies, 4%, except as to income from
municipally owned water plants; electric light and power companies, 4% on sales
and demand charges for domestic purposes and commercial lighting and 3% on
sales and demand charges for all other purposes, except as to income from
municipally owned plants producing or purchasing electricity and distributing
the same; natural gas companies, 3% on the gross income, such gross income for
this purpose to be determined by deducting from gross income from all sales to
consumers the amount of the tax paid by the taxpayers under §
38.005; toll bridge companies, 3%; and upon all other public service or utility
business, 2%. The measure of this tax shall not include gross income derived
from commerce between this state and other states of the United States or
between this city and other localities. The measure of the tax under this
section shall include only gross income received from the supplying of public
services. The gross income of the taxpayer from any other activity shall be
included in the measure of the tax imposed upon the appropriate section or
sections of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 711.08)
§ 38.009 BUSINESS OF CONTRACTING.
   Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of
contracting, the tax shall be $2 on each $100 of the gross income of the
business.
(Prior Code, § 711.09)
§ 38.010 BUSINESS OF OPERATING AMUSEMENTS.
   Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of
operating a theater, opera house, moving picture show, vaudeville, amusement
park, dance hall, skating rink, race track, radio broadcasting station or any
other place at which amusements are offered to the public, the tax shall be
equal to 0.4% of the gross income of the business; provided, that on and after
July 1, 2015, the tax imposed by this section shall be 0.2% of the gross income
of the business derived from engaging in this city in the business of operating
any amusements offered to the public on and after said date.
(Prior Code, § 711.10) (Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.011 SERVICE BUSINESS OR CALLING NOT OTHERWISE SPECIFICALLY TAXED.
   Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in any service
business or calling not otherwise specifically taxed under this subchapter,
there is likewise hereby levied and shall be collected a tax equal to 0.8% of
the gross income of any such business.
(Prior Code, § 711.11) (Ord. 85-3, passed 4-16-1985)
§ 38.012 BUSINESS OF FURNISHING PROPERTY FOR HIRE.
   Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of
furnishing any real or tangible personal property which has a tax situs in this
city, or any interest therein, for hire, loan, lease or otherwise, whether the
return be in the form of rentals, royalties, fees or otherwise, the tax shall
be 0.8% of the gross income of any such activity. The term TANGIBLE PERSONAL
PROPERTY as used herein, shall not include money or public securities.
(Prior Code, § 711.12) (Ord. 85-3, passed 4-16-1985)
§ 38.013 SMALL LOAN AND INDUSTRIAL LOAN BUSINESSES.
   Every person engaging or continuing within this city in the business of
making loans of money, credit goods, or things in action, who because of such
activity is required to obtain a license from the state’s Commissioner of
Banking, and each and every industrial loan company shall be subject to the
provisions of, and shall pay the taxes specified in §
38.014.
(Prior Code, § 711.13)
§ 38.014 BANKING AND OTHER FINANCIAL BUSINESS.
   (A)   Upon every person engaging or continuing within this city in the
business of banking or financial business, the tax shall be equal to 1% of the
gross income received from interest, premiums, discounts, dividends, service
fees or charges, commissions, fines, rents from real or tangible personal
property, however denominated, royalties, charges for bookkeeping or data
processing, receipts from check sales, charges or fees and receipts from the
sale of tangible personal property; provided, that on and after July 1, 2015,
the tax imposed by this section shall be 0.5% of the gross income derived from
engaging or continuing in this city in the business of banking or other
financial business on and after said date; provided however, that gross income
shall not include:
      (1)   Interest received on the obligations of the United States, its
agencies and instrumentalities;
      (2)   Interest received on the obligations of this or any other state,
territory or possession of the United States or any political subdivision of
any of the foregoing or of the District of Columbia; or
      (3)   Interest received on investments or loans primarily secured by
first mortgages or deeds of trust on residential property occupied by non
transients; provided further, that all interest derived on activities exempt
under this division (A)(3), shall be reported, as to amounts, on the return of
a person taxable under the provisions of this section. Persons taxed pursuant
to the provisions of this section shall not be taxed under §§
38.005 to
38.013 inclusive.
   (B)   Council hereby finds and declares that it is the intent of Council to
subject national banking associations and other financial organizations to the
tax imposed by this subchapter, in accordance with the authorization contained
in § 5219 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, being 12 U.S. C. § 548,
as amended by Pub. Law No. 91-156 enacted by the Congress of the United States
on December 24, 1969.
(Prior Code, § 711.14) (Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.015 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   There shall be an exemption in every case of $25 in amount of tax
computed under the provisions of this subchapter. A person exercising a
privilege taxable hereunder for a fractional part of a tax year shall be
entitled to an exemption of the sum bearing the proportion of $25 that the
period of time the privilege is exercised bears to a whole year. Only one
exemption shall be allowed to any one person, whether he or she exercises one
or more privileges taxable hereunder.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Insurance companies which pay to the state a tax upon premiums;
provided, that such exemption shall not extend to that part of a gross income
of insurance companies which is received for the use of real property, other
than property in which any such company maintains its office or offices in this
city, whether such income be in the form of rentals or royalties;
      (2)   Nonprofit cemetery companies organized and operated for the
exclusive benefit of their members;
      (3)   Fraternal societies, organizations and associations organized and
operated for the exclusive benefit of their members and not for profit;
provided, that this exemption shall not extend to that part of the gross income
arising from the sale of alcoholic liquor, food and related services, of such
fraternal societies, organizations and associations which are licensed as
private clubs under the provisions of W. Va. Code Article 60-7;
      (4)   Corporations, associations and societies organized and operated
exclusively for religious or charitable purposes;
      (5)   Production credit association, organized under the provisions of
the Federal Farm Credit Act of 1933, being Pub. Law No. 73- 75; and
      (6)   Any credit union organized under the provisions of W. Va. Code
Chapter 31 or any other chapter; provided, that the exemptions of this section
shall not apply to corporations or cooperative associations organized under the
provisions of W. Va. Code Article 19-4.
(Prior Code, § 711.15) (Ord. 85-3, passed 4-16-1985)
§ 38.016 [REPEALED].
§ 38.017 COMPUTATION OF TAX; REMITTANCE.
   (A)   The taxes levied hereunder shall be due and payable in quarterly
installments on or before the expiration of one month from the end of the
quarter in which they accrue. The taxpayer shall, within one month from the
expiration of each quarter, make out an estimate of the tax for which he or she
is liable for such quarter, sign it and mail it, together with a remittance, in
the form required by §
38.026, of the amount of tax to the office of the City Treasurer. In estimating
the amount of tax due for each quarter, the taxpayer may deduct one-fourth of
the tax credit for industrial expansion allowable for the taxable year and one-
fourth of the total exemption allowed for the year. When the total tax for
which any person is liable under this subchapter does not exceed the sum of
$100 in any year, the taxpayer may pay the same quarterly as aforesaid or, with
the consent in writing of the City Treasurer, at the end of the month next
following the close of the tax year.
   (B)   Any other provision of this section notwithstanding, the City
Treasurer, if he or she deems it necessary to insure payment of the tax, may
require the return and payment under this section for periods of shorter
duration than quarter-year periods.
(Prior Code, § 711.17)
§ 38.018 RETURN AND REMITTANCE BY TAXPAYER.
   On or before the expiration of one month after the end of the tax year, each
taxpayer shall make a return for the entire tax year showing the gross proceeds
of sales or gross income of business, trade or calling, and compute the amount
of tax chargeable against him or her in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter and deduct the amount of quarterly payments (as hereinbefore
provided), if any, and transmit with his or her report a remittance in the form
required by §
38.026 covering the residue of the tax chargeable against him or her to the
office of the City Treasurer; such return shall be signed by the taxpayer, if
made by an individual, or by the president, vice president, secretary or
treasurer of a corporation, if made on behalf of a corporation. If made on
behalf of a partnership, joint adventure, association, trust or any other group
or combination acting as a unit, any individual delegated by such firm,
copartnership, joint adventure, association, trust or any other group or
combination acting as a unit shall sign the return on behalf of the taxpayer.
The City Treasurer, for good cause shown, may extend the time for making the
annual return on the application of any taxpayer and grant such reasonable
additional time within which to make the same as may, by him or her, be deemed
advisable.
(Prior Code, § 711.18)
§ 38.019 ERRONEOUS COMPUTATION.
   (A)   If the taxpayer shall make any error in computing the tax assessable
against him or her, the City Treasurer shall correct such error or reassess the
proper amount of taxes, and notify the taxpayer of his or her action by mailing
to him or her promptly a copy of the corrected assessment, and any additional
tax for which such taxpayer may be liable shall be paid within ten days after
the receipt of such statement.
   (B)   If the amount already paid exceeds that which should have been paid on
the basis of the tax so recomputed, the excess so paid shall be immediately
refunded to the taxpayer upon the requisition of the City Treasurer and shall
be payable out of any funds available for the purpose. The taxpayer may, at his
or her election, apply an overpayment credit to taxes subsequently accruing
hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 711.19)
§ 38.020 FAILURE TO MAKE RETURN; ASSESSMENT BY CITY TREASURER WHEN RETURN
BELIEVED DEFICIENT.
   If any person shall fail or refuse to make a return, either in whole or in
part, or if the City Treasurer has reasonable ground to believe that any return
made is so deficient as not to form the basis of a satisfactory assessment of
the tax, he or she may proceed as he or she deems best to obtain information on
which to base the assessment of the tax. The City Treasurer may, in person or
by duly appointed agent, make examination of the books, records and papers, and
audit the accounts of any such person, and may take the evidence, on oath, of
any person whom he or she may believe shall be in possession of any relevant
information. As soon as possible after procuring such information as the City
Treasurer may be able to obtain as to any person failing or refusing to make a
return, he or she shall proceed to assess the tax and shall notify the person
assessed of the amount of the tax. The assessment of the tax by the City
Treasurer shall be final as to any person who refused to make a return.
(Prior Code, § 711.20)
§ 38.021 JEOPARDY ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   If the City Treasurer believes that the collection of any tax which he
or she is required to administer will be jeopardized by delay, he or she shall
thereupon make an assessment of the tax, noting that fact upon the assessment.
The amount assessed shall be immediately due and payable. Unless the taxpayer
against whom a jeopardy assessment is made petitions for reassessment within 20
days after service of notice of the jeopardy assessment, such an assessment
becomes final.
   (B)   A petition for reassessment by a person against whom a jeopardy
assessment has been made must be accompanied by such security as the City
Treasurer may deem necessary to insure compliance with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 711.21)
§ 38.022 NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT; PETITION FOR REASSESSMENT; HEARING.
   The City Treasurer shall give to the taxpayer written notice of any
assessment made pursuant to this subchapter. Unless the taxpayer to whom a
notice of assessment is directed shall, within 30 days after service thereof
(except in the case of jeopardy assessments), either personally or by certified
mail, file with the City Treasurer such a petition in writing, verified under
oath by such taxpayer or his or her duly authorized agent, having knowledge of
the facts, setting forth with definiteness and particularity the items of the
assessment objected to, together with the reason for such objections, such
assessment shall become and be deemed conclusive and the amount thereof shall
be payable at the end of the 30-day period. In every case where a petition for
reassessment as above described is filed, the City Treasurer shall assign a
time and place for the hearing thereof and shall notify the petitioner of such
hearing by written notice at least 20 days in advance thereof and such hearing
shall be held within 60 days from the filing of the petition for reassessment
unless continued by agreement or by the City Treasurer for good cause. The
hearing shall be informal and may be conducted by an examiner designated by the
City Treasurer. At such hearing, evidence may be offered to support the
assessment or to prove that it is incorrect. After such hearing, the City
Treasurer shall, within a reasonable time, give notice in writing of the
decision. Unless an appeal is taken within 30 days from service of this notice,
the City Treasurer’s decision shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 711.22)
§ 38.023 APPEAL; CORRECTION OF ASSESSMENT; INJUNCTION.
   If any person, having made the return and paid the tax as provided by this
subchapter, feels aggrieved by the assessment so made upon him or her for any
year by the City Treasurer, he or she may apply to Council by petition, in
writing, within 30 days after notice is mailed to him or her by the City
Treasurer, for a hearing and correction of the amount of the tax so assessed
upon him or her by the City Treasurer, in which petition shall be set forth the
reasons why such hearings should be granted and the amount of such tax should
be reduced. Council shall promptly consider such petition, and may grant such
hearing or deny it. If denied, the petitioner shall be forthwith notified
thereof; if granted, Council shall notify the petitioner of the time and place
fixed for such hearing. After such hearing, Council may make such order in the
matter as may appear to it just and lawful, and shall furnish a copy of such
order to the petitioner. Any person improperly charged with any tax required to
be paid by him or her may recover the amount so paid, together with interest,
in any proper action or suit against the city as may be authorized by law.
(Prior Code, § 711.23)
§ 38.024 TAX YEAR.
   The assessment of taxes herein made and the returns required therefor shall
be for the year ending on December 31. If the taxpayer, in exercising a
privilege taxable under this subchapter, keeps the books reflecting the same on
a basis other than such year, he or she may, with the assent of the City
Treasurer, make his or her annual returns and pay taxes for the year covering
his or her accounting period, as shown by the method of keeping his or her
books.
(Prior Code, § 711.24)
§ 38.025 TAX CUMULATIVE.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be in addition to all other
licenses and taxes levied by this code and other city ordinances as a condition
precedent to engaging in any business, trade and calling. A person exercising a
privilege taxable under this subchapter, subject to the payment of all licenses
and charges which are a condition precedent to exercising the privilege taxed,
may exercise the privilege for the current tax year upon the condition that he
or she shall pay the tax accruing under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 711.25)
§ 38.026 PAYMENT; PENALTY FOR NONPAYMENT.
   (A)   Every remittance of taxes imposed by this subchapter shall be made by
bank draft, certified check, money order or certificate of deposit to the City
Treasurer, who shall issue his or her receipt therefor to the taxpayer and pay
the money into the City Treasury to be kept and accounted for as provided by
law.
   (B)   If any taxpayer fails to make the return required by this subchapter,
or makes his or her return but fails to remit in whole or in part the proper
amount of tax, there shall be added to the amount of the tax unpaid, from the
date such tax should have been paid, a penalty in the amount of 5% of the tax
for the first month, or fraction thereof, of delinquency and 1% of the tax for
each succeeding month, or fraction thereof, of delinquency; provided, that if
such failure is due to reasonable cause, the City Treasurer may waive or remit
in whole or in part these penalties.
   (C)   If the failure to pay is due to fraud or intent to evade this
subchapter and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, there shall be
added an additional penalty of 25% of the amount of the tax exclusive of
penalties.
   (D)   The penalties so added shall be collected at the same time and in the
same manner and as a part of the tax.
(Prior Code, § 711.26)
§ 38.027 LIEN OF TAX DUE AND UNPAID.
   A tax due and unpaid under this subchapter shall be a debt due the city. It
shall be a personal obligation of the taxpayer and shall be a lien upon the
property of the taxpayer; provided, that no such tax lien shall be enforceable
against a purchaser (including lien creditor) for valuable consideration
without notice, unless docketed in the office of the county court in the county
wherein such property is located before a deed therefor to such purchaser is
delivered for record to the Clerk of the county court of such county.
(Prior Code, § 711.27)
§ 38.028 ENFORCEMENT OF COLLECTION.
   The city may use any means for the collection of the taxes imposed by this
subchapter as are provided by law for the enforcement and collection of similar
taxes of the state.
(Prior Code, § 711.28)
§ 38.029 PAYMENT WHEN PERSON SELLS OUT OR QUITS BUSINESS; LIEN; LIABILITY OF
SUCCESSOR.
   (A)   Any person exercising any privilege taxable under this subchapter who
shall sell out his or her business or stock of goods, or shall cease doing such
business, shall file the return prescribed by §
38.018 and remit the entire tax that may be chargeable against him or her
because of all business done, within 30 days after selling out his or her
business or stock of goods, or ceasing to do such business.
   (B)   The successor in business of any such person shall withhold so much of
the purchase money as will satisfy the taxes and penalty which may be due until
the former owner shall produce a receipt from the City Treasurer evidencing the
payment of such taxes and penalty. If the purchaser of a business or stock of
goods shall fail to withhold purchase money as above provided, and the taxes
and penalty shall remain unpaid after expiration of the 30-day period allowed
for payment thereof, he or she shall be personally liable for the payment of
all such taxes and penalty, and the same shall be recoverable by the City
Treasurer as provided by §
38.028.
(Prior Code, § 711.29)
§ 38.030 RECORDING OF TAX LIENS.
   The City Treasurer, for the more effective collection of the tax, may file
with the Clerk of the appropriate county court a certified copy of an
assessment of taxes under this subchapter for recordation. Upon payment of the
taxes delinquent under this subchapter, the lien of which shall have been
recorded, the City Treasurer shall certify in duplicate the fact and amount of
payment and the balance due, if any, and shall forward the certificates, one to
the taxpayer and one to the Clerk of the county court of the county in which
such lien has been recorded. From the date that such certificate is admitted to
record the land of the taxpayer in the city shall be free from any lien for
taxes under this subchapter accrued to the date that the certificate was
issued.
(Prior Code, § 711.30)
§ 38.031 COLLECTION BY DISTRAINT; SUIT TO ENFORCE LIEN.
   The City Treasurer may distrain upon any goods, chattels or intangibles
represented by negotiable evidences of indebtedness of any taxpayer delinquent
under this subchapter for the amount of all taxes and penalties accrued and
unpaid hereunder. The lien created by this subchapter on real estate may be
enforced by suit in equity and any other means provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 711.31)
§ 38.032 AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL TO REVOKE CITY LICENSES, AS ADDITIONAL PENALTY.
   In addition to the penalties provided in §
38.026, the failure of any taxpayer to make any required return or to pay the
tax imposed upon him or her by this subchapter, either or both, within five
days following the prescribed date for the filing of such return or the payment
of such tax, shall constitute good cause for Council to revoke or to refuse to
renew, either or both, the city license of such taxpayer to engage in the
business taxed under this subchapter, as well as any other city business
license held by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 711.32)
§ 38.033 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   Generally. On and after January 1, 2009, only the following tax
credits may be used as incentives for the development and/or expansion of
business properties in the city; provided, that for purposes of this section,
in addition to the terms defined in §
38.001, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed herein.
      AFFILIATE.
         (a)   Includes all persons, as defined in this section, which are
affiliates of each other, when either directly or indirectly:
            1.   One person controls or has the power to control the other; or
            2.   A third party or third parties control or have the power to
control two persons, the two thus being affiliates. In determining whether
concerns are independently owned and operated and whether or not an affiliation
exists, consideration shall be given to all appropriate factors, including
common ownership, common management and contractual relationships.
         (b)   The term AFFILIATE includes a member of an affiliated group.
      ANNEXED BUSINESS FACILITY. A business facility that is annexed into the
city subsequent to January 1, 2009.
      BASE YEAR EMPLOYMENT. The average employment within the city, which the
qualified business utilized to conduct business taxable under this subchapter
during the 12-month period immediately preceding first application for this
credit.
      BUSINESS FACILITY. A building, or several buildings in a given area that
are constructed in accordance with a development plan approved by the City
Treasurer, such building or buildings to be primarily used for the buying and
selling of goods and services including management information services.
BUSINESS FACILITY shall also include a factory, mill, plant, refinery,
warehouse or building or complex of buildings, including the land upon which it
is located, and all machinery, equipment and other real and tangible personal
property located at or within such facility that is used in connection with the
operation of such facility in the manufacturing, compounding or preparing of
tangible personal property for sale, profit or commercial use, and in the
business of providing a manufacturing service. BUSINESS FACILITY shall not
include residential buildings used by transient individuals for temporary
residential purposes or facilities used for gambling purposes.
      CITY. The City of Nitro, West Virginia.
      CORPORATION.
         (a)   Includes any corporation, a joint-stock company and any
association or other organization that is classified as a corporation under
federal income tax law.
         (b)   The term CORPORATION includes a limited liability company if it
is taxable as a corporation under federal income tax law.
      EXPANDED BUSINESS FACILITY. Any business facility situated in the city,
other than a new business facility or annexed business facility, resulting from
the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, installation or erection of
improvements or additions to that existing business facility if such
improvements or additions are purchased or constructed on or after January 1,
2009.
      FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE.
         (a)   A permanent hourly employee of an eligible taxpayer, who is a
West Virginia domiciled resident, and works in a qualified business more than
1,800 hours during the entire 12-month period ending on the last day of the
taxable year of the qualified business, such hours to include any combination
of hours worked at the qualified business, hours of employer paid vacation
leave and other employer paid leave, but shall not include unemployment
compensation.
         (b)   FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE does not include an employee who is a part-
time, seasonal or temporary employee.
            1.   No combination of part-time, seasonal or temporary employees
may be considered equivalent to a FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE.
            2.   No person who is not an employee (such as an independent
contractor) may be considered a FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE.
            3.   An employee who moves to West Virginia in order to become a
West Virginia domiciled resident in order to fill a new job may be counted as a
full-time employee if he or she otherwise qualifies as a FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE.
      MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SERVICES. Means, and is limited to, data
processing, data storage, data recovery and backup, programming recovery and
backup, telecommunications, computation and computer processing, computer
programming, electronic information, and data management activities, or any
combination of such activities, when not subject to regulation by the state’s
Public Service Commission, when such activity or activities are carried on for
the purpose of managing, planning for, organizing or operating any industrial
or commercial business, or any enterprise, facility or facilities of an
industrial or commercial business regardless of whether such industrial or
commercial business or enterprise facility is located in this city.
      MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Nitro, West Virginia.      
      NEW BUSINESS FACILITY. A business facility, other than an expanded
business facility or an annexed business facility, that on or after January 1,
2009, is newly constructed, purchased or leased by the taxpayer and located
within the boundaries of the city, and is employed by the taxpayer in the
conduct of a business the gross income of which is taxable pursuant to this
subchapter. The facility shall not be considered a new business facility in the
hands of the taxpayer if the taxpayer’s only activity with respect to the
business facility is to lease it to another person or persons. The facility may
not have been purchased or leased by the taxpayer from a related or affiliated
person.
      NEW EMPLOYEE. A person residing and domiciled in this state, who was
hired by the taxpayer to fill a new position or a new job in this city which
previously did not exist in the taxpayer’s existing business facility in this
city prior to the date on which the taxpayer’s qualified investment is placed
in service or use in this city, or which came into existence when the
taxpayer’s qualified investment was placed in service or use in this city. In
no case shall the number of new employees directly attributable to such
investment for purposes of this credit exceed the total net increase in the
taxpayer’s employment in this city; provided, that persons filling jobs saved
as a direct result of taxpayer’s qualified investment in property purchased or
leased for business expansion on or after January 1, 2009, may be treated as
new employees filling new jobs if the taxpayer certifies the material facts to
the City Treasurer and the City Treasurer expressly finds that:
         (a)   But for the new employer purchasing the assets of a business in
bankruptcy under chapter seven or eleven of the United States Bankruptcy Code
and such new employer making qualified investment in property purchased or
leased for business expansion, the assets would have been sold by the United
States bankruptcy court in a liquidation sale and the jobs so saved would have
been lost; or
         (b)   But for taxpayer’s qualified investment in property purchased or
leased for business expansion in this City, taxpayer would have closed its
business facility in this City and the employees of the taxpayer located at
such facility would have lost their jobs; provided, however, that this
certification may not be made unless the City Treasurer finds that the taxpayer
is insolvent as defined in 11 U.S.C. § 101(31) or that the taxpayer’s business
facility was destroyed in whole or in significant part by fire, flood or other
act of God.
      NEW JOB. A job at a qualified business located in this city, which did
not exist in this city with the employer as of the first day of the second
calendar month preceding the calendar month in which the qualified investment
in the qualified business came into service or use.
      ORDINANCES. The Codified Ordinances of the City of Nitro, West Virginia
and those ordinances enacted by the city but which have not been incorporated
into said codified ordinances of the City of Nitro, West Virginia.
      PARTNERSHIP.
         (a)   Includes a syndicate, group, pool, joint venture or other
unincorporated organization through or by means of which any business,
financial operation, or venture is carried on, which is classified as a
partnership for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year.
         (b)   The term PARTNERSHIP may include a limited liability company if
it is not taxable as a corporation under federal income tax law.
      PERSON. Includes any natural person, corporation, partnership or limited
liability company.
      PROPERTY.
         (a)   Real property, and improvements thereto, and new, tangible
personal property, but only if such property was constructed, or purchased, on
or after the passage of this section for use as a component part of an ongoing
business operation located within the city. This term includes only tangible
personal property with respect to which depreciation is allowable in
determining the personal income tax or corporate net income tax liability of
the business taxpayer, and has a useful life at the time the property is placed
in service or use in this city of four years or more. Property acquired by
written lease for a primary term of five years or longer, if used as a
component part of an expanded business facility, shall be included within this
definition.
         (b)   PROPERTY, within the meaning of this definition, shall not
include:
            1.   Repair costs, including materials used in the repair, unless
for federal income tax purposes the cost of the repair shall be capitalized and
not expended;
            2.   Motor vehicles licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles;
            3.   Airplanes;
            4.   Off premise transportation equipment; or
            5.   Property which is acquired incident to the purchase of the
stock or assets of a taxpayer, or which is property was or had been used by the
seller in the seller’s business in the city; provided, that, the City Treasurer
may waive this disqualification.
      QUALIFIED BUSINESS. Any business subject to the business and occupation
taxes imposed by this subchapter that, after the passage of this section, and
in the first 12 months of the business’ existence in the city makes qualified
investment in a new business facility that results in the next succeeding 24
months in a full-time average work force of at least five persons or a yearly
gross income as defined in §
38.001 of at least $500,000; provided, that if the qualified investment is in
an expanded business facility, the qualified investment shall occur in the
first 12 months after approval is granted under division (K) below, and during
the next succeeding 24 months the qualified business’ full-time average yearly
work force shall increase by at least five persons over base year employment or
the qualified business’ yearly gross income as defined in §
38.001 shall increase by at least $500,000. QUALIFIED BUSINESS shall also
include an affiliated group of taxpayers if such group elects to file a West
Virginia consolidated corporation net income tax return under W. Va. Code 11-
24-1 et seq.
      QUALIFIED INVESTMENT. A monetary investment, other than investment for
regular or normal maintenance purposes, in either a new or expanded business
facility located within the municipal boundaries of the city.
   (B)   Manufacturing business.
      (1)   Any qualified business taxable under §
38.006 shall be eligible for a decreasing tax credit to be taken over a period
of four years, and applied against the taxpayer’s business and occupation tax
liability arising under said §
38.006. The first taxable year, for purposes of this tax credit, shall commence
on the first day of the taxpayer’s fiscal year immediately succeeding the month
in which the qualified investment is first placed in service or use; provided,
that for purposes of this tax credit, each subsequent tax year shall commence
on the anniversary date of the first taxable year. The total amount of the tax
credit taken may not exceed the total amount of the qualified investment.
      (2)   The tax credit herein authorized shall be calculated as follows.
         (a)   New manufacturing business facility.
 
Calculation of Tax Credit
Year     Percent of B&O Tax Liability Used as a Tax Credit
1st year 100%
2nd year 75%
3rd year 50%
4th year 25%
5th year 0%
 
         (B)   Expanded manufacturing business facility. The tax credit
treatment accorded to the qualified investment in a qualified expanded
manufacturing business facility shall be the same as that accorded to a
qualified new manufacturing business facility; provided, that the tax credit
shall only apply to that incremental portion of the gross income directly
attributable to the qualified investment in the expanded business facility.
Upon determining the portion upon which the tax credit shall be applied, the
tax credit shall be calculated as follows.
 
Calculation of Tax Credit
Year     Percent of B&O Tax Liability Used as a Tax Credit
1st year 100%
2nd year 75%
3rd year 50%
4th year 25%
5th year 0%
 
   (C)   Retail or wholesale business.
      (1)   Any qualified business that commences retail or wholesale sales
activities within the corporate limits of the city that are taxable under §
38.007 shall be eligible for a decreasing tax credit to be taken over a period
of four years, and applied against the taxpayer’s business and occupation tax
liability arising under said §
38.007. The first taxable year, for purposes of this tax credit, shall commence
on the first day of the taxpayer’s fiscal year immediately succeeding the month
in which the qualified investment is first placed in service or use; provided,
that for purposes of this tax credit, each subsequent tax year shall commence
on the anniversary date of the first taxable year. The total amount of the tax
credit taken may not exceed the total amount of the qualified investment.
      (2)   The tax credit herein authorized shall be calculated as follows.
         (A)   New retail or wholesale business facility.
 
Calculation of Tax Credit
Year     Percent of B&O Tax Liability Used as a Tax Credit
1st year 100%
2nd year 75%
3rd year 50%
4th year 25%
5th year 0%
 
         (b)   Expanded retail or wholesale business facility. The tax credit
treatment accorded to the qualified investment in a qualified expanded retail
or wholesale business facility shall be the same as that accorded to a
qualified new retail or wholesale business facility; provided, that the tax
credit shall only apply to that incremental portion of the gross income
directly attributable to the qualified investment in the expanded retail or
wholesale business facility. Upon determining the portion upon which the tax
credit shall be applied, the tax credit shall be calculated as follows.
 
Calculation of Tax Credit
Year     Percent of B&O Tax Liability Used as a Tax Credit
1st year 100%
2nd year 75%
3rd year 50%
4th year 25%
5th year 0%
 
   (D)   Service business.
      (1)   Any qualified business taxable under §
38.011 shall be eligible for a decreasing tax credit to be taken over a period
of four years, and applied against the taxpayer’s business and occupation tax
liability arising under said §
38.011; provided, that a service business that, at the time of the passage of
this section, is paying taxes to the city under the service classification for
work performed within the city, although its principal place of business is
without the city, shall be eligible for a credit upon location of its principal
place of business within the city. The first taxable year, for purposes of this
tax credit, shall commence on the first day of the taxpayer’s fiscal year
immediately succeeding the month in which the qualified investment is first
placed in service or use; provided, that for purposes of this tax credit, each
subsequent tax year shall commence on the anniversary date of the first taxable
year. The total amount of the tax credit taken may not exceed the total amount
of the qualified investment.
      (2)   The tax credit herein authorized shall be calculated as follows.
         (a)   New service business facility.
 
Calculation of Tax Credit
Year     Percent of B&O Tax Liability Used as a Tax Credit
1st year 100%
2nd year 75%
3rd year 50%
4th year 25%
5th year 0%
 
         (b)   Expanded service business facility. The tax credit treatment
accorded to the qualified investment in a qualified expanded service business
facility shall be the same as that accorded to a qualified new service business
facility; provided, that the tax credit shall only apply to that incremental
portion of the gross income directly attributable to the qualified investment
in the expanded business facility. Upon determining the portion upon which the
tax credit shall be applied, the tax credit shall be calculated as follows.
 
Calculation of Tax Credit
Year     Percent of B&O Tax Liability Used as a Tax Credit
1st year 100%
2nd year 75%
3rd year 50%
4th year 25%
5th year 0%
 
   (E)   Rental income credit.
      (1)   Any qualified business taxable under §
38.012 that is a multi-unit commercial building facility constructed and placed
in service or use on or after January 1, 2009 shall be eligible for a
decreasing tax credit to be taken over a period of four years, and applied
against the taxpayer’s business and occupation tax liability arising under said
§
38.012. The first taxable year, for purposes of this tax credit, shall commence
on the first day of the taxpayer’s fiscal year immediately succeeding the month
in which the qualified investment is first placed in service or use: Provided,
That for purposes of this tax credit, each subsequent tax year shall commence
on the anniversary date of the first taxable year. The total amount of the tax
credit taken may not exceed the total amount of the qualified investment.
      (2)   The tax credit herein authorized shall be calculated as follows.
         (a)   New multi-unit commercial business facility.
 
Calculation of Tax Credit
Year     Percent of B&O Tax Liability Used as a Tax Credit
1st year 100%
2nd year 75%
3rd year 50%
4th year 25%
5th year 0%
 
         (b)   Expanded multi-unit commercial business facility. The tax credit
treatment accorded to the qualified investment in a qualified expanded multi-
unit commercial business facility shall be the same as that accorded to a
qualified new multi-unit commercial business facility; provided, that the tax
credit shall only apply to that incremental portion of the gross income
directly attributable to the qualified investment in the expanded retail or
wholesale business facility. Upon determining the portion upon which the tax
credit shall be applied, the tax credit shall be calculated as follows.
 
Calculation of Tax Credit
Year     Percent of B&O Tax Liability Used as a Tax Credit
1st year 100%
2nd year 75%
3rd year 50%
4th year 25%
5th year 0%
 
   (F)   Annexed business facility.
      (1)   Any annexed business facility that is subject to tax under §§
38.006,
38.007,
38.011 or
38.012 shall be classified as a qualified business facility eligible for a
decreasing tax credit to be taken over a period of four years and applied
against the taxpayer’s business and occupation tax liability arising under said
§§
38.006,
38.007,
38.011 or
38.012. The first taxable year, for purposes of this tax credit, shall commence
on the first day of the taxpayer’s fiscal year immediately succeeding the month
in which the business facility is annexed into the city; provided, that for
purposes of this tax credit, each subsequent tax year shall commence on the
anniversary date of the first taxable year.
      (2)   The tax credit herein authorized shall be calculated as follows.
         (a)   Annexed business facility.
 
Calculation of Tax Credit
Year     Percent of B&O Tax Liability Used as a Tax Credit
1st year 100%
2nd year 75%
3rd year 50%
4th year 25%
5th year 0%
 
         (B)   Business facility annexed on or after March 1, 2011. Any
business facility that is subject to tax under §§
38.006,
38.007,
38.011 or
38.012 and is annexed into the city on or after March 1, 2011 shall be
classified as a qualified business facility eligible for a tax credit to be
taken as indicated below and applied against the taxpayer’s business and
occupation tax liability arising under said §§
38.006,
38.007,
38.011 or
38.012. The first taxable year, for purposes of this tax credit, shall commence
on the first day of the taxpayer’s fiscal year immediately succeeding the month
in which the business facility is annexed into the city; provided, that for
purposes of this tax credit, each subsequent tax year shall commence on the
anniversary date of the first taxable year. The tax credit herein authorized
shall be calculated as follows.
Calculation of Tax Credit
Year Percent of B&O Tax Liability Used as a Tax Credit
Calculation of Tax Credit
Year                               Percent of B&O Tax Liability Used as a Tax
                                   Credit
1st year                           100%
2nd year                           100%
3rd year                           100%
4th year                           100%
5th year                           100%
6th year and every year thereafter 0%
 
   (G)   To qualify for credit. In order for a business to qualify for this
credit, the jobs created shall be located within the city and shall be utilized
in the qualified business’ activities in the city that are taxable under §§
38.006,
38.007,
38.011 or
38.012. In addition, the jobs created shall be retained for the full term of
the credit in order for the credit to be applicable; provided, that if the
number of qualifying jobs at any time drops below the base year employment
level plus five, the credit shall be lost.
   (H)   Credits for the purchase of existing businesses.
      (1)   Any qualified manufacturing, retailing, wholesaling, service or
multi-unit commercial building facility or business taxable under §§
38.006,
38.007,
38.011 or
38.012 that is purchased by another person may qualify for the tax credit
herein authorized, such credit to be applied against any increase in tax
liability after such sale has been consummated; provided, that the credit shall
only apply to that incremental portion of gross income which is greater than
the average gross income generated by the preceding business over the previous
three years.
      (2)   Any current tax credit that an existing qualified business may have
is eligible for transfer to the person purchasing the business; provided, that
only the remaining term of the existing credit may be transferred. Any such
transfer of an existing tax credit to the person purchasing the business shall
make such business ineligible for the credit available under division (H)(1)
above.
   (I)   Does not qualify for credit. A person will not qualify to use the tax
credit authorized by this section if at the time of application the person is
using a tax credit or tax rebate under the authority of Ordinance 96-05;
provided, that this restriction will cease to be effective at the time the
person is no longer using a tax credit or tax rebate that is authorized under
Ordinance 96-05.
   (J)   Forfeiture. Any taxpayer authorized to use the tax credit provided in
this section that does not pay when required any B&O tax imposed by this
subchapter immediately forfeits any future use of the tax credit. Other than
notifying the non-complying taxpayer that the taxpayer has forfeited its
authorization to use the credit, the City Treasurer is not required to provide
a hearing or any other procedure; provided, that if the taxpayer can
demonstrate that the required payment of B&O taxes did in fact occur within the
time stated in §§
38.017 and
38.018, the City Treasurer shall authorize the taxpayer’s continued use of the
tax credit.
   (K)   Forms. The City Treasurer shall develop such forms as are necessary to
facilitate the application and approval of any business seeking to qualify for
this tax credit. The forms at a minimum shall require the business’ name,
address, federal employer identification number, the activities of the
business, the number of employees of the business, the projected amount of
qualified investment, and any other information the City Treasurer determines
to be necessary. The City Treasurer shall provide information regarding this
tax credit section to any business that requests it. Upon receipt of all of the
relevant information, the City Treasurer shall recommend to the City Council
that it either approve or disapprove the application. Upon receipt of the
Treasurer’s recommendation, the City Council shall vote to either approve or
disapprove the application.
   (L)   City Treasurer examination of books, records and papers. In order to
assure the tax credit herein authorized is being properly utilized by each
business determined by the city to be qualified to use the tax credit, the City
Treasurer may, in person or by duly appointed agent, make examination of the
books, records and papers, and audit the accounts of any such business, and may
take the evidence, on oath, of any person whom he may believe shall be in
possession of any relevant information. As soon as possible after procuring
such information as the City Treasurer may be able to obtain that substantiates
improper use of the tax credit, he shall proceed to assess the tax due and
shall notify the business assessed of the amount of tax due. If the taxpayer
shall refuse to pay the amount of tax due, the City Treasurer is authorized to
pursue any and all action necessary to collect the amount of tax so assessed.
   (M)   City Treasurer determinations and denials. The City Treasurer is
hereby authorized to make any necessary determinations regarding forfeiture or
carryover of the tax credits authorized by this section. Further, the City
Treasurer, subject to review by Council, may determine that a particular tax
credit application violates the spirit and intention of this section, and deny
the credit on that basis.
(Ord. 96-05, passed 12-2-2008; Ord. passed 3-15-2011; Ord. passed 6-7-2011;
Ord. passed 8-16-2016)
CONSUMER SALES AND SERVICE TAX, USE TAX,
AND STREAMLINED SALES TAX
§ 38.045 COUNCIL FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Municipal Home Rule Board, under the authority provided in W. Va.
Code 8-1-5a, approved the city’s Home Rule, Phase II Application which
included, among other actions, the request for authorization to impose a
municipal consumers sales and service tax, and municipal use tax.
   (B)   The City Council believes that it is in the best interest of the city
to provide for financing of the construction or renovation of capital
improvements on city property, to promote economic development and growth
within the city and take other actions as determined by the City Council to be
appropriate.
   (C)   The City Council has determined that in order to accomplish the
objectives stated in division (B) above, it is appropriate to impose sales and
use taxes that conform to the state consumers sales and service tax and use tax
as codified in W. Va. Code 11-15-1 et seq., 11-15A-1 et seq. and 11- 15B-1 et
seq., all of which will be administered, collected and enforced by the State
Tax Division at the same time and in the same manner as the consumers sales and
service tax codified in W. Va. Code 11- 15-1 et seq., the use tax codified in
W. Va. Code 11-15A-1 et seq., and the applicable provisions of the streamlined
sales and use tax agreement codified in W. Va. Code 11-15B-1 et seq.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.046 DEFINITIONS.
   Terms used in this subchapter or in the administration, collection and
enforcement of the taxes imposed by this subchapter and not otherwise defined
in this subchapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in W. Va. Code
Chapter 11, Articles 9, 10, 15, 15A and 15B, as amended.
   BUSINESS. Includes all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with
the object of gain or economic benefit, direct or indirect, and all activities
of the state and its political subdivisions which involve sales of tangible
personal property or the rendering of services, when those service activities
compete with or may compete with the activities of other persons.
   CITY or THIS CITY. The City of Nitro, West Virginia.
   CODE OF WEST VIRGINIA. The Code of West Virginia of 1931, as amended.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership or any other legal entity,
including this state or its political subdivisions or an agency of either, or
the guardian, trustee, committee, executor or administrator of any person.
   PURCHASE. Any transfer, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any
manner or by any means whatsoever, for a consideration.
   PURCHASE PRICE. The measure subject to the taxes imposed by this subchapter
and has the same meaning as SALES PRICE.
   PURCHASER. A person who purchases tangible personal property, custom
software or a service taxed by this subchapter.
   RETAILER. Includes every person engaging in the business of selling, leasing
or renting tangible personal property or custom software or furnishing a
taxable service for use within the meaning of this subchapter, or in the
business of selling, at auction, tangible personal property or custom software
owned by the person or others for use in this city; provided, that when in the
opinion of the Tax Commissioner it is necessary for the efficient
administration of this subchapter to regard any salespersons, representatives,
truckers, peddlers or canvassers as the agents of the dealers, distributors,
supervisors, employees or persons under whom they operate or from whom they
obtain the tangible personal property sold by them, irrespective of whether
they are making sales on their own behalf or on behalf of the dealers,
distributors, supervisors, employers or persons. The Tax Commissioner may so
regard them and may regard the dealers, distributors, supervisors, employers,
or persons as RETAILERS for purposes of this subchapter.
   RETAILER ENGAGING IN BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (or any like term). Unless
otherwise limited by federal statute, means and includes, but is not limited
to:
      (1)   Any retailer having or maintaining, occupying or using, within this
city, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution house, sales house,
warehouse, or other place of business, or any agent (by whatever name called)
operating within this city under the authority of the retailer or its
subsidiary, irrespective of whether the place of business or agent is located
here permanently or temporarily, or whether the retailer or subsidiary is
admitted to do business within this state pursuant to W. Va. Code 31D-15-1501
et seq. or W. Va. Code 31D-14-1401 et seq.; or
      (2)   Any retailer that is related to, or part of a unitary business with
a person, entity or business that, without regard to whether the retailer is
admitted to do business in this state pursuant to W. Va. Code 31D-15-1501 et
seq. or W. Va. Code 31D-14-1401 et seq., is a subsidiary of the retailer, or is
related to, or unitary with, the retailer as a related entity, a related member
or part of a unitary business, all as defined in W. Va. Code 11-24-3a:
         (a)   That, pursuant to an agreement with or in cooperation with the
related retailer, maintains an office, distribution house, sales house,
warehouse or other place of business in this city;
         (b)   That performs services in this city in connection with tangible
personal property or services sold by the retailer, or any related entity,
related member or part of the unitary business;
         (c)   That, by any agent, or representative (by whatever name called),
or employee, performs services in this city in connection with tangible
personal property or services sold by the retailer, or any related entity,
related member or part of the unitary business; or
         (d)   That directly, or through or by an agent, representative or
employee located in, or present in, this city, solicits business in this city
for or on behalf of the retailer, or any related entity, related member or part
of the unitary business.
      (3)   For purposes of division (2) above, the term SERVICE means and
includes, but is not limited to, customer support services, help desk services,
call center services, repair services, engineering services, installation
service, assembly service, delivery service by means other than common carrier
or the United States Postal Service, technical assistance services, the service
of investigating, handling or otherwise assisting in resolving customer issues
or complaints while in this city, the service of operating a mail order
business or telephone, internet or other remote order business from facilities
located within this city, the service of operating a website or internet-based
business from a location within the city, or any other service.
   SALE, SALES or SELLING. Have the meaning as ascribed to those terms in W.
Va. Code 11- 15-1 et seq.
   SALES PRICE. Has the meaning as ascribed to that term in W. Va. Code 11-15B-
1 et seq.
   SALES TAX. The tax levied under §
38.047 of this subchapter.
   SERVICE or SELECTED SERVICE. Have the meaning as ascribed to those terms in
W. Va. Code 11-15B-1 et seq.
   STATE SALES TAX. The tax levied by W. Va. Code 11-15-1 et seq.
   STATE USE TAX. The tax levied by W. Va. Code 11-15A-1 et seq.
   STREAMLINED SALES AND USE TAX. The tax agreement codified in W. Va. Code 11-
15B- 1 et seq.
   TAX. The taxes imposed by this subchapter and includes additions to tax,
interest and penalties levied under the state’s Tax Procedures and
Administration Act, W. Va. Code 11-10-1 et seq.
   TAX COMMISSIONER. The State Tax Commissioner or his or her delegate. The
term DELEGATE in the phrase “or his or her delegate” when used in reference to
the TAX COMMISSIONER, means any officer or employee of the State Tax Division
duly authorized by the Tax Commissioner directly, or indirectly, by one or more
redelegations of authority to perform the functions mentioned or described in
W. Va. Code Chapter 11, Articles 15 or 15B, as amended, or the rules
promulgated under those articles.
   ULTIMATE CONSUMER or CONSUMER. A person who uses or consumes services or
tangible personal property.
   USE.
      (1)   For purposes of the tax imposed by §
38.048, means and includes:
         (a)   The exercise by any person of any right or power over tangible
personal property or custom software incident to the ownership, possession or
enjoyment of the property, or by any transaction in which possession of or the
exercise of any right or power over tangible personal property, custom software
or the result of a taxable service is acquired for a consideration, including
any lease, rental or conditional sale of tangible personal property or custom
software; or
         (b)   The USE or enjoyment in this city of the result of a taxable
service. As used in this definition, ENJOYMENT includes a purchaser’s right to
direct the disposition of the property or the use of the taxable service,
whether or not the purchaser has possession of the property.
      (2)   The term USE does not include the keeping, retaining or exercising
any right or power over tangible personal property, custom software or the
result of a taxable service for the purpose of subsequently transporting it
outside the city for use thereafter solely outside this city.
   USE TAX. The tax imposed by §
38.048.
   VENDOR. Any person furnishing services taxed by this subchapter or making
sales of tangible personal property or custom software. VENDOR and SELLER are
used interchangeably in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.047 IMPOSITION OF CONSUMERS SALES AND SERVICE TAX.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property or custom software
and for the privilege of furnishing certain selected services on and after July
1, 2015, a vendor doing business in this city shall collect from the purchaser
the tax imposed by this section and pay the amount of tax collected to the Tax
Commissioner at the same time and in the same manner as the consumers sales and
service tax imposed by W. Va. Code 11-15-1 et seq. The rate of tax shall be 1%
of the sales price, as defined in W. Va. Code 11-15B-2, of the tangible
personal property, custom software or taxable service purchased.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.048 IMPOSITION OF USE TAX.
   On and after July 1, 2015, an excise tax is hereby levied and imposed on the
use in this city of tangible personal property, custom software or taxable
services, to be collected and paid to the Tax Commissioner in the same manner
that state use tax is collected under W. Va. Code 11-15A-1 et seq. and W. Va.
Code 11-15B-1 et seq. The rate of tax shall be 1% of the purchase price, as
defined in W. Va. Code 11-15B-1 et seq., of the tangible personal property,
custom software or taxable service used within the city.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.049 CALCULATION OF TAX ON FRACTIONAL PARTS OF A DOLLAR.
   The tax computation under §§
38.047 and
38.048 shall be carried to the third decimal place and the tax rounded up to
the next whole cent whenever the third decimal place is greater than four and
rounded down to the lower whole cent whenever the third decimal place is four
or less. The vendor may elect to compute the tax due on a transaction on a per
item basis or on an invoice basis provided the method used is consistently used
during the reporting period, but the method used shall be the same as that used
for purposes of computing the state sales or use tax.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.050 MUNICIPAL SALES AND SERVICE AND USE TAX BASES.
   The taxable base of the taxes imposed by §§
38.047 and
38.048 shall be identical to the sales and service and use tax base of this
state except as provided in §
38.051, unless otherwise prohibited by federal law as required by W. Va. Code
11-15B-34.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.051 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The taxes imposed by this subchapter do not apply to:
      (1)   The sale or use of motor fuel, as defined in W. Va. Code 11-14C-
1 et seq.;
      (2)   The sale or use of motor vehicles subject to the tax imposed by W.
Va. Code 11- 15-3c;
      (3)   The purchase or use of any tangible personal property, custom
software or service that the city is prohibited from taxing under the laws of
this state;
      (4)   The tax imposed by §
38.047 does not apply to any transaction that is exempt from the tax imposed by
W. Va. Code 11-15-1 et seq., except for the exemption provided under W. Va.
Code 11-15-9f; and
      (5)   The tax imposed by §
38.048 does not apply to any purchase upon which the tax imposed by §
38.047 has been paid.
   (B)   The municipal sales and service tax and use tax imposed herein applies
solely to tangible personal property, custom software and services that are
sourced to the municipality. The municipal sales and service tax and use tax
imposed herein are subject to the sourcing rules set forth in W. Va. Code 11-
15B-1 et seq.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.052 CREDIT FOR LOCAL TAXES LAWFULLY PAID TO ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY.
   (A)   A person is entitled to a credit against the use tax imposed by §
38.048 on the use of a particular item of tangible personal property, custom
software or taxable service equal to the amount, if any, of sales tax lawfully
paid to another municipality for the acquisition of that property, custom
software or service; provided, that the amount of credit allowed may not exceed
the amount of use tax imposed by §
38.048 on the use of the tangible personal property, custom software or taxable
service in this city.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MUNICIPALITY. A municipality, as defined in W. Va. Code 8-1-2, or a
comparable unit of local government in another state.
      SALES TAX. Includes a sales tax or compensating use tax imposed on the
sale or use of tangible personal property, custom software or the results of a
taxable service by the municipality in which the sale occurred.
   (C)   No credit is allowed under this section for payment of any sales or
use taxes imposed by this state or any other state. For purposes of this
division (C), STATE includes the 50 states of the United States and the
District of Columbia but does not include any of the several territories
organized by Congress.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.053 LOCAL RATE AND BOUNDARY CHANGES.
   (A)   (1)   The state is required by W. Va. Code 11-15B-35 to maintain a
database of all jurisdictions levying a sales or use tax in this state.
      (2)   The city shall furnish the Tax Commissioner with information the
state requires for that database that will allow the state to maintain a
database that assigns each five-digit and nine-digit zip code within the state
to the proper tax rates and jurisdictions.
      (3)   The state must apply the lowest combined tax rate imposed in the
zip code area if the area includes more than one tax rate in any level of
taxing jurisdiction; provided, that, when sales are sourced to a physical
location within the boundaries of the city, the seller shall collect the tax
imposed by §
38.047.
   (B)   Whenever boundaries of the city change, whether by annexation or de-
annexation, the City Treasurer shall promptly notify the Tax Commissioner in
writing of the change in boundaries and provide the Tax Commissioner with the
nine-digit zip code or codes for the addresses located within the boundaries of
the city as well as the area annexed or de-annexed, a certified copy of the
ordinance adding to or detaching territory from the city, which must reflect
the effective date of the change, a map of the city clearly showing the
territory added or detached and any other information the Tax Commissioner may
require or is required by W. Va. Code 110-28-8.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.054 STATE LEVEL ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Tax Commissioner is responsible for administering, collecting and
enforcing the taxes imposed by this subchapter as provided in W. Va. Code 8-1-
5a, 11-10-11c and 11-15B-33. The city may enter into an agreement with the Tax
Commissioner that will allow employees of the city auditing a vendor with a
physical location in the city for compliance with the city’s business and
occupation tax, to also audit that location for compliance with the sales and
use tax laws of this state and this city and to share that information with the
Tax Commissioner.
   (B)   The Tax Commissioner may retain from collections of the taxes imposed
by this subchapter, a fee of up to 5% of the amount of the taxes collected by
the Tax Commissioner prior to the effective date of the legislative rule
setting the fee pursuant to W. Va. Code 11-10-11c. The fee retained from taxes
collected on and after that date shall be the fee allowed by W. Va. Code 11-10-
11c or by any other state law or legislative rule.
   (C)   The Tax Commissioner shall deposit all the proceeds from collection of
the taxes imposed by this subchapter, minus any fee for collecting, enforcing
and administering taxes retained under this section, in the subaccount for this
city established in “Municipal Sales and Service Tax and Use Tax Fund”, an
interest, bearing account created in the State Treasury pursuant to W. Va. Code
8-13C-7. All moneys collected and deposited in the subaccount for the city
shall be remitted at least quarterly by the State Treasurer to the City
Treasurer, as provided W. Va. Code 8-13C-7.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.055 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   Each and every provision of the state’s Tax Procedure and Administration
Act, set forth in W. Va. Code 11-10-1 et seq., applies to the administration,
collection and enforcement of the sales and service and use taxes imposed
pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.056 CRIMINAL PENALTIES APPLY.
   Each and every provision of the state’s Tax Crimes and Penalties Act, set
forth in W. Va. Code 11-9-1 et seq., applies to the administration, collection
and enforcement of the sales and service and use taxes imposed pursuant to this
subchapter; provided, that the criminal penalties imposed upon conviction for a
criminal violation of this subchapter may not exceed the maximum penalties
allowed by law for that violation.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.057 AUTOMATIC UPDATING.
   Any amendments to W. Va. Code Chapter 11, Articles 9, 10, 15, 15A and 15B
shall automatically apply to the sales and service or use tax imposed pursuant
to this subchapter, to the extent applicable.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.058 DEPOSIT OF TAXES COLLECTED IN SPECIAL REVENUE FUND.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established a special revenue fund in the City
Treasury which shall be designated and known as the City Sales and Service Tax
and Use Tax Fund.
      (2)   The City Sales and Use Tax Fund shall consist of: all revenues
received from collection of the city’s sales and use taxes, including any
interest, additions to tax and penalties imposed on such taxes, and deposited
with the City Treasurer; all appropriations to the fund; all interest earned
from investment of the fund; and any gifts, grants or contributions received
and placed by the city into the City Sales and Use Tax Account.
      (3)   Revenues in the City Sales and Use Tax Fund shall not be treated by
any person to be a general revenue of the city. Revenues in the City Sales and
Use Tax Fund shall be disbursed in the manner and consistent with the
priorities set forth for in division (B) below.
   (B)   Revenues in the City Sales and Use Tax Fund shall be used: first, to
satisfy the debt service requirements each fiscal year on any bonds issued by,
or other obligations incurred by, the city, from time to time, including any
refunding bonds, to finance capital improvements to the city and for any other
economic development or public safety projects, including the funding of any
reserve funds relating to any such bonds or other obligations, and/or to make
lease payments which secure bonds issued to finance other economic development
projects; and second, after providing for payment of first priority items, any
unencumbered revenue in the City Sales and Use Tax Fund may periodically be
transferred as necessary or convenient to the city’s General Revenue Account.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
§ 38.059 TAXES IMPOSED IN ADDITION TO THE STATE CONSUMERS SALES AND SERVICE AND
USE TAXES.
   The municipal sales and service tax and municipal use tax imposed pursuant
to this subchapter shall be in addition to the consumers sales and service tax
and use tax imposed pursuant to W. Va. Code 11-15-1 et seq. and 11-15A-1 et
seq. on sales made and services rendered and on the use of tangible personal
property, custom software, or taxable services within the boundaries of the
city and, except as exempted or excepted, all sales made and services rendered
and on the use of tangible personal property, custom software, or taxable
services within the boundaries of the city shall remain subject to the tax
levied by those Articles of the state code. Further, the municipal sales and
service tax and municipal use tax imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall be
imposed in addition to any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of W. Va.
Code 7-22-1, 8-13-6, 8-13-7, and 8-38-12.
(Ord. passed 1-6-2015)
LICENSE TAXES
§ 38.070 CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO DOING BUSINESS.
   Payment in full of the proper tax or fee as required by the city, the
issuance of a city license certificate and the fulfillment of all terms and
conditions of such grant shall be conditions precedent to the transaction of
any business, profession, calling, vocation, activity, trade or employment for
which a city license is required.
(Prior Code, § 733.01)
§ 38.071 LICENSE APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE; PAYMENT OF TAX AND FEES; RECORDS.
   (A)   Each applicant for a city license shall make application to the City
Recorder on a form to be provided by the city, and holders of business
franchise certificates or other forms of state licenses authorizing them to do
business within the city shall display such state certificates or licenses to
the City Recorder at the time of making application for a city license.
   (B)   Upon the payment of such license tax or fee as may be imposed by this
subchapter or elsewhere in these codified ordinances or other ordinance, upon
the city license for which application is made, the City Recorder shall issue
the license applied for; provided, that the application is in proper form and
that all requirements of state law, these codified ordinances and other
ordinances and all conditions precedent to the issuance of such license appear
to the City Recorder to have been complied with; and provided further, that
applications for licenses which are required to be issued by Council shall be
referred by the City Recorder to Council at its next meeting succeeding the
date of filing thereof, and he or she shall not issue any such license until
authorized to do so by Council, and in any such case the payment of any license
tax or fee shall be deferred until such application has been approved by
Council.
   (C)   The City Recorder shall maintain on file all applications for city
licenses and a record of each license issued, which shall set forth the name
and business address of the licensee, the date of issuance and the term for
which issued, the type of license, the amount of license tax to be paid, the
number of the license and such additional information as may be pertinent to
establish that all requirements of law and ordinances have been complied with.
(Prior Code, § 733.02)
§ 38.072 FALSE STATEMENTS PROHIBITED; RETURNS CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make any false statement in any application
for a city license or in any tax return, report or other statement relating to
any activity licensed by the city and which is required to be made to any city
officer or agency.
   (B)   All returns and tax statements made by taxpayers to city officers
shall be regarded as confidential and, except in compliance with judicial
order, or as may be required by the proper administration hereof, the City
Recorder, his or her agents and employees, and former City Recorders, agents
and employees, shall not divulge facts or information obtained in the
administration of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 733.03)
§ 38.073 SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH FIXED PLACE AND EACH CLASS OF
BUSINESS.
   Except as may be provided otherwise in these codified ordinances or other
ordinance, any person who, at more than one fixed place of business within the
city, engages in or prosecutes any business, profession, calling or vocation
for which a city license is required or who within the city engages in or
prosecutes more than one type of business, profession, calling or vocation for
which a city license is required, shall obtain a separate license and pay the
prescribed tax or fee therefor for each such fixed place of business and for
each such business, profession, calling or vocation.
(Prior Code, § 733.04)
§ 38.074 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each person to whom a city license is issued shall keep such license
conspicuously posted upon or within the premises to which such license relates.
   (B)   Each licensee having no fixed place of business shall carry his or her
license upon his or her person at all times while engaging in the licensed
business or any transaction incidental thereto, and shall display such license
upon request of any person with whom he or she is transacting business or any
law enforcement officer.
(Prior Code, § 733.05)
§ 38.075 DUPLICATE LICENSES.
   Any person losing, misplacing or destroying any license issued under the
provisions of this subchapter may, by application to the City Recorder, procure
a duplicate thereof, upon satisfactory proof of the loss of the original and
upon the payment to him or her of a fee of $0.50 for the issuance thereof.
(Prior Code, § 733.06)
§ 38.076 LICENSE A PERSONAL PRIVILEGE; CHANGE OF NAME, LOCATION, OWNERSHIP AND
THE LIKE.
   (A)   Each license shall confer a personal privilege only, to transact the
business, profession, calling or vocation which is the subject of the license
and shall not be exercised except by the person to whom issued and shall not be
assignable to any other person.
   (B)   Changes in the name of the person or change of location or address, or
changes in ownership of a business or changes in real parties of interest shall
be considered a cessation of the business and a new city license shall be
required. Changes of partners or members of firms or officers of a corporation
shall not require a new license to be issued.
(Prior Code, § 733.07)
§ 38.077 LICENSE DOES NOT LEGALIZE UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   Nothing in this subchapter and no payment for or issuance of any city
license under the provisions hereof shall be deemed to legalize any act which
otherwise may be in violation of law, or to exempt any person from any penalty
prescribed for such violation.
(Prior Code, § 733.08)
§ 38.078 ZONING ORDINANCE COMPLIANCE; RESPONSIBILITY OF APPLICANTS.
   No payment of a license tax on the issuance of any certificate of license
under the provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed to validate the conduct
of any business, activity, trade or employment at any address within the city
at which such business, activity, trade or employment is prohibited or
restricted under any provision of the zoning ordinance or any other city
ordinance, notwithstanding that the certificate of license may purport to
license such business, activity, trade or employment at such specific address;
and it shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a city license to
first ascertain that the address at which he or she proposes to engage in or
prosecute the business, activity, trade or employment is one at which such
business, activity, trade or employment is permitted by the zoning ordinance
and all other ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 733.09)
§ 38.079 COLLECTION BY PROCEEDINGS IN COURT.
   The City Recorder may collect any license tax, fee or penalty unpaid under
the provisions of this subchapter by appropriate proceedings in the Municipal
Court of the city, or in any other court of competent jurisdiction; provided,
that on and after August 1, 2009, the city police shall be instructed to close
any business that is more than 30 days delinquent in obtaining a municipal
license or paying the tax required by this subchapter, such business closure to
cease when the business obtains a current business license and pays the license
tax required by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 733.10) (Ord. 09-06, passed 7-21-2009)
§ 38.080 PROSECUTION FOR VIOLATIONS; CITY TO SEEK INJUNCTIONS.
   On and after August 1, 2009, any person who engages in or prosecutes any
business, profession, calling or vocation contrary to any of the provisions of
these codified ordinances, whether without first obtaining a license therefor
or by continuing the same after the termination of the effective period of any
such license, or by any violation of the terms and conditions of such license,
he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, shall be subject to immediate
prosecution in the Municipal Court of the city, and shall be subject to the
fine imposed by §
38.999, and, in addition, the City Attorney may, in the name of the city, seek
such injunctive relief as may be appropriate in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 733.11) (Ord. 09-06, passed 7-21-2009)
§ 38.081 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES; PUBLIC HEARINGS UPON APPEAL.
   The City Recorder, upon reasonable notice to the licensee, may summarily
revoke any license issued by him or her pursuant to the provisions of these
codified ordinances for any reason which would have been grounds for denial of
such license when first issued, for violation of any term or condition of such
license, for violation of any pertinent provision of state law, these codified
ordinances or other ordinance, or for the perpetration or attempted
perpetration of fraud, malpractice or malfeasance by the licensee, without
prejudice to prosecution of such licensee by the city. Any person having an
interest in any license so revoked and who feels aggrieved thereby may request
the City Recorder to further investigate the grounds for revocation and to
reconsider his or her action, and if the City Recorder accedes to such request,
he or she may suspend or reinstate the license pending his or her final
decision. If the City Recorder refuses to accede to such request, or if, upon
reconsideration, he or she affirms his or her revocation of the license, the
party so aggrieved may appeal to the Municipal Court of the city, which shall,
without delay, afford such person a public hearing at which he or she may
appear in person or by counsel, and may have the attendance of witnesses, books
and papers in his or her behalf, and may testify in person. The decision of the
Municipal Court following such hearing shall be final, subject only to such
judicial review as may be provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 733.12) (Ord. 09-06, passed 7-21-2009)
§ 38.082 LICENSES REQUIRED; LICENSE TAXES IMPOSED.
   (A)   Licenses generally. No person shall, without a currently valid city
license, engage in or prosecute within the city any of the businesses,
occupations, activities, trades or employments named in §
38.083. The license taxes hereinafter specified are hereby levied on every
person engaging in or prosecuting, within this city, any such businesses,
activities, trades or employments. The license taxes prescribed in said §
38.083 are levied on an annual basis, commencing July 1 of each year, expiring
on the following June 13, and are not proratable if taken out during the
license year nor shall fees paid be refundable if a license is revoked,
suspended or business ceased during the license year.
   (B)   Coin-operated merchandise, service, music and amusement devices.
      (1)   Persons owning and operating coin-operated merchandise, service,
amusement or music devices or vending machines shall obtain the annual
municipal license or licenses required by §
38.083. The city will not furnish decal stamps for these devices; however, the
owner shall identify each machine by installing on each device an
identification label, plainly legible and visible, in such a manner that the
machine need not be moved to observe the identification label, and the
identification label shall contain the name of the owner, his or her license
number, his or her street address and the name of city and state.
      (2)   The liability for the license to operate any type of coin-operated
merchandise, service, amusement or musical device or vending machines shall be
upon the owner of the machine. The ownership shall be established by either a
bill of sale, paid invoice or a conditional sales contract which has been
recorded in the City Recorder’s office. The leasing of such a machine shall not
be considered to be a transfer of ownership of the machine and where a lessor-
lessee relationship exists; the lessor shall be liable for the applicable
license tax.
      (3)   The operator of more than one type of such device shall pay the
highest fee prescribed.
      (4)   Any device taking more than one denomination of coin or paper money
shall be licensed on the basis of the largest denomination of coin or paper
money taken or the total of the coins necessary to make the device function or
operate.
      (5)   No license tax shall be required of any store or business owning
and operating such machines or devices owned by them in their own licensed
stores; provided, that where the principal business is the operation of the
machine or devices, then licenses shall be obtained as outlined above; provided
however, that any person exempt from or not liable for such license shall
identify each machine by installing on each device an identification label,
plainly legible and visible, in such a manner that the machine need not be
moved to observe the identification label, and the identification label shall
contain the name of the owner, his or her store license number, his or her
street address and the name of city and state.
      (6)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be applicable to any
pay telephone, postage stamp vending machines or currency changing machines
operated on the coin-in-the-slot principle.
      (7)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be applicable to any
limited video lottery terminals or on the operation of racetrack video lottery
terminals.
   (C)   Circuses, carnivals and other public shows.
      (1)   The municipal license to exhibit a circus or other itinerant show
not exhibited in a theater or other permanent place for public shows, shall be
based upon the number of railroad cars or motor vehicles used to transport the
property or equipment of such shows, but not including railroad cars or motor
vehicles used to transport the personnel thereof. In addition to the license
taxes stated in §
38.083, if railroad cars are used, the tax shall be $4 for each car for each
day on which any performance is given, and if motor vehicles are used, the tax
shall be $3 for each motor vehicle for each day on which any performance is
given.
      (2)   The municipal license to exhibit a street or other carnival shall
be issued for a period of a week and shall be for each entertainment,
performance or exhibition given at or in the vicinity of any such carnival.
Each such entertainment, performance or exhibition shall require a separate
license, whether or not shown under the same canvas and whether or not
exhibited for additional compensation; upon the conclusion of any such
entertainment, performance or exhibition, the City Recorder shall determine if
an additional license tax for admission is to be imposed and collected.
      (3)   The municipal license to operate any riding device of any kind at
or in the vicinity of any street or carnival show shall be issued for a period
of a week.
      (4)   The municipal license to keep or maintain any concession stand
selling service, goods, wares or merchandise, such as food, soft drinks, ice
cream, candy floss and the like, at or in the vicinity of such street or
carnival show, shall be issued for a period of a week for each such concession.
      (5)   The municipal license to maintain any concession stand such as ball
games, striking machine, weighing machine, shooting gallery, artful dodger,
bumper, fish pond, dart game, or other legitimate games of skill, none of which
shall be controlled by the operator, at or in the vicinity of any street or
carnival show, shall be issued for a period of a week for each such concession.
      (6)   The municipal license to operate or maintain a candy wheel or any
other legitimate merchandise wheels, when operated without control of the
operator, shall be issued for a period of a day.
      (7)   The municipal license to operate or maintain rides of all kinds
shall be issued for a period of a week.
      (8)   No municipal license shall be granted to any circus, show or street
carnival where games such as the following are operated: roll downs, blowers,
spinners, swinging ball, creepers, race tracks, spot the spot, and all other
games controlled by the operator.
   (D)   Junk dealers and collectors.
      (1)   A municipal license shall be required to act as a resident junk
dealer, a junk dealer’s agent, a nonresident junk dealer or his or her agent
who buys or solicits for the purchase of junk within the city, or an itinerant
junk collector. A nonresident junk dealer may purchase junk from any resident
junk dealer without complying with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   No person within the city shall engage in the business of a junk
dealer, junk dealer’s agent or itinerant junk collector without having obtained
a state license to operate a salvage yard.
      (3)   No corporation or firm shall engage in the business of junk dealer
or junk dealer’s agent in the city unless the officers or agents of such
corporation or firm who engage in the business of junk dealer or junk dealer’s
agent, in behalf of such corporation or firm shall be eligible to be duly
licensed as resident junk dealers or junk dealer’s agent in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
   (E)   Hawkers and peddlers.
      (1)   A municipal license shall be required to act as a hawker or
peddler.
      (2)   This division (E) does not apply to any person who sells any goods,
wares or merchandise to be delivered in the future, or to any of the following
who offer immediate delivery of the goods being sold:
         (a)   Any person engaged within this state in the business or calling
of agriculture, who sells the products derived from his or her business or
calling of agriculture; provided, that if such person also purchases
agricultural products for resale, such person is not exempt from the
requirement to obtain a municipal license;
         (b)   Any wholesaler or jobber selling soft drinks or non-intoxicating
beer for which he or she is duly licensed under other provisions to make such
sales;
         (c)   Any sales by societies, groups or organizations acting for
charitable, religious or benevolent purposes; and
         (d)   Any agent or sales person who sells to retail dealers for the
purpose of resale manufactured products produced by his or her employer.
   (F)   Collection agencies. A municipal license is required to engage in the
business of a collection agency within this city. For purposes of this section,
any such collection agency shall be licensed as a collection agency under the
authority of W. Va. Code Chapter 11, as amended. Additionally, solicitation or
collection by or through an agent operating within this city shall be
considered to be engaging in the business of a collection agency within this
city.
   (G)   Employment agents. A municipal license is required to engage in the
business of an employment agent in this city. An employment agent receives
applications for employment, and hires or contracts with persons for
employment; provided, that any such agency or registry operated by a registered
professional nurses association or any district subdivision thereof for the
exclusive benefit of its registrants and not for profit is not subject to the
municipal license requirement imposed on an employment agent.
   (H)   Store license taxes.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain any
general or special store in this city without first having obtained the annual
license to do so from the City Recorder.
      (2)   The following are exempt from the requirement to obtain a license
to establish, operate or maintain either a general or special store:
         (a)   The United States of America, the State of West Virginia and its
political subdivisions;
         (b)   Religious and charitable organizations; and
         (c)   Any person engaged within this state in the business of
producing agricultural products who, individually or collectively, sell in such
store only agricultural products which he or she or they have produced;
provided, that if such person purchases agricultural products for resale, such
person shall be required to obtain the license herein required.
   (I)   Street vendor.
      (1)   Operation without license unlawful; failure to display license
unlawful. No person shall engage in the business or trade of street vendor
without first obtaining a license from the City Recorder. The license shall be
displayed conspicuously at all times upon the vendor’s table, cart, container
or other sales location. Any and all additional licenses or permits required
pursuant to law shall be displayed conspicuously at all times upon the vendor’s
table, cart, container or other sales location. Failure to obtain a license
from the City Recorder shall be an offense subject to a fine of an amount not
to exceed state law. Each day’s operation of such business without a license
shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   License fees. The license fee for engaging in the trade or business
of street vendor shall be $15 per fiscal year, or any portion thereof;
provided, that a street vendor that affirmatively demonstrates by provision of
a copy of its state business registration certificate or a similar document
from the West Virginia Secretary of State that shows that it is a non-profit
organization shall not be required to pay the $15 license fee.
      (3)   Application and issuance of vendor’s license; general liability
insurance required; procedures.
         (a)   Each applicant for a vendor’s license shall file an application
with the City Recorder in such form as prescribed by the City Recorder. The
applicant may be an individual or a firm or corporation on behalf of an
individual. In the case where a person, firm or corporation applied for the
license on behalf of an individual, the license shall be issued in the name of
the applicant and the license shall also bear the name of the vendor on whose
behalf the license is issued.
         (b)   All food vendor applicants shall submit with their application
evidence of approval from the Kanawha-Charleston Health Department for the type
of food to be sold.
         (c)   No license shall be issued or shall remain in effect unless such
vendor can demonstrate to the City Recorder proof of general public liability
insurance in the aggregate sum of $500,000, naming the city as additional
insured, with assurance that the city will be advised by the insurance carrier
if the insurance is canceled. In addition, such vendor shall enter into a hold-
harmless agreement with the city.
      (4)   Street sales. No person licensed as a vendor shall demonstrate,
sell or offer for sale or barter any goods, wares, merchandise, food,
confection or drink upon any street or sidewalk or any other city-owned
property within the city except in accordance with all of the following
provisions.
         (a)   No merchandise shall be displayed or sold except in the
locations designated by the City Recorder, and approved by the City Council.
         (b)   No merchandise shall be displayed or sold in a manner that
blocks, obstructs or restricts the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles in
the lawful use of the sidewalks, streets or public places or ingress or egress
to the abutting property.
         (c)   All merchandise shall be displayed or sold from portable tables,
carts or containers as approved by the City Recorder. Each street vendor shall
remove all merchandise, packaging, paper, display tables, carts or containers,
or other materials brought to the location at the termination of sales each
day.
         (d)   No street vendor’s table, cart, container or other
appurtenances, paraphernalia, merchandise, supplies or signage shall occupy an
area more than eight feet in width and 16 feet in length.
         (e)   Each street vendor during the period of selling shall keep the
area within ten feet of the location where the street vendor sells or displays
merchandise free from all litter and debris arising from the operations,
including the litter that arises from action of customers in disposing of
wrapping or packaging materials of merchandise sold by the street vendor.
         (f)   Street vendors shall at all times exercise reasonable care that
their merchandise, packaging material, display equipment and other
paraphernalia shall not create a safety or health hazard to customers or other
persons using the public streets, sidewalks or public places, or to persons on
or in abutting property.
         (g)   No street sales shall be conducted nor shall any display table,
cart, container or other appurtenances be permitted on any public property
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. daily. Any other ordinance
prescribing more restrictive hours shall prevail.
         (h)   No items of a pornographic nature shall be sold or displayed by
street vendors.
         (i)   The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument
or device in such a manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet
comfort and repose of store owners, employees or patrons in the vending area is
prohibited.
      (5)   Exception. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
the distribution or the sale of newspapers on the sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 733.13) (Ord. 09-06, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 12-6, passed 9-18-
2012) Penalty, see §
38.999
§ 38.083 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is hereby levied and shall be collected from persons actively engaged
in the practice, within the corporate limits of the city, of professions, trade
or activity recognized and regulated as such by the laws of the state which are
hereinafter named, an annual license tax as follows.
Profession, Occupation, Trade or Activity Price Per Unit
Profession, Occupation, Trade or Activity           Price Per Unit
Acupuncturist                                       $425
Alcoholic beverages (liquor and wine)
Wine
Supplier                                            $150
Distributor                                         $2,500
Retailer                                            $150
Wine specialty shop                                 $250
Wine tasting                                        $150
Private wine bed and breakfast                      $150
Private wine restaurant                             $250
Private wine spa                                    $150
Wine sampling license                               $150
Retailers, liquor
Class A license                                     $1,000
Class B license                                     $1,000
Class A (nonprofit social, veterans and fraternal   $375
clubs)
Class B (private club, membership of 1,000 or less) $500
Class C (private club, membership more than 1,000)  $1,250
Amusement or music devices
Less than 20:
1 device - each device                              $2
5 devices - each device                             $5
10 devices - each device                            $10
10 plus devices - each device                       $12.50
20 or more:
1 device - each device                              $50
5 devices - each device                             $150
10 devices - each device                            $225
10 plus devices - each device                       $300
Any device taking more than one denomination of
coin shall be licensed on the basis of the largest
denomination of coin taken or the total of the
coins necessary to make the device function or
operate.
Athlete agent                                       $10
Architects                                          $75
Attorney                                            $5
Auctioneer                                          $15
Baggage or parcel checking devices, vibrator        $0.50
machines and toilet lockers, sanitary napkins
Barber, beautician, manicurist                      $25
Barber or beautician school                         $250
Beer (state license shall be presented in Clerk’s
office)
Retail dealers:
Class A (restaurants, bars, clubs, fraternal and    $150
social organizations)
Class B (grocery store, chilled/unchilled)          $150
Distributor                                         $1,000
Brewer                                              $1,500
Brewpub                                             $1,000
Billiard or pool, first table                       $25
Each additional table                               $15
Bowling alley, first alley                          $25
Each additional alley                               $15
Certified public accountant                         $65
Chiropractors                                       $200
Circuses, carnivals (street or other)
For each performance, exhibit or entertainment -    $5
per week
Riding devices - per week                           $10
Concession selling services, goods, wares,          $5
merchandise, and food - per week per concession
Games of skill - per week per concession            $10
Candy or merchandise wheels - per day               $25
Collection agency                                   $100
Commercial rental (shall register and pay per unit) $15
Dental corporation                                  $150
Dental hygienist                                    $65
Dentists                                            $150
Embalmer and funeral director                       $80
Employment agencies                                 $100
Employment agency                                   $200
Engineers                                           $40
Fortune telling, palmist, phrenologist,             $200
spiritualist, clairvoyant, mind reader, medium
Funeral establishment                               $200
General contractors (shall register)                $100
Annual renewal                                      $50
Handyman (shall register)                           $25
Annual renewal                                      $25
General store                                       $15
Hawker and peddler
On foot                                             $10
Vehicle not exceeding one-half ton                  $15
Vehicle not exceeding one ton                       $50
Vehicle not exceeding two tons                      $100
                                                    $150, plus $100 for each
More than two tons                                  additional ton or fraction
                                                    thereof
Hearing aid fitters/dealers                         $100
5-49 beds                                           $20
50-99 beds                                          $30
100-199 beds                                        $40
200 or more beds                                    $50
Hotels, motels, boarding houses                     $2
Each bedroom in excess of seven                     $0.25 each up to $10
Insurance broker                                    $25
Insurance company                                   $50
Itinerant vendors                                   $500
Junk dealers
Resident junk dealer within city limits             $25
Resident junk dealer - no yard for storing          $25
Resident junk dealer’s agent                      $10
Itinerant junk collector                            $2
Non-resident junk dealer                            $150
Non-resident junk dealer’s agent                  $50
Land surveyor                                       $20
Landscape architects                                $100
Laundromats - car wash
1-5 devices                                         $15
6-9 devices - each                                  $3
10 or more devices                                  $30
Licensed forester                                   $15
Licensed practical nurse                            $40
Licensed social worker                              $30
Loan companies, credit union and banks              $50
Massage therapist                                   $30
Master electrician (shall register)                 $50
Master plumber (shall register)                     $50
Medical corporation                                 $300
Mid wives                                           $10
Motels, hotels, restaurants                         $10
Nursing home administrator                          $300
Occupational therapist                              $90
Optometrist                                         $325
Osteopathic physician/surgeon                       $100
Pawnbroker                                          $100
Personal care homes - per bed                       $4
Physical therapist                                  $60
Physicians, surgeons, podiatrist                    $50
Practical nurses                                    $5
Private detective/investigator                      $50
Professional counselors                             $75
Psychologists                                       $175
Radiological technologist                           $20
Real estate appraiser
State licensed residential licensee                 $265
State certified general licensee                    $465
State certified residential licensee                $315
Real estate broker                                  $100
Real estate sales person                            $50
Registered professional nurse                       $25
Residential rental (shall register and pay per      $15
unit)
Respiratory care therapist                          $65
Restaurants                                         $2
Each five chairs or spaces where persons are fed in $0.25/section up to $10
excess of ten
Social worker                                       $5
Special store                                       $5
Speech language audiologist                         $60
Speech language pathologist                         $60
Street vendors                                      $15
Theaters and public shows                           $40
Trading stamps                                      $175
Vending, merchandise or service machines (providing
product)
Less than 20:
1 device - each device                              $2
5 devices - each device                             $5
10 devices - each device                            $10
10 plus devices - each device                       $12.50
20 or more:
1 device                                            $50
5 devices                                           $100
10 devices                                          $150
10 plus devices                                     $250
Veterinarians                                       $225
All other business not listed above                 $25
 
(Prior Code, § 733.14) (Ord. 09-06, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 12-6, passed 9-18-
2012; Ord. passed 12-17-2019)
§ 38.084 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling containing a single dwelling unit and not more
than ten guest rooms or suites of rooms, where lodging is provided with or
without meals, for compensation for more than 30 days.
   CIGARETTES. Any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco,
irrespective of size or shape and whether or not such tobacco is flavored,
adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, the wrapper or cover of which
is made of paper or any other substance or material except tobacco.
   CITY. The City of Nitro, West Virginia.
   FAMILY. A group of persons who are connected by blood or law and within two
generations, and by any other method accepted under state law.
   GENERAL STORE. Includes any store or stores or any mercantile establishment
or establishments, in which goods, wares, or merchandise or any kind are
purchased, ordered, sold or offered for sale either at retail or wholesale.
   HAWKER. A person who sells merchandise on the street, road or highway, or
from door to door.
   HOTEL. Any facility or building, publicly or privately owned (including a
facility located in a state, county or municipal park), in which the public
may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall
include, but is not limited to, boarding houses, hotels, motels, inns, courts,
lodges, cabins and tourist homes. The term shall include state, county and city
parks offering accommodations as set forth in this subchapter. The term shall
not be construed to mean any hospital, sanitarium, extended care facility,
nursing home, university or college housing unit, or any facility providing
fewer than three hotel rooms, or any tent, trailer or camper campsites;
however, where a university or college housing unit provides sleeping
accommodations for the general nonstudent public for a consideration, the term
shall, if otherwise applicable, apply to such accommodations for the purposes
of this tax. A HOTEL, MOTEL or INN may include a restaurant, nightclub,
newsstand or tavern, provided that such uses are clearly accessory to the
principal use of overnight accommodations.
   ITINERANT JUNK COLLECTOR. Only those persons who gather junk from place to
place, and who have no fixed place of business.
   ITINERANT VENDOR.
      (1)   Includes all persons who engage or conduct within the city a
temporary or transient business of selling goods, wares and merchandise; and
who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, use, lease or occupy either
in whole or in part, a room, building or other structure, or who use, lease or
occupy for such purposes a room or rooms in any hotel or lodging house, for the
exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise; and the person so
engaged shall not be relieved from the provisions of this section by reason of
association temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer,
or by conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as
part of the business of, or in the name of, any local dealer, trader, merchant
or auctioneer.
      (2)   ITINERANT VENDOR includes:
         (a)   Commercial travelers or selling agents who make sales to persons
in the usual course of business;
         (b)   Commercial travelers or selling agents who make bona fide sales
of goods, wares or merchandise by sample for future delivery;
         (c)   Hawkers or peddlers on the streets, roads or highways, from
packs or vehicles;
         (d)   Persons selling farm or garden products derived from such
person’s farm or garden business activities;
         (e)   A society making sales for charitable, religious or benevolent
purposes; or
         (f)   Any person making judicial sales directed by law, or under the
orders of any court.
   JUNK. Old or scrap gold, copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper,
rubber, automobile parts, iron, steel and other old scrap ferrous or nonferrous
metals.
   JUNK DEALERS. All persons engaged in the business of buying or selling junk
as herein above defined.
   JUNK DEALER’S AGENTS. All persons who buy or sell junk for or on behalf of a
junk dealer, but the term JUNK DEALER’S AGENT shall not be construed to include
any persons regularly employed upon a salary by a regularly licensed junk
dealer engaged in such business within the city.
   MUNICIPAL LICENSE. The municipal license required by this subchapter to
practice the professions, occupations, trades and activities stated in §
38.083.
   NONRESIDENT JUNK DEALER or NONRESIDENT JUNK DEALER’S AGENT. Includes all
persons who act as junk dealers or junk dealer’s agents who are nonresidents of
the state, and all firms so engaged whose members are nonresidents of the city.
   ON-CAMPUS RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A building owned or controlled by an
educational institution and/or other institution of higher learning, or spaces
within buildings owned or controlled by an educational institution and/or other
institution of higher learning, where housing is provided exclusively for
students.
   OWNER or LANDLORD. One or more person(s), in whom is vested all or part of
the legal title to a rental unit, or all or part of the beneficial ownership
and a right to present use and enjoyment of the rental unit, including a
mortgagee in possession who rents or leases such rental unit either personally
or through a designated agent, to any tenant.
   PAWNBROKER. Any person engaged in the business of lending money on deposit
or pledge of personal property or other valuable thing, other than securities
or printed evidences of indebtedness, or in the business of purchasing personal
property, such as articles made of or containing gold, silver, platinum or
other precious metals or jewels of any description for the purpose of reducing
or smelting them into any form different from their condition or construction
when purchased and reselling or marketing the product.
   PEDDLER. A person who travels from place to place selling goods.
   PERSON. Any natural person, corporation, partnership or limited liability
company deemed to be actively engaged in the practice of any profession, trade
or activity previously specified in §
38.083 during any fiscal year, if that person is licensed by the state to
practice a particular profession and holds himself or herself out to the
public, or represents to the public that he or she is authorized and available
to practice a particular profession and maintains any office, place of
business, establishment or the like, within the corporate limits of the city,
or any other legal entity, executor, personal representative, government,
governmental subdivision or agency, estate, trust, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
   RENTAL UNIT. A room or group of rooms within any structure, building, house,
mobile home, or any portion thereof, arranged or designed to be occupied for
residential sleeping, living, cooking, and sanitation purposes by one or more
persons, which is leased or rented from the owner of such units, or the owner’s
designated agent, to any tenant, whether by day, week, month, year, or any
other term. The words RENTAL UNIT shall not include any of the exceptions
contained in §
38.086.
   RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT. The owner or a natural person designated by the
owner as the agent responsible for operating a rental unit in compliance with
the ordinances adopted by the city. In many instances, the RESPONSIBLE LOCAL
AGENT may be the owner if no other responsible party exists.
   SPECIAL STORE. Includes any store or stores or any mercantile establishment
or establishments, in which goods, wares or merchandise of any kind except
cigarettes, tobacco products and soft drinks are purchased, ordered, sold or
offered for sale, either at retail or wholesale, and which contains no coin
operated device, or devices, owned or operated by the store proprietor.
   STREET VENDOR.
      (1)   Includes any person, except an itinerant vendor, hawker or peddler,
who engages in or conducts, either as principal or agent, and whether working
independently or as part of an organized event under the umbrella of a
promoter, sponsor or organizer of an event in the city, a business selling
goods, wares, merchandise, food, confectionery or drink upon any street,
sidewalk or public park, regardless of whether the STREET VENDOR makes such
sales while occupying portable table, open sided cart or trailer, or a
motorized vehicle, or using a container.
      (2)   STREET VENDOR. Shall not apply to:
         (a)   Sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or selling agents
in the usual course of business;
         (b)   Bona fide sales of goods, wares or merchandise by samples for
future delivery; or
         (c)   Sidewalk sales carried on by a vendor.
   TENANT. Any individual who has, in exchange for monetary or other valuable
consideration, the temporary use and occupancy of real property owned by
another person in subordination to that other person’s title and with that
other person’s consent; for example, a person who rents or leases a rental unit
from an owner.
   VENDOR. Any person, whether selling at retail to the general public or
otherwise selling to a person engaged in business in the city, who is engaged
in this city in furnishing or rendering services or making sales of tangible
personal property; provided, that a VENDOR does not mean or include an
itinerant vendor, street vendor, hawker or peddler.
   WHOLESALER. Includes any person who:
      (1)   Purchases cigarettes directly from the manufacturer;
      (2)   Purchases cigarettes from any other person who purchases from the
manufacturer and who acquires the cigarettes solely for the purpose of bona
fide resale to retail dealers or to persons for the purposes or resale only; or
      (3)   Services retail outlets by the maintenance of an established place
of business for the purchase of cigarettes, including, but not limited to, the
maintenance of warehousing facilities for the storage and distribution of
cigarettes. A person may qualify in different capacities as both a WHOLESALER
and a retailer of cigarettes.
(Prior Code, § 733.15) (Ord. 09-06, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. passed 12-17-2019)
§ 38.085 PAYMENT.
   The license tax provided for in this subchapter shall be payable annually to
the City Recorder at his or her office in the City Building on or before July 1
of each year.
(Prior Code, § 733.16) (Ord. 91-3, passed 2-19-1991)
§ 38.086 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose and scope. It is the purpose of the city’s residential rental
properties section to assure that rental housing in the city is maintained in a
good, safe, and sanitary condition, to ensure that all rental units meet all
applicable building, fire, health, safety, and to provide an efficient system
for compelling both absentee and local landlords to correct violations and
maintain, in proper condition, rental property within the city within a timely
manner reducing recidivism. This section applies to any residential rental unit
located within the city. This section shall be construed liberally in order to
achieve the purposes and intent enunciated herein. The provisions of this
section shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, methods or processes
otherwise contained in any ordinance or law of the city, county or state. All
city employees meeting the criteria set forth in §
154.004(A) and (B) shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this
section and shall be referred to herein as Code Enforcement Officers.
   (B)   Exceptions. This section specifically excludes the following licensed
facilities:
      (1)   Transient occupancy in a hotel, motel, inn, bed and breakfast, or
other similar lodging facility;
      (2)   Group homes, community living arrangements or foster homes;
      (3)   Hospitals, nursing homes, congregate care facilities, assisted
living facilities, extended medical care facilities or other similar
facilities;
      (4)   Public housing, owned by a governmental agency, and any housing
owned or controlled by the Charleston-Kanawha Housing Authority;
      (5)   On-campus residential facilities owned, operated or managed by an
accredited college or university;
      (6)   Single-family dwellings that a family member of the owner occupies
and no gross income or like value is earned by the owner; and
      (7)   Residential facilities owned, operated or managed by or for the
benefit of a hospital, or by or for the benefit of any affiliate or supporting
organization of a hospital, providing housing exclusively for students,
trainees, interns or residents in medical, nursing, medical technologist or
other allied health care fields.
   (C)   Residential rental license required. On July 1, 2020 and thereafter,
it shall be unlawful for any owner to lease or rent, or hold out for rent or
lease by advertisement or otherwise, a rental unit located within the city
without possession of a valid residential rental license for that rental unit,
authorized by the city and complying with all provisions of this section. The
residential rental license requirement provided for in this section shall be in
addition to any general business license required in this section.
   (D)   Additional application requirements for residential rental license.
The residential rental license provided for in this section shall be in the
form of a certificate issued by the City Recorder as provided in §
38.071 to any owner making proper application on forms to be prescribed and
furnished by the City Recorder.
   (E)   Reason for denial of application.
      (1)   An application for a residential rental license may be denied if
the owner has:
         (a)   Delinquent business and occupation taxes related to income
derived by owner from rental units located within the city;
         (b)   Delinquent fees related to any rental units for which the owner
is applying for a residential rental license; or
         (c)   Fines due and owing to the city arising from building, planning
or zoning violations related to any rental unit for which the owner is applying
for a license.
      (2)   An application for a residential rental license shall be denied if
the city has reason to believe, following a reasonable and appropriate inquiry,
that one or more of the rental units is unfit for human occupancy or is located
in an unsafe structure, or three or greater violations have been given the
previous calendar 12 months.
   (F)   Applications.
      (1)   Applications for a residential rental license shall be filed with
the City Recorder’s office using the existing license forms, and shall include
the following:
         (a)   The street address of the rental unit(s);
         (b)   The number and types of rental unit(s);
         (c)   The square footage of each rental unit;
         (d)   Name, residence address, telephone number, e-mail address (if
applicable), mobile telephone number and facsimile number of all owners of the
rental unit(s);
         (e)   Name, residence address, telephone number, e-mail address (if
applicable), mobile telephone number, and facsimile number of the responsible
local agent designated by the owner, for each rental unit;
         (f)   The maximum number of tenants permitted for each rental unit;
         (g)   The name, address, telephone number, e-mail address (if
applicable), mobile telephone number and facsimile number of the person(s)
authorized to collect rent from the tenants if other than owner or responsible
local agent;
         (h)   The name, address, telephone number, e-mail address (if
applicable), mobile telephone number and facsimile number of the person
authorized to make or order repairs or services for the rental unit, if in
violation of city or state codes, if the person is other than the owner or the
responsible local agent;
         (i)   The name, address and telephone number of the bank or other
financial institution, if any, who holds a lien on the rental unit(s) or the
land on which the rental unit(s) is located; and
         (j)   The name, address and telephone number of the person designated
to accept all legal notices or services of process with respect to the rental
unit(s).
      (2)   The issuance of a residential rental license by the city for any
rental unit shall not constitute a finding by the city that the rental unit is
in compliance with any or all requirements imposed by city, state or federal
law or regulation.
   (G)   Responsible local agent.
      (1)   Where the owner is not a natural person, the owner information
shall be that of the president, general manager or other chief executive of the
organization who is duly authorized to execute the application. Where more than
one person has an ownership interest, the required information shall be
provided for each such owner. The owner and/or designated responsible local
agent shall be responsible for all of the following:
         (a)   Operating the licensed rental unit in compliance with all
applicable city, county or state laws related to building, fire, health, safety
or zoning;
         (b)   Providing access to the rental unit(s) for the purpose of
permitting any and all city inspections necessary to ensure compliance with
applicable city ordinances related to building, fire, health and safety,
including using all reasonable efforts to obtain permission from tenants for
access; and
         (c)   Maintaining a list of the names and number of occupants of each
rental unit for which he or she is responsible.
      (2)   Owners shall notify the City Recorder of any change in the
designation of the responsible local agent, including a change in name,
address, e-mail address, telephone number, mobile telephone number or facsimile
number of the designated responsible local agent within five business days of
the change. Within 30 days of any change of ownership of a rental unit, the new
owner shall apply for a residential rental license for that rental unit.
   (H)   Revocation of residential rental license. After adequate inquiry and
verification of the reasons therefore, the City Recorder, upon reasonable
written notice to the licensee, may revoke any residential rental license
issued by him or her pursuant to the provisions of this code for any reason
which would have been grounds for denial of such license when first issued, for
violation of any term or condition of such license, or for violation of any
applicable provision of state law, this code or other city ordinance related to
building, fire, health, safety or zoning. Any person having an interest in any
residential rental license so revoked and who disputes such revocation may
request that the City Recorder further investigate the grounds for revocation
and reconsider his or her action. If the City Recorder accedes to such request,
he or she may temporarily suspend or reinstate the residential rental license
pending his or her final decision. If the City Recorder refuses to accede to
such request or if, upon reconsideration, he or she affirms his or her
revocation of the residential rental license, his or her decision shall be
final, subject to such judicial review as may be provided by law.
   (I)   Periodic inspections. In addition to all other inspections permitted
herein or otherwise permitted by law, each rental unit shall be subject to
periodic internal and external inspection to determine compliance with the
provisions of this section and all other applicable city, county or state laws
related to building, fire, health, or safety; provided, that said periodic
inspections shall be conducted no more than once in any 12-month period for
each rental unit and within the following guidelines.
      (1)   No fee shall be charged for an inspection. Re-inspection fees shall
comply with division (K) below.
      (2)   Though not limiting after discovery of a violation, all residential
rental inspections shall emphasize life safety of occupants, with a standard
checklist adopted below.
      (3)   One passed inspection shall be conducted prior to new license
issuance.
      (4)   One passed inspection may be conducted prior to reissuance of
license, subject to discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer.
      (5)   One passed inspection shall be required as a result of the
following credible events:
         (a)   Violation issued by the city related to life safety;
         (b)   Complaint;
         (c)   Observation by an authorized official;
         (d)   Request by tenant or owner; or
         (e)   When the Fire Chief, Building Official, or their respective
designees have a reasonable belief that a condition exists related to the
rental unit which poses imminent danger to the tenant or the public.
      (6)   Adopted standard checklist for residential rental periodic
inspections:
         (a)   Address numbers are plainly legible and visible from the street
or road fronting the property;
         (b)   Roof must be maintained in a safe and sound condition and in
good repair based on visual inspection;
         (c)   Foundation is weather-proof, maintained and structurally sound;
         (d)   Exterior yard, stairs and decks are safe, structurally sound and
maintained;
         (e)   Exterior doors must have deadbolts and doors must operate
properly and be unobstructed;
         (f)   Exterior walls are reasonably weather-tight and water-tight,
structurally sound, rodent proof, and kept in a safe and sound condition;
         (g)   Structural components such as walls and floors are maintained in
a safe and sound condition and in good repair. Wall, floor and ceiling
coverings must be dry and free of moisture. Floor coverings are exposing
framing members or sheathing and will deteriorate structure if left unattended.
Dirt floors may not be present in any room used as a living space;
         (h)   There must be two reasonable ways out of each bedroom. One door
and one escapable window are sufficient. Must meet minimum size of seven feet
of any room dimension and 70 square feet in size;
         (i)   Heat source in the unit is permanent, working and able to
maintain a temperature of 68°F in every habitable space in the dwelling;
         (j)   Smoke and CO alarm requirements include: smoke alarms must be
present in all lawful spaces and CPs must be present when there is an attached
garage or a fuel fired appliance;
         (k)   Electrical must not have exposed wiring. A habitable room must
have an operable and permanently installed light fixture and an outlet. GFCIs
must be installed in all wet and damp locations and within six feet of a water
source;
         (l)   Electrical wiring must be permanent with no power strips or
extension cords needed for powering of basic equipment;
         (m)   Counters, cabinets, sinks and toilets must be tight fitting, not
made of porous material, and not pulling away from the framing member;
         (n)   Cooking appliances must be operational and 75% of appliance
still functioning;
         (o)   Refrigerator must operate as intended by the manufacturer;
         (p)   Hot water must reach at least 110°F after two minutes of running
water;
         (q)   Plumbing must be properly installed, sanitary and maintained in
good condition;
         (r)   Sewer must be connected to approved sewer, evidence of smells,
clogged or slow drains, leaking pipes and the like;
         (s)   Every unit has at least one directly accessible bathroom
(primary bathroom) that includes an operable toilet, sink and tub or shower,
all in safe and sound condition and sanitary working order;
         (t)   Visible evidence of rodents or insects such as bedbugs, ants,
cockroaches and the like. Must show evidence of sufficient treatment; and
         (u)   Garbage/rubbish not in a leak-proof container with a tight-
fitting lid, maintained behind the rear of the structure. No materials,
machinery or inoperable vehicle.
   (J)   Inspection procedures.
      (1)   Code Enforcement Officers shall be authorized to enter into a
rental unit at reasonable times to inspect the same, provided that permission
to enter the rental unit is obtained from the owner or responsible local agent,
or the tenant. If the rental unit is rented during the time of inspection, Code
Enforcement Officers shall obtain tenant’s consent for the inspection. The
owner(s) or their responsible local agent shall make commercially reasonable
efforts to notify tenants of planned inspections of their rental units to
secure the tenant’s consent. Owner shall also be solely responsible for
complying with state law regarding entrance into leased property. If an owner,
tenant or other person in charge of a rental unit refuses to permit
unrestricted access and entry to the rental unit, or any part thereof, for an
inspection authorized by this section, a Code Enforcement Officer may, upon a
showing that probable cause of refusal of a lawful entry to a rental unit, (per
Camara v. Municipal Court, 387 U.S. 523 (1967)), petition and obtain an order
to inspect and/or a search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (2)   No warranty is provided by the city for any failure of the landlord
to provide minimum living conditions or for the safety of the tenants.
   (K)   Notice of violation; corrective action; re-inspection.
      (1)   Whenever a Code Enforcement Officer determines that any rental unit
is in violation of applicable city or state laws related to building, fire,
health, safety or zoning, the Code Enforcement Officer shall provide written
notice of the violation to the owner or responsible local agent and shall
specify a reasonable time period in which the violation must be corrected.
Failure to correct violations within the time period specified by the Code
Enforcement Officer may result in an immediate revocation of the residential
rental license for that rental unit and may further subject the owner to the
penalties set forth in §
38.999, and any other penalties permitted under this code. No residential
rental license shall be revoked for failure to remedy a condition, so long as
the owner or responsible local agent is, in the discretion of the Code
Enforcement Officer, acting with due diligence and taking bona fide steps to
correct the violation, including, but not limited to, pursuing remedies under a
lease agreement with a tenant, but not greater than 30 days. These bona fide
steps may include submittal of plans, approved building permits, purchased
materials and/or contractor licenses obtained in anticipation of work to be
completed.
      (2)   Code Enforcement Officers may, in their discretion, perform one or
more re- inspections of a rental unit in which violations have occurred for the
purpose of verifying corrective action. If, in the discretion of the Code
Enforcement Officer, required repairs can reasonably be made at the time of
inspection, no re-inspection will be required and no re-inspection fee will be
charged.
      (3)   The fee for the first re-inspection shall be $50 per rental unit
inspected. The fee for the second and all subsequent re-inspections shall be
$100 per rental unit inspected. All fees shall be paid to the City Treasurer’s
office. If, in the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer, the need for re-
inspection has been a result of intentional damage by the tenant, the Code
Enforcement Officer may waive any re-inspection fee.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2019) Penalty, see §
38.999
HOTEL/MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
§ 38.100 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSIDERATION PAID or CONSIDERATION. The amount received in money, credits,
property or other consideration for or in exchange for the right to occupy a
hotel room.
   CONSUMER. A person who pays the consideration for the use or occupancy of a
hotel room. The term shall not be construed to mean the government of the
United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, or the government of the
state or any political subdivision of the state.
   CONVENTION AND VISITOR’S BUREAU. The Nitro Convention and Visitor’s Bureau,
which shall be nonstock, nonprofit corporation with a full-time staff working
exclusively to promote tourism and to attract conventions, conferences and
visitors to the city.
   CONVENTION CENTER. A convention facility owned by the city or other public
entity or instrumentality and shall include all facilities, including armories,
commercial, office, community service and parking facilities and publicly owned
facilities constructed or used for the accommodation and entertainment of
tourist and visitors, constructed in conjunction with the CONVENTION CENTER and
forming reasonable appurtenances to the CONVENTION CENTER.
   FISCAL YEAR. The year beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of the next
calendar year.
   HISTORIC SITES. Any site listed on the United States National Register of
Historic Places, or listed by a local historical landmarks commission,
established under state law, when such sites are owned by a city, a county or a
nonprofit historical association and are open, from time to time, to
accommodate visitors.
   HOTEL. Any facility or building, publicly or privately owned (including a
facility located in a state, county or municipal park), in which the public
may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall
include, but is not limited to, boarding houses, hotels, motels, inns, courts,
lodges, cabins and tourist homes. The term shall include state, county and city
parks offering accommodations as set forth in this subchapter. The term shall
not be construed to mean any hospital, sanitarium, extended care facility,
nursing home, university or college housing unit, or any facility providing
fewer than three hotel rooms, or any tent, trailer or camper campsites;
however, where a university or college housing unit provides sleeping
accommodations for the general nonstudent public for a consideration, the term
shall, if otherwise applicable, apply to such accommodations for the purposes
of this tax.
   HOTEL OPERATOR. The person who is proprietor of a hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, trustee in
possession, trustee in bankruptcy, receiver, executor or in any other capacity.
Where the HOTEL OPERATOR performs his or her functions through a managing agent
of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also
be deemed a HOTEL OPERATOR for the purposes of this subchapter and shall have
the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter by either the principal or the managing agent
shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
   HOTEL ROOM. Any room or suite of rooms or other facility affording sleeping
accommodations to the general public and situated within a hotel. The term
shall not be construed to mean a banquet room, meeting room or any other room
not primarily used for or in conjunction with sleeping accommodations.
   NET PROCEEDS. The gross amount of tax collection less the amount of tax
lawfully refunded.
   PROMOTION OF THE ARTS. Activity to promote public appreciation and interest
in one or more of the arts, it includes the promotion of music of all types,
the dramatic arts, dancing, painting and the creative arts through shows,
exhibits, festivals, concerts, musicals and plays.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. Includes any public park, parkway, playground,
public recreation center, athletic field, sports arena, stadium, skating rink
or arena, golf course, tennis courts and other park and recreational
facilities, whether of a like or different nature, that are owned by the city.
   TAX, TAXES or THIS TAX. The hotel occupancy tax authorized by this
subchapter.
   TAXING AUTHORITY. The City of Nitro.
   TAXPAYER. Any person liable for the tax authorized by this subchapter.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.101 IMPOSITION.
   There is imposed a municipal hotel tax upon all hotels located within the
corporate limits of the city, including any hotels owned by the state or by any
political subdivision of the state. The tax shall be imposed on the consumer
and shall be collected by the hotel operator as part of the consideration paid
for the occupancy of a hotel room; provided, that the tax shall not be imposed
on any consumer occupying a hotel room for 30 or more consecutive days.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.102 RATE.
   The rate of tax imposed by this subchapter shall be 6% of the consideration
paid for the use or occupancy of a hotel room. Such consideration shall not
include the amount of tax imposed on the transaction under W. Va. Code Chapter
11, Article 15, as amended, or charges for meals, valet service, room service,
telephone service, or other charges or consideration not paid for use or
occupancy of a hotel room.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.103 COLLECTION WHEN SALE ON CREDIT.
   A hotel operator doing business wholly or partially on a credit basis shall
require the consumer to pay the full amount of tax due upon a credit sale at
the time such sale is made or within 30 days thereafter.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.104 CONSUMER TO PAY TAX; DUTIES OF HOTEL OPERATOR.
   (A)   The consumer shall pay to the hotel operator the amount of tax imposed
by the city, which tax shall be added to and shall constitute a part of the
consideration paid for the use and occupancy of the hotel room, and which tax
shall be collectible as such by the hotel operator, who shall account for and
remit to the city all taxes paid by consumers. The hotel operator shall
separately state the tax authorized by this subchapter on all bills, invoices,
accounts, books of account and records relating to consideration paid for
occupancy or use of a hotel room. The hotel operator may commingle tax
collected under this subchapter with the proceeds of the rental of hotel
accommodations. The city’s claim shall be enforceable against and shall be
superior to all other claims against the moneys so commingled, excepting only
claims of the state for moneys held by the hotel pursuant to the provisions of
W. Va. Code Chapter 11, Article 15, as amended. All taxes collected pursuant to
the provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed to be held in trust by the
hotel until they shall have been remitted to the taxing authority as provided
in this subchapter.
   (B)   A hotel or hotel operator shall not represent to the public in any
manner, directly or indirectly, that it will absorb all or any part of the tax
or that the tax is not to be considered an element in the price to be collected
from the consumer.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.105 EXEMPTIONS FOR GOVERNMENT AGENCIES OR EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Hotel room occupancy billed directly to the federal government shall
be exempt from this tax; however, rooms paid for by a federal government
employee for which reimbursement is made shall be subject to this tax.
   (B)   Hotel room occupancy billed directly to the state or its political
subdivisions shall be exempt from this tax; however, rooms paid for by an
employee of the state for which reimbursement is made shall be subject to this
tax.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.106 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   Generally. The net proceeds of the tax collected and remitted to the
taxing authority pursuant to this subchapter shall be deposited into the
General Revenue Fund of the city and, after appropriation, shall be expended
only as provided in divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   Required expenditures. At least 50% of the net revenue receivable by
the city during the fiscal year pursuant to this subchapter shall be
transmitted to the Nitro Convention and Visitor’s Bureau for the promotion of
conventions and tourism; provided, that if a convention and visitor’s bureau is
not located within the city, the required percentage of the net revenues
received from this tax shall be distributed to the convention and visitor’s
bureau in Putnam County and Kanawha County as required by W. Va. Code 7-18-1 et
seq., and such distribution shall be made based on the revenue received from
the hotels located in those counties; provided, however, that the distribution
to the convention and visitor’s bureau in Putnam County and Kanawha County
shall cease when operation of the city’s Convention and Visitor’s Bureau
commences.
   (C)   Permissible expenditures. After making the appropriation required by
division (B) above, the remaining portion of the net revenues receivable by the
city during the fiscal year pursuant to this subchapter may be expended for one
or more of the purposes set forth in this division (C), but for no other
purpose. The purposes for which expenditures may be made pursuant to this
division (C) are as follows:
      (1)   The planning, construction, reconstruction, establishment,
acquisition, improvement, renovation, extension, enlargement, equipment,
maintenance, repair and operation of publicly owned convention facilities,
including, but not limited to, arenas, auditoriums, civic centers and
convention centers;
      (2)   The payment of principal or interest, or both, on revenue bonds
issued to finance such convention facilities;
      (3)   The promotion of conventions;
      (4)   The construction, operation or maintenance of public parks, tourist
information centers and recreation facilities (including land acquisition);
      (5)   The promotion of the arts;
      (6)   Historic sites; and
      (7)   Beautification projects.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.107 ANNUAL REPORTS BY CONVENTION AND VISITOR’S BUREAUS.
   Each year, on or before August 15, the city’s Convention and Visitor’s
Bureau shall file with the city a statement, including an income statement and
balance sheet, showing all amounts of hotel occupancy tax appropriated to the
city’s Convention and Visitor’s Bureau and all expenditures of hotel occupancy
tax made by the city’s Convention and Visitor’s Bureau for the prior fiscal
year.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.108 LIABILITY OF HOTEL OPERATOR FOR FAILURE TO COLLECT OR REMIT.
   If any hotel operator fails to collect the tax authorized by and levied
pursuant to this subchapter, or shall fail to properly remit such tax to the
taxing authority, he or she shall be personally liable for such amount as he or
she failed to collect or remit; however, such hotel operator shall not be held
liable for failure to collect such tax if the hotel operator can, by good and
substantial evidence, prove the refusal of the purchaser to pay such tax,
despite the diligent effort in good faith of the hotel operator to collect the
tax.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.109 TOTAL AMOUNT COLLECTED TO BE REMITTED.
   No profit shall accrue to any person as a result of the collection of the
tax authorized by this subchapter. Notwithstanding that the total amount of
such taxes collected by a hotel operator may be in excess of the amount for
which a consumer would be liable by the application of the levy of 6% for the
occupancy of hotel rooms, the total amount of all taxes collected by any hotel
operator shall be remitted to the taxing authority as provided in this
subchapter.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.110 RETURNS AND REMITTANCES GENERALLY.
   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be due and payable in monthly
installments on or before the fifteenth day of the calendar month next
succeeding the month in which the tax accrued; however, for credit sales in
which the tax authorized by this subchapter is not collected by the hotel
operator at the time of such sales, such tax shall not, for the purposes of
this subchapter, be regarded as having accrued until either the date on which
it is received by the hotel operator or the expiration of the 30-day payment
period set forth in §
38.103, whichever shall first occur. The hotel operator shall, on or before the
fifteenth day of each month, prepare and deliver to the city a return for the
preceding month, in the form prescribed by the city. Such form shall include
all information necessary for the computation, collection and subsequent
distribution of the tax as the city may require. A remittance for the amount of
the tax due shall accompany each return. Each return shall be signed by the
hotel operator or his or her duly authorized agent.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.111 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES GENERALLY.
   The administrative procedures for the assessment, collection and refund of
the tax authorized by this subchapter shall conform as closely as possible to
those for the business and occupation tax; provided, that the City Treasurer is
authorized to establish different or additional procedures to aid in the
efficient administration of the tax.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.112 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully refuse to collect or to pay
the tax or to willfully refuse to make the return required to be made by this
subchapter; or to willfully make any false or fraudulent return or false
statement in any return with the intent to defraud any taxing authority; or to
willfully evade the payment of the tax, or any part of the tax; or for any
person to willfully aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of
the tax, or any part of the tax; or for any officer, partner or principal of
any corporation or association to willfully make or willfully permit to be made
for such corporation or association any false return, or any false statement in
any return authorized by this subchapter, with the intent to evade the payment
of such tax.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008) Penalty, see §
38.999
§ 38.113 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   The tax imposed and levied by this subchapter, if not paid when due,
shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the due date of the return
until paid.
   (B)   If any hotel operator fails to make the return of any quarterly
installment required by this subchapter, or makes his or her return but fails
to remit in whole or in part the proper amount of tax, there shall be added to
the amount of tax unpaid, from the date such tax should have been paid, a
penalty in the amount of 5% of the tax for the first month, or fraction of a
month, of delinquency and 1% of the tax for each succeeding month, or fraction
of a month, of delinquency; provided, that if such failure is due to
responsible cause, the City Treasurer may waive in whole or in part these
penalties.
   (C)   Interest and penalties may be collected in the same manner as the tax
imposed by this subchapter.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.114 PRIORITY OF TAX IN RECEIVERSHIP, BANKRUPTCY, AND SIMILAR PROCEEDINGS.
   In the distribution, voluntary or compulsory, in receivership, bankruptcy or
otherwise of the property or estate of any person, all taxes due and unpaid
authorized under this subchapter shall be paid from the first money available
for distribution in priority to all claims and liens, except taxes and debts
due to the United States, which, under federal law, are given priority over the
debts and liens created by municipal ordinance for this tax, and taxes and
debts due to the state. Any person charged with the administration or
distribution of any such property or estate who shall violate the provisions of
this section shall be personally liable for any taxes accrued and unpaid which
are chargeable against the person whose property or estate is in administration
or distribution.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.115 LIABILITY OF OFFICERS OF ASSOCIATIONS OR CORPORATIONS.
   If the taxpayer is an association or corporation, the officers actually
participating in the management or operation of the association or corporation
shall be personally liable, jointly and severally, for any default on the part
of the association or corporation; and payment of tax, fines, additions to tax
or penalties which may be imposed by state law, city ordinance or other
authority may be enforced against such officers as against the association or
corporation which they represent.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
§ 38.116 RECORDS.
   Each hotel operator shall keep complete and accurate records of taxable
sales and of charges, together with a record of the tax collected, and shall
keep all invoices and other pertinent documents in such form as the taxing
authority may require. Such records and other documents shall be preserved for
a period of not less than three years unless the taxing authority shall consent
in writing to their destruction within that period or shall require that they
be kept for a longer period.
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008)
PUBLIC UTILITY TAX
§ 38.130 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE. All services and tangible personal property
purchased within this city from a seller, as hereinafter in this section
defined, namely, telephone service; electric service; gas service, including
bottled or liquid gas, if the seller thereof is classified as a public utility
subject to the jurisdiction of the state’s Public Service Commission; water
service and sanitary sewer service; if purchased, used or consumed within the
corporate limits of the city.
   PURCHASER. Includes every person who purchases, uses or consumes a public
utility service.
   SELLER. Includes every person, whether a public service corporation, a
municipality or private corporation, classified as a public utility and subject
to the jurisdiction of the state’s Public Service Commission, who sells,
furnishes or supplies a public utility service.
   USER. The owner or tenant of private residential property or the owner or
tenant of property used for commercial or industrial purposes, and every
combination thereof, of every kind or description.
(Prior Code, § 749.01)
§ 38.131 TAX IMPOSED UPON CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS WITH CERTAIN PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   An excise tax upon the privilege of purchasing, using or consuming within
the corporate limits of the city any public utility service and tangible
personal property supplied by any public utility subject to the jurisdiction of
the state’s Public Service Commission (whether such public utility be privately
or municipally owned or otherwise owned by any type of governmental entity) is
hereby imposed and levied as provided in the following sections of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 749.02)
§ 38.132 IMPOSITION; AMOUNT OF TAX.
   There is hereby imposed and levied upon each and every purchaser of a public
utility service an excise tax upon the privilege of purchasing, using or
consuming, within the corporate limits of the city, such public utility
service. Such tax shall be in the amount of 2% of the charge (exclusive of any
federal or state tax thereon) made by the seller against the purchaser with
respect to each public utility service, which tax in every case shall be
collected by the seller and paid by the purchaser upon the amount of each
periodic statements rendered such purchaser by the seller, and shall be paid by
the purchaser to the seller at the time the purchase price or such charge shall
become due and payable under the agreement between the purchaser and the
seller. The tax imposed and levied by this subchapter is in addition to all
other taxes imposed and levied by the city. In the event the amount of the
charge for any single public utility service exceeds the sum of $20,000 in any
given calendar month, to any single purchaser, no tax shall be imposed for such
additional purchase, use or consumption in excess of such amount of $20,000. In
the event more than one public utility shall furnish the identical public
utility service to the same purchaser, that purchaser shall be entitled to
group the same as a single public utility service in calculating the amount of
the charges in any calendar month for such public utility service.
(Prior Code, § 749.03)
§ 38.133 COLLECTION; PAYMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every seller, in acting as the tax collecting
medium or agency for the city, to collect from each purchaser, for the use of
the city, the tax hereby imposed and levied at the time of collecting the
purchase price charged for its public utility service; and the amount of tax
actually collected during each calendar month shall be reported by each seller
to the city and each seller shall remit to the city the amount of tax shown by
such report to have been collected on or before the last day of the second
calendar month following the month in which collected, together with the name
and address of any purchaser who has failed or refused to pay the tax so
imposed and levied.
   (B)   The required reports shall be in the form prescribed by the official
of the city charged with the responsibility of collecting taxes due the city.
(Prior Code, § 749.04)
§ 38.134 RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY USERS; INSPECTION THEREOF.
   Each and every seller shall keep and maintain complete records showing all
purchases of public utility services within the corporate limits of the city,
which records shall show the charge made against each purchaser, the dates such
public utility services were furnished, the date of payment therefor and the
amount of tax imposed hereunder; and such records shall be kept open for
inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times, and
the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and
authority to make, at the expense of the city, such transcripts thereof during
such times as they may desire.
(Prior Code, § 749.05)
§ 38.135 EXEMPTED TRANSACTIONS.
   The tax imposed and levied by this subchapter shall not apply to the
following transactions, which transactions are hereby exempted from such tax:
   (A)   Purchase of public utility service for resale;
   (B)   Purchase of public utility service by the United States of America,
the state and the political subdivisions, municipalities, boards, commissions,
authorities and public corporations thereof;
   (C)   Purchase of tangible personal property such as appliances or the like,
as distinguished from the public service supplied;
   (D)   Charges for telephone service which are paid by the insertion of coins
into coin-operated telephones, and specific charges or tolls for telephone
calls to points outside the corporate limits of the city; and
   (E)   Nonrecurring or one-time charges incidental to the furnishing of
public utility service.
(Prior Code, § 749.06)
§ 38.136 NONLIABILITY OF UTILITY; REFUNDS; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   There shall be no liability upon the seller for erroneously collecting
the tax hereby imposed and levied or for erroneously failing to bill for such
tax as a result of a good faith mistake on the part of the seller. When any
purchaser contends that such tax is not owed by such purchaser on the ground
that the public utility service was not purchased, used or consumed within the
corporate limits of the city, the seller shall refer the question to the City
Treasurer and such seller shall thereafter collect or refrain from collecting
such tax from such purchaser for such public utility service as instructed in
writing to do by the Treasurer. Any and all claims for refunds of any such tax
shall be presented to the city and not to the seller.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall have the authority to promulgate and enforce
reasonable rules and regulations necessary for the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 749.07)
§ 38.137 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any amount of tax due and unpaid under this subchapter shall be a debt due
the city, and shall be a personal obligation of the purchaser and shall be a
lien upon all of the property of the purchaser. The lien shall have priority
over all other liens and obligations except those due the state and the United
States of America. Any such lien shall attach when the obligation to pay such
tax accrues. The lien shall be enforceable by the city as any other lien
against the property of a debtor.
(Prior Code, § 749.08)
§ 38.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   No person shall refuse to make any return required to be made by §§
38.001 to
38.032; or shall make any false or fraudulent return or false statement in any
return, with intent to defraud the city or evade the payment of the tax, or any
part thereof, imposed by §§
38.001 to
38.032, nor shall any person aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the
payment of the tax, or any part thereof, imposed by §§
38.001 to
38.032; nor shall the president, vice president, secretary or treasurer of any
corporation make or permit to be made for any corporation or association any
false return or any false statement in any return required in §§
38.001 to
38.032, with the intent to evade the payment of any tax hereunder. Whoever
violates any provision of §§
38.001 to
38.032 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a
term not to exceed state law, or both. In addition to the foregoing penalties,
any person who knowingly swears to or verifies any false or fraudulent return,
or any return containing any false or fraudulent statement with the intent
aforesaid shall be guilty of the offense of false swearing and shall be
punished in the manner provided by law. Any corporation for which a false
return, or a return containing a false statement, as aforesaid, shall be made,
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed state law.
(Prior Code, § 711.99)
   (C)   (1)   Whoever actively engages in the practice of, within the meaning
of §§
38.070 to
38.086, any profession named herein, without first paying the license tax
herein provided for, shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law. Each day
that such person shall practice without such license shall constitute a
separate offense.
      (2)   Any owner who leases or rents, or holds out for rent by
advertisement or otherwise, a rental unit within the city without possession of
a valid residential rental license for that rental unit, or who otherwise fails
to comply with the requirements of §§
38.070 to
38.086 shall be subject to a fine of an amount not to exceed state law per
rental unit. Each month the violation exists shall constitute a separate
violation.
      (3)   The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or
revocation of a license, permit or franchise, or other administrative
sanctions. Violations of §§
38.070 to
38.086 that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may
be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty
does not prevent injunctive relief. Violations of §§
38.070 to
38.086 shall be adjudicated through the City Municipal Court.
(Prior Code, § 733.99)
   (D)   (1)   Any person willfully violating any of the provisions of §§
38.100 to
38.116 shall, for the first offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be subject to the penalty set forth in §
10.99.
      (2)   Every prosecution for any offense arising under §§
38.100 to
38.116 shall be commenced within three years after the offense was committed,
notwithstanding any provision of these codified ordinances to the contrary.
      (3)   Proceedings against any person under this division (D) shall be
initiated in the county of the state wherein such person resides if any element
of the offense occurs in such county of residence, or if no element of the
offense occurs in such county of residence, in Kanawha County.
      (4)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         EVADE. To willfully and fraudulently commit any act with the intent of
depriving the city of payment of any tax which there is a known legal duty to
pay.
         FRAUD. Any false representation or concealment as to any material fact
made by any person with the knowledge that it is not true and correct, with the
intention that such representation or concealment be relied upon by the city.
         WILLFULLY. The intentional violation of a known legal duty to perform
any act required to be performed by any provision of §§
38.100 to
38.116 in respect of which the violation occurs; provided, that the mere
failure to perform any act shall not be a willful violation under §§
38.100 to
38.116. A WILLFUL violation of §§
38.100 to
38.116 requires that the defendant have had knowledge of or notice of a duty to
perform such act, and that the defendant, with knowledge of or notice of such
duty, intentionally failed to perform such act.
   (D)   (1)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
38.130 through
38.137, or any regulation promulgated under §§
38.130 through
38.137, shall be subject to a fine of an amount not to exceed state law plus
court costs, and shall also be required to pay all delinquent municipal service
fees which the person owes; provided, that any owner of a business unit, multi-
business complex, or multi- family dwelling, four units or larger, violating
this subchapter, or any regulations promulgated under this subchapter, shall be
subject to a fine of an amount not to exceed state law plus court costs, and
shall also be required to pay all delinquent municipal service fees which the
person owes; provided, however, that any owner of any other commercial
establishment violating this subchapter, or any regulations promulgated under
this subchapter, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed state law plus court
costs, and shall also be required to pay all delinquent municipal service fees
which the person owes.
      (2)   If the property owner is an individual who is found guilty, and the
total amount of delinquent municipal service fees, as well as the fine and
court costs imposed by the court are not paid within 90 days subsequent to when
the City Municipal Court renders its decision, the city shall notify the
state’s Division of Motor Vehicles of the court’s decision and the property
owner’s failure to make the appropriate payment, and request the state’s
Division of Motor Vehicles suspend the property owner’s license to operate a
motor vehicle until such time as the fine, court costs and delinquent municipal
service fees are paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 749.99)
(Ord. 08-, passed 11-3-2008; Ord. passed 12-17-2019)
CHAPTER 39: FEES
Section
Municipal Service Fees
   
39.001   Council findings
   
39.002   Imposition; rate
   
39.003   Delinquent accounts
   
39.004   Posting of list of delinquent property owners
   
39.005   Issuance of permits and licenses prohibited
   
39.006   Automatic property lien
   
39.007   Suspension of license to operate a motor vehicle
   
39.008   Payment of delinquent municipal service fees when transferring
property
   
39.009   Recordation of deeds
   
39.010   City Treasurer’s discretion
   
39.011   Report by City Treasurer to Council
   
39.012   Fee schedule
Liens
   
39.025   Findings
   
39.026   Application
   
39.027   Definitions
   
39.028   Filing a lien for delinquent municipal service fees
   
39.029   Filing a lien for delinquent decontamination or demolition of
contaminated structure fees
   
39.030   Filing a lien for unpaid property maintenance fee
   
39.031   Filing a lien for unpaid emergency services user fee
   
39.032   Filing of other liens
   
39.033   Release of liens
   
39.034   Delinquent fees and taxes collected when property transferred
Emergency Services User Fee
   
39.045   Findings
   
39.046   Definitions
   
39.047   Fee imposed; exemptions
   
39.048   Fire protection service fee for nonresident businesses and residences
   
39.048   Fire service contracts for nonresidential businesses and residences
   
39.050   Charge for responding to fire calls outside the city
   
39.051   City Treasurer to recommend change in user fee amount
   
39.052   Report by the City Treasurer to the City Council
   
39.053   Motor vehicle emergencies
MUNICIPAL SERVICE FEES
§ 39.001 COUNCIL FINDINGS.
   (A)   The City Council finds that the Municipal Home Rule Board, under the
authority provided in W. Va. Code 8-1-5a, approved the city’s Home Rule, Phase
II Application which included, among other actions, the request for
authorization to enact an ordinance that:
      (1)   Creates an automatic lien that attaches to all real property
immediately upon the imposition of all city municipal fees respecting such
property;
      (2)   Authorizes the city to foreclose on said property, under applicable
state law respecting foreclosure procedures, without the requirement of going
to Circuit Court;
      (3)   Requires closing agents, attorneys and others, to contact the city
prior to closing any real estate transaction involving real property located
within the city to determine the amount of delinquent fees and that all such
delinquent fees be paid in full from/at closing; and
      (4)   Requires the transferee of real property located within the city to
record the deed to the property with the Clerk of the county in which the
property is located, and that the deed be recorded within 12 months of the date
the transfer occurs.
   (B)   The City Council believes that it is in best interests of the city and
the residents of the city to provide for the uniform imposition and collection
of the municipal service fee.
   (C)   The City Council hereby determines that insofar as some residents
allow the municipal service fee imposed on their respective properties to
become delinquent, the city should take necessary and appropriate actions to
collect those delinquent municipal service fees.
(Ord. 15-, passed 6-2-2015)
§ 39.002 IMPOSITION; RATE.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby levied and shall be collected a charge against
residential users of municipal services situated within the city for essential
municipal services, including police protection, fire protection, street
lighting, street maintenance, street cleaning, street improvements, ambulance
service, recreation and garbage and refuse collection, (excluding sewage and
sewage disposal and other essential municipal services). The charge for such
services shall be at the rate of $25 per month or $75 per quarter for each
single-family unit residence, per unit, and for each multiple-family dwelling
or apartment house, per each residential unit or apartment, whether or not
occupied; provided, that the billing shall be subject to the restrictions
stated in division (B) below; provided, however, that in accordance with
division (F) below, the foregoing charge for municipal services may be revised
without further amendment to this division (A); provided further, that on and
after March 1, 2009, the record owner of the property upon which a single-
family residence, multi-family dwelling or apartment house is situated shall
pay the charge imposed by this section on each of those properties.
      (2)   There is hereby levied and shall be collected a charge against
commercial users of municipal services situated within the city for essential
municipal services, including police protection, fire protection, street
lighting, street maintenance, street cleaning, street improvements, ambulance
service, recreation and garbage and refuse collection, (excluding sewage and
sewage disposal and other essential municipal services). The minimum charge for
such services shall be at a rate of $25 per month or $75 per quarter for each
commercial business, per unit, and in buildings where there are more than one
commercial business unit, firm or corporation, each unit or business unit, firm
or corporation, shall be considered as a separate unit with respect to service
rendered under the terms hereof, and with the duty of subscribing for service
and paying for service to the respective commercial unit; provided, that the
billing shall be subject to the restrictions stated in division (B) below;
provided, however, that in accordance with division (F) below, the foregoing
charge for municipal services may be revised without further amendment to this
division (A); provided further, that on and after March 1, 2009, the record
owner of the property upon which a commercial business unit or multi-business
complex is situated shall pay the charge imposed by this section on each of
those properties. Any business establishment requiring collection of garbage or
refuse more frequently than once a week or having more than 100 pounds per week
shall enter into a separate agreement with the City Treasurer for said
collection. The minimum monthly charge of $25 is hereby levied and shall be
collected against all business entities within the city; provided, that the
minimum monthly fee levied against business entities that contracts with others
for garbage and refuse collection shall be $5 less than the minimum monthly
charge levied and collected against business entities within the city that use
city services for garbage and refuse collection.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall be charged with the duty of mailing a
statement on a monthly basis to each residence and business to be charged with
the municipal fee hereby imposed for the fee due for the preceding month;
provided, that on and after October 1, 2025, the City Treasurer shall mail a
statement on a quarterly basis to each residence and business to be charged
with the municipal fee hereby imposed for the fee due for the preceding
quarter, but failure to mail any statement for the municipal service fee
charges incurred shall not be grounds for avoiding payment. A statement shall
be mailed by the Treasurer at least as frequently as once each quarter and any
such statement may be consolidated by the Treasurer with statements for other
municipal fees and services due from such person or business entity. If a
quarterly statement is mailed by the Treasurer, it may be mailed each quarter
on a date selected by the Treasurer but the Treasurer shall render the
quarterly billing to such person or business entity in a uniform manner so that
each quarterly bill is mailed at intervals of approximately 90 days.
   (C)   Subject to such reasonable regulations as may be promulgated by the
City Treasurer and approved by City Council, the record owner of the property
upon which a single-family residence or business is situated shall be presumed
to be the user of municipal service rendered for the benefit of such property
or business and the record owner shall be liable to the city for such charges;
the tenants or occupants of the business units or of the multi-business complex
or residential units of a multi-family dwelling or apartment house shall be
presumed to be the users of such municipal services and shall be liable to the
city for such charges. However, in the event that a business unit or business
unit of a multi- business complex or a residential unit of a multi-family
dwelling or apartment house is temporarily unoccupied, then and in that event,
the record owner of the property upon which such multi-business unit or multi-
family dwelling or apartment house is situated shall be presumed to be the user
of the municipal services provided to each such unoccupied unit and shall be
liable to the city for such charges. Subject to such reasonable regulations as
may be promulgated by the City Treasurer as aforesaid, the record owner of the
property upon which such multi-business unit, multi-family dwelling or
apartment house is situated shall be charged with the responsibility of
collecting in advance, the charge imposed by this section from the tenants or
occupants of such business units, dwelling units or apartments and properly
remitting same to the City Treasurer and shall be liable to the city in the
amount of such charges for failure to do so or for failure to maintain adequate
records from which such liability may be ascertained; provided, that on and
after March 1, 2009, the record owner of the property upon which a business
unit, multi-business complex, single-family residence, multi-family dwelling or
apartment house is situated is presumed to be the user of the services for
which the municipal service fee is imposed and shall pay the charge imposed by
this section on each of those properties, shall properly remit all municipal
service fees due and payable to the City Treasurer no later than the final day
of the quarter for which the municipal service fee was imposed, and shall be
liable to the city for the amount of charges not remitted or for failure to
maintain adequate records from which such liability may be ascertained.
   (D)   When the aggregate gross income during the preceding calendar year of
all persons residing in a single-family residential unit located in the city
was less than $15,560 if one person, $21.150 if two persons, $26,650 if three
persons, $32,150 if four persons, and an additional $5,500 for each additional
person after four persons, the municipal service fee to such single-family
residential unit during the current year shall be reduced to an amount that is
$10 less per month or $30 per quarter than the amount charged for residential
units that do not qualify for the reduced rate; provided, that in order to
qualify for such reduced rate, all of the residents who occupy such single-
family residential unit, and who were employed at any time during the preceding
year, shall join in making an application for such reduced rate to the City
Treasurer and shall file an affidavit providing all relevant facts; provided
however, that all such residents shall attach to the application a copy of each
Internal Revenue Service Form 1040 ES filed by and each Internal Revenue
Service Form W-2 received by each of the residents demonstrating all estimated
income tax payments made and all wages earned during the calendar year
preceding the current year in which application is made; provided further, that
in order for a previously qualified residential unit to continue to receive the
reduced rate, a new application with all supporting documentation shall be
filed with the City Treasurer in the manner stated in this division (D).
      (1)   For owner occupied single-family residences, on and after March 1,
2009, the City Treasurer shall notify the record owner if the qualifications
are satisfied and, if those qualifications are satisfied, the record owner
shall pay the reduced municipal service fee.
      (2)   For single-family residential units occupied by tenants, on and
after March 1, 2009, the City Treasurer shall inform the record owner of each
single-family residential unit that qualifies for the reduced municipal service
fee and the record owner of that property shall pay the reduced municipal
service fee for each qualified single-family residential unit.
      (3)   The rate and charge shall become effective retroactively to the
first day of the calendar quarter in which such application is made and the
affidavit with supporting documentation is filed. In the event any person
making application for reduced charges shall submit any false, erroneous or
untrue information relative to the eligibility or qualifications of the
applicant for such reduced charges as set forth herein, any such person
supplying such false, erroneous or untrue information shall be subject to a
penalty equal to 150% of the prevailing rate then in effect and the property
wherein that person resides shall not be eligible for the reduced municipal
service fee.
   (E)   The City Treasurer is hereby authorized to adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary for him or her to determine, and he or she
shall determine, the classification of businesses, residences, multiple
dwellings, business complexes and other buildings and premises for the
application of rates, fees and charges established by any schedule, enacted by
Council pursuant to this section; and any person or business feeling aggrieved
by the application of any such rule or regulation of the City Treasurer to any
rate, fee or charge sought to be collected from it or him or her by the City
Treasurer shall have the burden of proof to show that the City Treasurer’s rule
or regulation is erroneous.
   (F)   The City Treasurer shall annually, but no later than March 1, compose
and provide to the City Council for Council’s authorization a schedule of
rates, fees and charges to be imposed under this section and §
50.25 for the forthcoming fiscal year. Council may revise or authorize without
revision the schedule of rates, fees and charges so as to assure that costs
will be distributed as equitably as possible among all businesses and residents
of the city on the basis of benefit received. At no time, however, shall rates
be continued that are disclosed to be producing less revenue than is required
to meet all obligations and costs involved in rendering services to the public.
(Prior Code, § 741.01) (Ord. 09-01, passed 2-17-2009; Ord. 15-, passed 6-16-
2015; Ord. passed 10-7-2025)
§ 39.003 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   An account shall be considered delinquent if not paid by the last day
of each month following the month for which the service is rendered. A
delinquent account shall be subject to stoppage of service with notice. Any
billing unpaid by the last day of the month following the month for which the
services were rendered shall be charged a delinquent fee amounting to 1.5% of
the unpaid billing, and such delinquent fee shall be added to and become part
of the amount of the unpaid municipal service fee; provided, that for each
subsequent month the municipal service fee remains unpaid, an additional
delinquent fee equal to 1.5% of the unpaid municipal service fee shall be added
to and become part of the unpaid municipal service fee.
   (B)   After the delinquent fee has been assessed, the city shall notify the
property owner of the amount owed; that the delinquent fee will continue to be
imposed for each month the municipal service fee remains unpaid; that failure
to properly pay the municipal service fee as required by §
39.002 is a violation of this subchapter, as amended; and that the failure to
pay the amount in full within ten days will result in the city taking any of
the actions authorized by this subchapter.
(Ord. 15-, passed 6-2-2015; Ord. passed 9-3-2019)
§ 39.004 POSTING OF LIST OF DELINQUENT PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   On and after August 1, 2015, the name of each property owner that is
delinquent in paying the municipal service fee shall be added to a list of
other property owners who are delinquent in the payment of that fee.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall prepare monthly the list of delinquent
municipal service fee property owners, such listing to reflect the status of
the municipal service fee accounts as of the first day of the month that
payment of the municipal service fee is delinquent.
   (C)   The list of delinquent service fee property owners shall be posted
monthly at City Hall and published in the newspapers.
(Ord. 15-, passed 6-2-2015)
§ 39.005 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND LICENSES PROHIBITED.
   On and after August 1, 2015, the city, including its departments, shall not
issue any permits or licenses to any property owner that is delinquent in the
payment of municipal service fees until the total amount of the delinquent
municipal service fees due and owing by that property owner are paid in full.
(Ord. 15-, passed 6-2-2015)
§ 39.006 AUTOMATIC PROPERTY LIEN.
   (A)   On and after August 1, 2015, there shall be an automatic lien on all
real property for the municipal service fees imposed thereon under the
authority of §
39.002, and for the delinquent fee imposed under the authority of §
39.003, and for other authorized charges imposed under this code including but
not limited to a $50 lien processing fee and a $12 lien filing fee, which lien
shall attach on the first day of the month next succeeding the month for which
the fee is imposed, and the fees imposed shall continue to accumulate until
paid in full.
   (B)   Whenever the amount of any lien filed in accordance with this
subchapter has been paid, together with costs, in full to the City Treasurer,
the City Treasurer shall certify such payment to the Mayor, who shall execute
and deliver to the party paying the lien a release of the lien, which may be
recorded in the office of the County Clerk of the county wherein the property
is located as other lien releases.
   (C)   The Mayor is authorized to issue a release of any such lien which may
be filed by mistake against the wrong property, upon evidence of such mistake
being presented to the Mayor by the City Treasurer.
   (D)   All liens filed under the authority of this section shall run with the
land, and if the property is transferred to another, the lien shall continue
until the lien and all charges are paid in full.
   (E)   The city is authorized to foreclose on property that is delinquent in
the payment of municipal service fees. The City Attorney shall develop the
procedure for accomplishing this actions; provided, that in accordance with the
authority granted by the Municipal Home Rule Board, the city shall not be
required to prosecute the foreclosure in Circuit Court.
(Ord. 15-, passed 6-2-2015; Ord. passed 10-7-2025)
§ 39.007 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE TO OPERATE A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   Because the non-payment of municipal service fees is a violation of §
39.002(C), or regulations promulgated under this subchapter, on and after
August 1, 2015, the matter shall be heard in the city’s Municipal Court, or any
other court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 15-, passed 6-2-2015)
§ 39.008 PAYMENT OF DELINQUENT MUNICIPAL SERVICE FEES WHEN TRANSFERRING
PROPERTY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BUSINESS DAY. A day the offices of the city are open for business.
      CHARGES. All rates, fees and assessments assessed by the city under the
authority of the codified ordinances of the City of Nitro, West Virginia, as
amended, and penalties and interest for unpaid or delinquent rates, fees and
assessments.
      CLOSING AGENT. A person or business that is responsible for closing the
transaction for the sale of real estate property located in the city. CLOSING
AGENT shall include the mortgage lender, the seller’s broker, the buyer’s
broker or any other person who acts in the capacity of a closing agent.
   (B)   Seller’s requirements effective on and after August 1, 2015.
      (1)   The seller of a fee interest in real property is responsible for
satisfying, upon closing, any outstanding charges owed to the city, including,
but not limited to, charges for the municipal service fee, refuse, sewer,
wastewater, solid waste, fire services and parking.
      (2)   The seller shall, as a provision in a written agreement for the
purchase and sale of real estate, specifically inform the closing agent for the
sale of any municipal service provided to the property; provided, that the
closing agent shall request from the seller specific information of the
services provided to the property. The provision of the information in a
written agreement for the purchase and sale of real estate constitutes a
written request to the closing agent to administer disbursement of closing
funds necessary to satisfy unpaid charges owed the city.
   (C)   Closing agent’s requirements and city requirements on and after August
1, 2015.
      (1)   The closing agent shall submit a request for a final billing to the
city. A closing agent who fails to request a final billing identified in
division (B) above is liable to the city for the unpaid charges covered by the
request. A closing agent is not liable if the seller provides incomplete or
incorrect information to the closing agent; provided, that the closing agent
specifically requested from the seller specific information of the services
provided to the property.
      (2)   After receiving a request for a final billing, the city shall
provide the requesting party with a written estimated or actual final billing
within five business days after receipt of the request. If the city is unable
to provide a written estimated or actual final billing, due to insufficient
information to identify the account, it shall notify the requesting party in
writing that the information is insufficient to identify the account.
      (3)   The final billing must include all outstanding charges and the
average per diem rate for city services for up to 30 days beyond the stated
closing date if the closing date is delayed.
      (4)   A closing agent must inform the seller of all applicable estimated
and actual final billings furnished by the city.
(Ord. 15-, passed 6-2-2015)
§ 39.009 RECORDATION OF DEEDS.
   On and after August 1, 2015, the transferee of real property, whether as a
result of purchase, foreclosure, testate or intestate succession, or any other
legal means, that is located within the city shall record the deed to the
property with the Clerk of the county in which the property is located;
provided, that the deed shall be recorded no later than 12 months after the
date the transfer occurs.
(Ord. 15-, passed 6-2-2015)
§ 39.010 CITY TREASURER’S DISCRETION.
   The City Treasurer shall have the power to waive any delinquency or interest
charge if, in the City’s Treasurer’s discretion, such action is warranted.
(Ord. 15-, passed 6-2-2015)
§ 39.011 REPORT BY CITY TREASURER TO COUNCIL.
   The City Treasurer shall, within 60 days after the end of each fiscal year,
report to Council a list of all persons and business establishments that are
delinquent in the payment of the municipal service fee or any portion thereof
for the preceding fiscal year.
(Ord. 15-, passed 6-2-2015)
§ 39.012 FEE SCHEDULE.
Schedule of Fees
 Minimum
Schedule of Fees
                   Minimum
Construction plans $10/each required improvement $50
Final plat         $15/lot or $50
                   2% of required escrow deposit or performance bond. The
                   inspection fee shall defray all reasonable costs for
Inspection fee     certification by City Engineer for review of plats,
                   construction plans and other requirements and for final
                   inspection of installed improvements.
Preliminary plat   $10/lot or $50
Sketch plat        $5/lot or $25
Street signs       $50/approved sign
 
(Prior Code, Appendix A)
LIENS
§ 39.025 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds:
   (A)   The city must provide services to the residents of the city;
   (B)   The city must impose taxes, fees and other charges to pay for the
services provided by the city;
   (C)   The collection of taxes, fees and other charges imposed by the city
does not always occur on a timely basis and become delinquent;
   (D)   Taxes, fees and other appropriate charges are the price that is paid
to live in a civilized city such as this city;
   (E)   W. Va. Code 8-13-13, as amended, authorizes municipalities to file
liens to collect debts; and
   (F)   Because some service recipients do not pay the taxes, fees and other
charges on a timely basis, alternative methods must be utilized for the
collection of those delinquent taxes, fees and other charges.
(Ord. 09-13, passed 11-17-2009)
§ 39.026 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall apply to all liens filed by the city.
(Ord. 09-13, passed 11-17-2009)
§ 39.027 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms have the meanings ascribed herein, unless the context in
which used requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Building Inspector for the city.
   CHARGE. Any amount other than a fee or a tax that is imposed by the city,
including, but not limited to, court costs, attorney costs, filing fees,
recordation fees, legal notice costs, any other legally authorized charge, and
interest which shall be 8% per year until the total amount due is paid to the
city.
   CITY. The City of Nitro, West Virginia.
   CODE. The codified ordinances of the City of Nitro, West Virginia.
   DEBT. Any fee, tax or charge, or any combination thereof, imposed by and due
to the city.
   FEE. The municipal service fee, the decontamination of methamphetamine
laboratory sites fee, the property maintenance fee, the emergency services user
fee or any other fee enacted by the City Council of the city.
   FIRE PROTECTION. Fire extinguishment services, and the provision of
emergency medical services, property inspection services for the purpose of
preventing fires, and any other public safety services or public health
services provided by the city’s Fire Department for the purpose of protecting
human life and property.
   POLICE PROTECTION. Those services provided by the city’s Police Department
for the purpose of protecting human life or property, or public health or
safety, whether the activity undertaken is taken only by city Police Department
personnel, or the activity undertaken is taken with the assistance or under the
direction of other departments of the city, Kanawha County, Putnam County, the
State of West Virginia or any agency of the federal government; provided, that
POLICE PROTECTION shall also include any activity for the protection of human
life or property, or public health or safety, undertaken by any other agency of
city government without involvement of the city’s Police Department.
   STREET. Every highway, byway, waterway, street, alley, or other public
thoroughfare within the boundaries of the city, whether owned or regulated by
the city, Kanawha County, Putnam County, the State of West Virginia or any
agency of the federal government.
   TAX. Either, the municipal B&O tax or the license tax.
   TREASURER. The Treasurer of the city.
(Ord. 09-13, passed 11-17-2009)
§ 39.028 FILING A LIEN FOR DELINQUENT MUNICIPAL SERVICE FEES.
   (A)   When the Treasurer, as provided in §
39.002, has determined that a property owner is delinquent in the payment of
the municipal service fee for municipal services provided to real property
located in the city, the Treasurer shall send to the property owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a letter stating:
      (1)   The municipal service fee is delinquent;
      (2)   The municipal service fee is required to be paid by a date
specified in the letter; and
      (3)   If the required payment is not made by that specified date, a lien
will be filed against the real property that is the recipient of the municipal
services for the amount of the delinquent municipal service fee plus any
legally authorized and applicable charges; provided, that the date specified
for payment shall be no less than 90 days from the date the notice is mailed.
   (B)   If the property owner disagrees with the Treasurer’s determination,
the property owner may appeal that determination to the Circuit Court of the
county in which the property is located; provided, that the appeal shall be
filed no later than 30 days after the date the Treasurer’s decision is
rendered.
   (C)   Unless specifically stayed by the court, the lien herein authorized
shall be filed on the date specified in the notice mailed to the property
owner.
   (D)   All liens filed under the authority of this section shall run with the
land, and if the property is transferred to another, the lien shall continue
until the lien and all charges are paid in full.
(Ord. 09-13, passed 11-17-2009)
§ 39.029 FILING A LIEN FOR DELINQUENT DECONTAMINATION OR DEMOLITION OF
CONTAMINATED STRUCTURE FEES.
   (A)   When, under the authority of §§
154.135 to
154.151, the Building Inspector designates a structure as being contaminated,
the procedures in §§
154.135 to
154.151 shall be effective in order to protect public health and safety.
      (1)   If the whereabouts of a person or persons having a full or partial
ownership of the property is unknown or may not be ascertained, or if the
identity of those persons or person is unknown or may not be ascertained, the
Building Inspector shall:
         (a)   Instruct the Treasurer file a Class II legal notice stating:
            1.   The property, as identified in the legal notice, has been
determined to be contaminated;
            2.   If the property owner’s whereabouts or identity remains
unknown, the city will demolish the property on the date specified in the legal
notice; and
            3.   A lien for all expenses and charges incurred by the city in
the demolition activity will be filed 90 days after the completion of the
demolition activity.
         (b)   If the property owner or owners do not respond to the legal
notice, demolish the property on the date stated;
         (c)   Prepare a complete itemized statement that clearly demonstrates
the costs and charges incurred to accomplish the demolition activity; and
         (d)   Provide the complete itemized statement, including a statement
stating when the demolition activity was completed, to the Treasurer who will
file a lien on the remaining real property for the total amount indicated in
the complete itemized statement plus any other applicable charges; provided,
that prior to filing the lien, the Treasurer shall file a Class II legal notice
stating:
            1.   The property, as identified in the legal notice, was
determined to be contaminated;
            2.   The property was demolished on the date specified;
            3.   A lien for all expenses incurred and charges paid by the city
in the demolition activity will be filed on the specified date;
            4.   Payment of the expenses incurred and charges paid by the city
in the demolition activity will prevent the lien from being filed; and
            5.   If the required payment is not made on or before that
specified date, a lien in the amount indicated in (A)(1)(d)3. above plus any
other applicable charges will be filed; provided, that the date specified for
payment shall be no less than 90 days from the date the demolition activity is
completed.
      (2)   If the property owner refuses to employ a decontamination
contractor to start decontaminating the structure or structures within 30 days
from the date that the property is designated as contaminated, the Building
Inspector shall:
         (a)   Instruct the Treasurer to send to the property owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a letter stating:
            1.   The property identified in the letter has been determined to
be contaminated;
            2.   Unless the property owner employs a decontamination contractor
who starts decontaminating the property by the date specified within the
letter, such date to be 14 days subsequent to the date the letter is mailed,
the property will be demolished;
            3.   The property owner will be responsible for the costs and
charges incurred to demolish the structure or structures on the property; and
            4.   If the property owner does not pay the demolition costs and
applicable charges within 90 days after completion of the demolition activity,
a lien for all expenses and charges will be filed 90 days after the completion
of the demolition activity; provided, that the date specified for payment shall
be no less than 90 days from the date the letter is mailed.
         (b)   Proceed with the demolition or the structure on the date stated.
      (3)   If the property owner refuses to employ a demolition contractor for
demolition of the contaminated structure or structures within 30 days from the
date that the property is designated as contaminated, the Building Inspector
shall:
         (a)   Instruct the Treasurer to send to the property owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a letter stating:
            1.   The property identified in the letter has been determined to
be contaminated;
            2.   Unless the property owner employs a demolition contractor who
starts demolishing the structure or structures by a date specified within the
letter, such date to be 14 days subsequent to the date the notice is mailed,
the property will be demolished;
            3.   The property owner will be responsible for the costs and
charges incurred to demolish the structure or structures on the property;
            4.   If the property owner does not pay the demolition costs and
charges within 90 days after completion of the demolition activity, a lien for
all expenses and charges incurred in the demolition activity will be filed 90
days after the completion of the demolition activity; provided, that the date
specified for payment shall be no less than 90 days from the date the notice is
mailed.
         (b)   Proceed with the demolition of the structure on the date stated.
   (B)   If the property owner disagrees with the proposed action proposed by
the city, the property owner may appeal the Treasurer’s decision to the Circuit
Court of the county in which the property is located; provided, that the appeal
shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date the Treasurer’s decision is
rendered.
   (C)   Unless specifically stayed by the court, the lien herein authorized
shall be filed on the date specified in the notice mailed to the property
owner.
   (D)   All liens filed under the authority of this section shall run with the
land, and if the property is transferred to another, the lien shall continue
until the lien and all charges are paid in full.
(Ord. 09-13, passed 11-17-2009)
§ 39.030 FILING A LIEN FOR UNPAID PROPERTY MAINTENANCE FEE.
   (A)   When the Treasurer, acting on behalf of the city to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and under the authority of
Chapter 154, has determined that a property owner is in default in payment of a
property maintenance fee imposed because the city carried out the
responsibilities of a property owner under said
Chapter 154, or a property owner is in default of an inspection fee imposed
because the city carried out necessary inspections so as to provide a minimum
level of health and safety, the Treasurer shall send to the property owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a letter stating:
      (1)   The property maintenance fee or inspection fee is in default;
      (2)   The property maintenance fee or inspection fee is required to be
paid by a date specified in the letter; and
      (3)   If the required payment is not made by that specified date, and if
the city deems it to be the best course of action, a lien will be filed against
the real property that is the recipient of the property maintenance services or
inspection services for the amount of the delinquent property maintenance fee
or inspection fee plus any legally authorized and applicable charges; provided,
that the date specified for payment shall be no more than 90 days from the date
the notice is mailed.
   (B)   If the property owner disagrees with the Treasurer’s determination,
the property owner may appeal that determination to the Circuit Court of the
county in which the property is located; provided, that the appeal shall be
filed no later than 30 days after the date the Treasurer’s decision is
rendered.
   (C)   Unless specifically stayed by the court, the lien herein authorized
shall be filed on the date specified in the notice mailed to the property
owner.
   (D)   All liens filed under the authority of this section shall run with the
land, and if the property is transferred to another, the lien shall continue
until the lien and all charges are paid in full.
(Ord. 09-13, passed 11-17-2009)
§ 39.031 FILING A LIEN FOR UNPAID EMERGENCY SERVICES USER FEE.
   (A)   When the Treasurer, acting on behalf of the city and as provided in §
39.050, has determined that a property owner is in default in the payment of
the emergency services user fee charged for the provision of emergency
services, the Treasurer shall send to the recipient of those emergency services
by certified mail, return receipt requested, a letter stating:
      (1)   The emergency services user fee is in default;
      (2)   The emergency services user fee is required to be paid by a date
specified in the letter; and
      (3)   If the required payment is not made by that specified date, and if
the city deems it to be the best course of action, a lien will be filed against
the real property that is the recipient of the emergency services for the
amount of the delinquent emergency services user fee plus any legally
authorized and applicable charges; provided, that if the fee is charged for the
delivery of personal emergency services, the lien plus appropriate charges
shall be filed against property owned by the delinquent or defaulting fee payer
wherever located; provided however, that the date specified for payment shall
be no less than 90 days from the date the notice is mailed.
   (B)   If the user of emergency response services disagrees with the
Treasurer’s determination, that user may appeal that determination to the
Circuit Court of the county in which the property is located; provided, that
the appeal shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date the Treasurer’s
decision is rendered.
   (C)   Unless specifically stayed by the court, the lien herein authorized
shall be filed on the date specified in the notice mailed to the property
owner.
   (D)   All liens filed under the authority of this section shall run with the
land, and if the property is transferred to another, the lien shall continue
until the lien and all charges are paid in full.
(Ord. 09-13, passed 11-17-2009)
§ 39.032 FILING OF OTHER LIENS.
   (A)   For any other debts due the city and not otherwise referenced in this
subchapter, the Treasurer shall use all available records to determine the
amount due and develop an assessment to be transmitted to the delinquent
taxpayer or fee payer.
   (B)   If the whereabouts of a person or persons owing the debt to the city
is known or may be ascertained, the Treasurer, acting on behalf of the city,
shall send to the taxpayer or fee payer by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a letter and assessment stating:
      (1)   The amount of tax, fee and charge that is delinquent or otherwise
due;
      (2)   The delinquent tax, fee and charge is required to be paid by a date
specified in the letter; and
      (3)   If the required payment is not made by that specified date, a lien
will be filed against the real property owned by the delinquent taxpayer or fee
payer, wherever the property is found, for the amount of the delinquent tax or
fee and charge; provided, that the date specified for payment shall be no more
than 90 days immediately succeeding the date the notice is mailed.
   (C)   If the whereabouts of a person or persons owing a debt to the city is
unknown or may not be ascertained, the Treasurer shall take the following
action. The Treasurer shall file a Class II legal notice stating:
      (1)   The person or persons, as identified in the legal notice, owe the
city the amount specified for provision of the specified service;
      (2)   The whereabouts of the person or persons is unknown;
      (3)   The city will pursue appropriate legal action to secure a judgment
for the total amount of the debt against the person or persons owing the debt;
      (4)   Upon securing the judgment, the city will seek out all property
owned by the person or persons and file a lien for all expenses and charges
incurred by the city against that property; and
      (5)   The person or persons named in the legal notice may avoid the
foregoing actions by paying in total the debt due the city on or before a date
stated in the legal notice.
   (D)   If the person or persons identified in the legal notice do not respond
to the legal notice, the city shall proceed with the action stated; provided,
that prior to filing the lien, the Treasurer shall file a Class II legal notice
stating:
      (1)   The city has secured a judgment in the amount stated against the
person or persons identified in the legal notice;
      (2)   Unless the judgment is paid in full by a specific date, a lien for
the total debt, all expenses incurred and charges paid by the city will be
filed on the property owned by the identified person or persons wherever the
property is located;
      (3)   Payment by the date stated in the legal notice of the total debt,
all expenses incurred and charges paid by the city will prevent the lien from
being filed; and
      (4)   If the required payment is not made on or before that specified
date, a lien in the amount indicated will be filed; provided, that the date
specified for payment shall be no less than 90 days from the date the legal
notice is filed.
   (E)   If the delinquent taxpayer or fee payer disagrees with the Treasurer’s
determination, the delinquent taxpayer or fee payer may appeal that
determination to the Circuit Court of Kanawha County or Putnam County,
whichever is appropriate; provided, that the appeal shall be filed no later
than 30 days after the date the Treasurer’s decision is rendered.
   (F)   If the city prevails, the city, after providing notice to the
defendant by certified mail, return receipt requested, shall file a lien
against the defendant’s property or take any other legally authorized actions;
provided, that the notice shall inform the defendant that if the amount of the
judgment is paid to the city no later than a date specified in the notice, the
lien will not be filed; provided, however, that the final date for payment of
the judgment shall be 14 days subsequent to the date the notice is mailed.
   (G)   Unless specifically stayed by the court, the lien herein authorized
shall be filed on the date specified in the notice mailed to the property
owner.
   (H)   All liens filed under the authority of this section shall run with the
land, and if the property is transferred to another, the lien shall continue
until the lien and all charges are paid in full.
(Ord. 09-13, passed 11-17-2009)
§ 39.033 RELEASE OF LIENS.
   (A)   Whenever the amount of any lien filed in accordance with this
subchapter has been paid, together with costs, in full to the City Treasurer,
the City Treasurer shall certify such payment to the Mayor, who shall execute
and deliver to the party paying the lien a release of the lien, which may be
recorded in the office of the County Clerk as other releases of liens.
   (B)   The Mayor is authorized to issue a release of any such lien which may
be filed by mistake against the wrong property, upon evidence of such mistake
being presented to the Mayor by the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 09-13, passed 11-17-2009)
§ 39.034 DELINQUENT FEES AND TAXES COLLECTED WHEN PROPERTY TRANSFERRED.
   (A)   If any tax, fee or charge imposed under this code is delinquent and a
lien is filed to facilitate payment of that delinquent tax or fee, when the
property that is the subject of the lien is transferred from the record owner
to another person, the amount of such fee or tax and applicable charges shall
be collected from the transferor at the time of the transfer and the amount so
collected shall be paid to the City Treasurer within seven days immediately
succeeding the day the property is transferred.
   (B)   The Treasurer shall, within 60 days after the end of each fiscal year,
report to Council a list of all persons and business establishments who are
delinquent in the payment of the municipal service fee or any portion thereof
for the preceding fiscal year.
(Ord. 09-13, passed 11-17-2009)
EMERGENCY SERVICES USER FEE
§ 39.045 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds:
   (A)   The city provides emergency services to residents and non-residents
both within and outside its corporate borders, including non-residents both
within and outside the city’s Fire Service District;
   (B)   Such emergency services include police protection and fire protection;
   (C)   Residents of the city and owners of property located in the city pay
for the emergency services through payment of ad valorem property taxes,
municipal service fees and municipal B&O taxes;
   (D)   Nonresidents of the city who receive the emergency services do not pay
for the emergency services received;
   (E)   The provision of emergency services to nonresidents of the city
results in the temporary removal from the city of scarce resources in the form
of city personnel, city fire and police equipment and city-owned materials;
   (F)   The provision of such emergency services is within the authority of
and is at the direct request of Putnam County 911, Kanawha County 911 or the
State Police;
   (G)   W. Va. Code 8-15-3 authorizes every municipality to enter into a fire
service contract to provide fire protection for property located outside
municipal borders;
   (H)   W. Va. Code 8-15-3 provides the method to calculate the amount of the
annual payment for the provision of the fire protection service under a fire
service contract;
   (I)   Since emergency services other than those emergency services provided
under a fire protection contract are only provided to nonresidents of the city
when directed by either Putnam County 911 or Kanawha County 911, it is
reasonable to derive a portion of the cost of providing and maintaining such
services from the individuals to whom the services are provided;
   (J)   W. Va. Code 8-13-13 provides that every municipality has the plenary
power and authority to provide by ordinance for the installation, continuance,
maintenance or improvement of such emergency services, to make reasonable
regulations with respect thereto, and to impose by ordinance upon the users of
such emergency services reasonable rates, fees and charges to be collected in
the manner prescribed in the ordinance;
   (K)   All of those individuals who use, enjoy and benefit from these
emergency services should bear an equitable share of the costs thereof;
   (L)   The imposition of the emergency service user fee established herein is
a reasonable system of distributing the costs to all of the users of the
emergency services;
   (M)   The State Legislature has conferred upon municipalities the plenary
power to enact reasonable administrative provisions to ensure the efficient,
orderly and equitable implementation and collection of the emergency service
user fees from all users;
   (N)   It is in the best interests of the citizens of the city and the users
of emergency services to enact this subchapter to impose an emergency service
user fee;
   (O)   There are many individuals who benefit from emergency services who are
not owners of property or residents of the city; and
   (P)   The fee imposed is reasonable, not excessive, and warranted based upon
a reasonable allocation of the fee payers’ usage of the emergency services
contemplated herein.
(Ord. 09-01, passed 2-17-2009; Ord. passed 8-18-2015; Ord. passed 10-6-2015)
§ 39.046 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPARATUS. Fire apparatus which is divided into seven categories by NFPA
Standard 1901: Pumper Fire Apparatus, Initial Attack Apparatus, Mobile Water
Supply Apparatus, Aerial Apparatus, Quint Fire Apparatus, Special Service Fire
Apparatus including Rescue Truck, and Mobile Foam Fire Apparatus; provided,
that the definition for each category as defined in detail by the NFPA Standard
is incorporated herein by reference.
   AUTOMATIC AID. A formal standing agreement between municipalities for
cooperative emergency management on a continuing basis where resources are
dispatched from the nearest fire station, regardless of which side of the
jurisdictional boundary the incident is on.
   BOX ALARM. A fire alarm, regardless of whether the alarm is activated by an
actual fire, or is activated in error and results in a false alarm.
   CITY. The City of Nitro, West Virginia.
   CITY FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Fire Department operated by the city.
   CITY OF NITRO FIRE SERVICE DISTRICT or CITY FIRE SERVICE DISTRICT. The Fire
Service District composed of the area within the boundaries of the city.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES. Fire protection or extinguishment services, emergency
medical services or public safety services provided by the city’s Police
Department and the city’s Fire Department for the purpose of protecting human
life and property.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES USER FEE. The fee imposed on the user of emergency
services and includes, as applicable, the incident response user fee, the fire
service user fee and the fire protection service fee.
   FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE FEE. The fee imposed on property owners of real
property located in the Fire Service District; provided, that such real
property is located outside the municipal boundaries of the city.
   FIRE SERVICE DISTRICT or FIRST DUE AREA. The agreed upon area outside the
boundaries of the city for the provision of fire and other relevant emergency
services as determined by the State Fire Commission and the State Fire Marshal.
   FIRE SERVICE USER FEE. The fee imposed on a property owner of real property
located outside the city and outside the Fire Service District when the city’s
Fire Department responds to a fire service call for that property.
   INCIDENT RESPONSE USER FEE. The fee imposed on property owners of real
property when the city’s Fire Department responds to a fire service call and
there is no fire.
   MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT. An agreement between emergency responders to lend
assistance, either automatically when an emergency situation occurs or by
request only, in the form of available manpower and assistance across
jurisdictional boundaries.
(Ord. 09-01, passed 2-17-2009; Ord. passed 8-18-2015; Ord. passed 10-6-2015)
§ 39.047 FEE IMPOSED; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   On and after October 15, 2015, there is hereby imposed and shall be
collected an emergency services user fee for the provision by the city of
emergency services, such fee to be administered as directed in this subchapter;
provided, that the following are exempt from the emergency services user fee:
      (1)   Residents of the city;
      (2)   Residents of any other municipality in the state that has entered
into an automatic aid agreement with the city;
      (3)   Nonresident owners of property situated in the city; provided, that
this exemption shall only apply to emergency services provided to the
nonresident owner’s property located in the city; and
      (4)   Persons who pay the municipal service fee imposed by §§
39.001 to
39.012.
   (B)   On and after October 15, 2015, there is hereby imposed and shall be
collected a fire protection service fee as described in §
39.048.
   (C)   On and after October 15, 2015, there is hereby imposed and shall be
collected a fire service user fee as described in §
39.049.
   (D)   On and after October 15, 2015, there is hereby imposed and shall be
collected an incident response user fee as described in §
39.050.
   (E)   All emergency services user fees, fire protection service fees, fire
service user fees and incident response user fees received by the city shall be
used to pay for fire department equipment, materials, apparatus, facilities and
firefighter pensions.
(Ord. 09-01, passed 2-17-2009; Ord. passed 8-18-2015; Ord. passed 10-6-2015)
§ 39.048 FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE FEE FOR NONRESIDENT BUSINESSES AND RESIDENCES.
   Emergency services shall be continued, maintained and improved by the city,
in part, by payment of the fire protection service fee by the owners of
buildings and structures of every kind and nature located within the Fire
Service District (First Due Area) of the City Fire Department, which owners are
declared to be users and beneficiaries of fire services as contemplated by W.
Va. Code 8-13-13. Emergency services shall be provided by City Fire Department
as herein defined within the geographic area established by the state’s State
Fire Commission as the First Due Area of the City Fire Department.
 
Fire Protection Service Rate Fees for Properties Located Outside of the
Corporate Limits of the City but Within the City’s First Due Area
Owner of single-family residential unit $150 per year or $37.50 per quarter
of any size
Owner of any residential unit with one
or more detached structures exceeding   An additional $75 or $18.75 per quarter
1,000 square feet
Owner of a nonresidential unit          $0.0675 per square foot
structure
 
(Ord. passed 8-18-2015; Ord. passed 10-6-2015)
§ 39.049 FIRE SERVICE CONTRACTS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL BUSINESSES AND RESIDENCES.
   (A)   If the city’s Fire Department is directed by either Putnam County 911
or Kanawha County 911 to respond to a fire outside the city and outside the
Fire Service District, the City Treasurer shall assess a fire service user fee
upon the owner of the property, such fee to be calculated as follows:$250 plus
$75 for each Fire Department apparatus remaining on the scene of the fire for
each half-hour increment, or part thereof, after the initial hour of response.
The owner shall also be liable for, and the city shall have the right to
recover from such owner, the cost and expense for the utilization of any
specialized and disposable equipment or materials necessary to fight the fire
and render the scene safe and secure.
   (B)   In lieu of the emergency services user fire protection service fee
imposed by §
39.047, the city is authorized to enter into a fire service contract with the
owner of any business or residence located outside of but within three miles of
the city Fire Service District. Any such owner that enters into a fire service
contract shall annually be assessed a fee of $25 plus an amount equal to 60% of
the annual tax levied for current municipal purposes upon property within the
city of like classification and valuation to the property under the contract.
   (C)   The annual payment for each fire service contract shall be due and
payable on October 1 for each calendar year the fire service contract is in
existence. Any annual payment that is delinquent for a period of more than 30
days shall bear interest at the rate of 9% per annum and shall be a lien upon
the property under contract; provided, that a notice of that lien is properly
recorded in the office of the County Clerk of the county in which the property
or the major portion thereof is located. The lien shall be void at the
expiration of two years after the delinquent annual payment became due unless
within that two-year period a civil action seeking equitable relief to enforce
the lien is instituted by the city. The city may by civil action collect any
annual payment and the interest thereon at any time within five years after
such payment became due; provided, that upon default in any annual payment, the
city may cancel the fire service contract involved.
   (D)   Each fire service contract made under the authority of this section
shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon the successors in title of
the property owner making the fire service contract, and the property owner,
upon conveying the property subject to fire service contract, shall no longer
be liable under the fire service contract, except as to any annual payments
which were due prior to the conveyance and which remain unpaid.
   (E)   A property owner not delinquent on payment of the fire service
contract fee may cancel any fire service contract with respect to the property
of the property owner upon giving a 30-day written notice to the city;
provided, that if notice of cancellation is given subsequent to July 1 of any
calendar year, the next succeeding annual payment shall be made by the property
owner as soon as the amount thereof is ascertainable. Upon cancellation of the
fire service contract, the City Treasurer shall deliver to the property owner a
recordable release discharging that owner and the subject property from any
further lien or obligation with respect to the annual payments. The annual
payments due under the fire service contract shall be made to the City
Treasurer.
(Ord. passed 8-18-2015; Ord. passed 10-6-2015)
§ 39.050 CHARGE FOR RESPONDING TO FIRE CALLS OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   (A)   In the event the City Fire Department is directed by either Kanawha
County 911 or Putnam County 911 to respond to a residence box alarm, a
residence fire service call by other than a box alarm, or any other residential
emergency situation outside the City Fire Service District, and there is no
emergency situation in existence and the owner of the residence has not either
paid the fire protection service fee nor entered into a fire service contract
with the city, the city shall impose the incident response user fee to pay for
the use of city personnel, equipment and materials utilized in the response;
provided, that if the residence is located in a Fire Service District that is
the responsibility of another fire department and there is in existence a
current mutual aid agreement between the City Fire Department and that other
fire department, there shall be no incident response user fee imposed on that
response by the City Fire Department. The incident response user fee charged to
the owner of the residence shall be calculated as follows:
      (1)   One hundred dollars plus $100 per hour, or part thereof, for each
City Fire Department apparatus at the scene of the fire and $50 per hour, or
part thereof, for each member of the City Fire Department at the scene of the
fire; provided, that the time used to calculate the incident response user fee
for each apparatus responding shall commence when each City Fire Department
apparatus dispatch notification from either Putnam County 911 or Kanawha County
911, as appropriate, occurs and shall continue until each such City Fire
Department apparatus returns to the City Fire Department facility.
      (2)   The city shall also recover from such owner the cost and expense
for utilization of any specialized and disposable equipment or materials
necessary to render the fire scene safe and secure.
   (B)   In the event the City Fire Department is directed by either Kanawha
County 911 or Putnam County 911 to respond to a box alarm, a fire service call
other than by a box alarm, or any other emergency situation at a manufacturing,
commercial, professional or other business establishment located outside the
city Fire Service District and there is no emergency situation in existence and
the owner of the manufacturing, commercial, professional or other business
establishment has not either paid the fire service protection fee nor entered
into a fire service contract with the city, the city shall impose the incident
response user fee to pay for the use of city personnel, equipment and materials
utilized in the response; provided, that if the manufacturing, commercial,
professional or other business establishment is located in a fire service
district that is the responsibility of another fire department and there is in
existence a current mutual aid agreement between the City Fire Department and
that other fire department, there shall be no incident response user fee
imposed on that response by the City Fire Department. The incident response
user fee charged to the owner of the manufacturing, commercial, professional or
other business establishment shall be calculated as follows.
      (1)   Two thousand dollars plus $500 per hour, or part thereof, for each
City Fire Department apparatus at the scene of the fire and $200 per hour, or
part thereof, for each member of the City Fire Department at the scene of the
fire; provided, that the time used to calculate the incident response user fee
shall commence for each apparatus responding when each City Fire Department
apparatus dispatch notification from either Putnam County 911 or Kanawha County
911, as appropriate, occurs and shall continue until each such City Fire
Department apparatus returns to the City Fire Department facility.
      (2)   The city shall also recover from such owner the cost and expense
for utilization of any specialized and disposable equipment or materials
necessary to render the fire scene safe and secure.
   (C)   Within four work days after the day the City Fire Department responded
to a box alarm, whether for an actual fire or a false alarm, a fire service
call other than by a box alarm, or any other emergency situation outside the
city Fire Service District and there was not the payment of the applicable fee,
an applicable fire service contract in existence nor an affirmative response by
another fire department, the City Fire Department shall provide to the City
Treasurer information demonstrating the number of City Fire Department
apparatus that responded and the length of time each apparatus was at the
scene, the number of City Fire Department personnel who responded and the
amount of time each was at the scene, and the quantity of consumables used and
the nature of any equipment damaged or destroyed. Within five working days
after receiving the information from the City Fire Department, the City
Treasurer shall calculate the charge to be assessed and transmit the bill to
the property owner. The City Treasurer shall indicate on the bill the date when
payment is due; provided, that the due date for payment of the bill shall be no
later than 45 days subsequent to the date the bill is mailed.
   (D)   If the fee imposed by this section is not paid when due, the amount
shall be in default and may be recovered by the city in any appropriate action.
The city is authorized to contract with a debt collector to collect the amount
due, to proceed against the property owner in the circuit court of the county
wherein the property is located to collect the debt, and to perfect a lien upon
the property served and then proceed to judgment to collect the amount due and
any expenses resulting from that process.
(Ord. passed 8-18-2015; Ord. passed 10-6-2015)
§ 39.051 CITY TREASURER TO RECOMMEND CHANGE IN USER FEE AMOUNT.
   The City Treasurer shall annually, but no later than March 1, compose and
provide to the City Council for Council’s authorization a schedule of fees to
be imposed under this subchapter for the forthcoming fiscal year.
(Ord. passed 8-18-2015; Ord. passed 10-6-2015)
§ 39.052 REPORT BY THE CITY TREASURER TO THE CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Treasurer shall, within 60 days after the end of each fiscal year,
report to Council a list of all persons and business establishments who are
delinquent in the payment of the emergency service user fee or any portion
thereof for the preceding fiscal year.
(Ord. passed 8-18-2015; Ord. passed 10-6-2015)
§ 39.053 MOTOR VEHICLE EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   If the city’s Fire Department is directed by either Putnam County 911
or Kanawha County 911 to respond to an emergency on or about a motor vehicle,
the City Treasurer shall assess an emergency services user fee upon the owner
of such vehicle, such fee to be calculated as follows: $250 plus $75 for each
Fire Department apparatus remaining on the scene of the emergency for each
half-hour increment, or part thereof, after the initial hour of emergency
service. The owner shall also be liable for, and the city shall have the right
to recover from such owner, the cost and expense for the utilization of any
specialized and disposable equipment or materials necessary to render an
emergency scene safe and secure.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have the discretion to assess
additional fees for certain other service calls including, but not limited to,
rescue operations, the use of utility vehicles, boats, water rescue dive teams
and hazmat response. The City Treasurer shall have plenary power and authority
to enforce this section in accordance with and pursuant to W. Va. Code 8-13-13.
   (C) Within four work days after the day the city’s Fire Department responded
to a motor vehicle emergency situation, including a vehicle fire, that involved
one or more nonresidents of the city, the Department shall provide to the City
Treasurer information demonstrating the number of vehicles or apparatus that
responded and the length of time each vehicle or apparatus was at the scene,
and the number of personnel who responded and the amount of time each was at
the scene. Within five working days after receiving the information from the
Department, the City Treasurer shall calculate the charge to be assessed and
transmit the bill to the nonresident vehicle owner, or nonresident vehicle
lessee if appropriate. The City Treasurer shall indicate on the bill the date
when payment is due; provided, that the due date for payment of the bill shall
be no later than 45 days subsequent to the date the bill is mailed.
   (D)   If the fee imposed by this section is not paid when due, the amount
shall be in default and may be recovered by the city in any appropriate action,
including contracting with a debt collector to collect the amount due, and
proceeding against the vehicle owner or vehicle lessee in the Circuit Court of
the county wherein the vehicle emergency occurred to collect the amount due and
any expenses resulting from that process.
(Ord. 09-01, passed 2-17-2009)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
      
51.   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION
      
52.   SEWER REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
In General
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Prohibited disposal of refuse
   
50.03   Depositing of refuse so as to prevent dissemination by wind and the
like
   
50.04   Use of street refuse cans
   
50.05   Duty of owners or occupants to maintain premises
   
50.06   Notice to abate violation; abatement by city
   
50.07   Compliance
   
50.08   Fly ash use restricted
Refuse Collection Service
   
50.20   Short title
   
50.21   Enforcement by Director of Public Works
   
50.22   Collection service; city has monopoly
   
50.23   Precollection practices
   
50.24   Frequency of collections
   
50.25   Service charges imposed
   
50.26   Delinquent accounts
Cross-reference:
   Loads dropping or leaking, see §
72.073
   Placing material in streets, see §
71.01
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(10) et seq.
IN GENERAL
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter,
liquid or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or
storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables, and containers originally
used for foodstuffs.
   REFUSE. Garbage, rubbish, or both.
   RUBBISH. All other solid waste material and refuse of every character
accumulated, including trash, debris, yard waste, ashes or similar substances.
(Prior Code, § 923.01) (Ord. 01-07, passed 4-3-2001)
§ 50.02 PROHIBITED DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any street or upon any
sidewalk or other public place, or upon any private property whether owned by
him or her or not, within the city except it be in proper containers for
collection as provided in this chapter, or under express approval granted by
the Director of Refuse Collection Service; nor shall any person throw or
deposit any refuse in any stream, reservoir, well, cistern or other body of
water.
   (B)   No person shall sweep any refuse from any premises onto any sidewalk,
street or public way within the city or shall wash any refuse across any
sidewalk into any street, highway or other public place.
(Prior Code, § 923.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.03 DEPOSITING OF REFUSE SO AS TO PREVENT DISSEMINATION BY WIND AND THE
LIKE.
   No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any
refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements of
nature upon any street, sidewalk, sewer, parkway or other public place or into
any occupied premises within the city.
(Prior Code, § 923.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.04 USE OF STREET REFUSE CANS.
   No person shall use the street rubbish refuse cans provided by the city of
any purpose whatsoever except the deposit by pedestrians of refuse as may be
cast by passersby on the street and no such pedestrians or passersby shall
throw any such substances upon the streets, sidewalks, gutters, open spaces,
vacant lots, spaces between houses, or in any other place than the cans
designated for the deposit of such articles. No owner, occupant, lessee,
janitor or employee of any building or room within the city, or any other
person shall deposit in the street refuse cans any refuse of any kind or nature
whatsoever, which may have been removed from or which may have accumulated in
any storeroom, office, restaurant, sleeping room or any other room or place
within the city.
(Prior Code, § 923.04) (Ord. 01-07, passed 4-3-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.05 DUTY OF OWNERS OR OCCUPANTS TO MAINTAIN PREMISES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant and person in charge of
any premises within the city to maintain such premises free of any accumulation
of garbage, rubbish or other refuse which constitutes a fire or health hazard
or which is dangerous to persons or which otherwise constitutes a nuisance.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant and person in charge of
any premises within the city to maintain such premises free of noxious weeds,
undergrowth and other vegetation which affords a harboring or breeding place
for vermin, insects, rodents or reptiles; and grass which is eight inches or
more in height, not grown for agricultural or horticultural purposes, shall be
deemed UNDERGROWTH within the meaning of this division (B).
   (C)   No person shall suffer or permit any refuse to accumulate and remain
on any premises owned or occupied by him or her or in his or her charge or
custody, whether or not such refuse is in containers, for a period of more than
one week in any case.
(Prior Code, § 923.05) (Ord. 01-07, passed 4-3-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.06 NOTICE TO ABATE VIOLATION; ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   (A)   (1)   Upon investigation and finding by any city officer that any
premises within the city is being maintained contrary to any provision of §
50.05, the Mayor is hereby vested with authority to give written notice, which
may be served in any manner authorized by law, to the owner, occupant or person
in charge of such premises, or to any two or all three of them, believed to be
responsible for such violation.
      (2)   This notice shall specify the condition which constitutes the
violation and shall direct the addressee to abate such violation within a
period of time which shall be stated therein and which shall be not less than
three days nor more than ten days after service of such notice has been
accomplished. Such notice shall also warn the addressee that failure to comply
with the directive contained therein shall subject him or her to prosecution
for a violation of §
50.07 and, in addition shall render him or her liable to the city for any costs
and expenses which may be incurred by the city in the abatement of such
violation under the provisions of division (B) below.
   (B)   If, upon the expiration of the time specified in any such notice for
the abatement of an existing condition such condition has not been abated, the
Mayor shall provide for the abatement of such condition by the most expedient
means, and the costs and expenses thereby incurred shall be collected by the
City Treasurer from the delinquent addressee of such notice in any manner
provided by law for the recovery of taxes, charges or other debts due the city.
(Prior Code, § 923.06)
§ 50.07 COMPLIANCE.
   No person shall violate or fail to comply with any provision of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 923.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.08 FLY ASH USE RESTRICTED.
   No person shall use fly ash at any of the landfills within the city without
covering such fly ash at the end of each working day, or in no event later than
8:00 p.m. of each working day, with dirt or some other substance which would
prevent air pollution by such fly ash and to prevent it from being picked up by
the wind and polluting the air or settling on other properties in the area.
(Prior Code, § 1117.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICE
§ 50.20 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Municipal Refuse
Collection Ordinance of the City of Nitro”, or simply as the “Refuse Collection
Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 923.08)
§ 50.21 ENFORCEMENT BY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Director of Public Works, hereinafter in this subchapter referred to as the
“Director”. The Director shall have authority to promulgate reasonable rules
and regulations in connection with the collection and disposal of refuse
accumulated in the city.
(Prior Code, § 923.09)
§ 50.22 COLLECTION SERVICE; CITY HAS MONOPOLY.
   All garbage, rubbish and refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected,
conveyed and disposed of by the city and subject to all the provisions of this
subchapter and all reasonable rules and regulations at any time adopted by the
Director or by Council. No person other than the city shall, for compensation,
collect or convey over any of the streets of the city any garbage, rubbish or
refuse accumulated in the city.
(Prior Code, § 923.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.23 PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES.
   (A)   Manner of storage in containers. All garbage, after all free liquids
have been drained therefrom, shall be wrapped in paper and placed and stored in
closed containers. All rubbish shall be drained of liquid before being
deposited for collection. All cans and bottles which have contained food shall
be cleaned and washed before being deposited for collection.
   (B)   Duty to provide and maintain refuse containers. Refuse containers
shall be provided, by the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the premises on
which the material to be disposed of originates. Refuse containers shall be
maintained in good condition. The Director shall have the authority to refuse
collection services for failure to comply herewith.
   (C)   Garbage containers. Garbage containers shall be made of metal or other
suitable material equipped with suitable handles and tight-fitting covers and
shall be waterproof and watertight.
   (D)   Curbside pickup required. Any refuse for collection shall be put in
plastic garbage bags and placed at the refuse collection site, curbside or
alley, as appropriate, on the day designated by the city for collection.
   (E)   Unauthorized accumulations. Any accumulation of refuse contrary to any
provision of this chapter on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance
and is prohibited.
   (F)   Time limit on accumulations. No person shall suffer or permit any
garbage to accumulate and remain on the premises in containers, or otherwise,
longer than a period of one week in any event.
   (G)   Time restrictions for setting-out garbage, trash, and other materials
for collection.
      (1)   All residential garbage, trash and yard waste collections will be
normally made between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the designated
collection day. Refuse containers, refuse bags, garbage can liners, bulky
waste, recycling containers, and/or yard waste containers shall be set out at
the refuse collection site, curbside or alley, as appropriate, on the
designated collection day before 6:00 a.m. and no earlier than 4:00 p.m. of the
day preceding the regular collection day.
      (2)   Refuse containers, garbage cans, recycling containers and/or yard
waste containers shall be removed from the refuse collection site no later than
8:00 p.m. on the day of the regular collection. The occupant of the property
shall promptly clean up and remove any scattered solid waste, rejected items,
recyclable material and/or yard waste from the property before 9:00 p.m. on the
day of the scheduled date of regular collection.
   (H)   Special pick-up. Any resident of the city may call the Department of
Public Works for a special pick-up of garbage or refuse; provided, that the
special pick-up shall be subject to the fees stated in §
50.25.
(Prior Code, § 923.11) (Ord. 12-5, passed 9-18-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.24 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   Refuse accumulated by residences shall be collected at least once each
week, unless more frequent collection is approved by the Director because of
weather conditions, emergency conditions or other good cause.
   (B)   Commercial establishments may enter into an agreement for a greater
frequency of collection. Where deemed necessary to protect the public health,
the Director shall have the authority to require that more frequent collections
be made.
   (C)   Rubbish accumulated by residences shall be collected at least once
each month, unless more frequent collection is requested by the resident, and
then, only upon payment of the service charge provided in §
50.25(A).
(Prior Code, § 923.12) (Ord. 01-07, passed 4-3-2001)
§ 50.25 SERVICE CHARGES IMPOSED.
   The following service charges shall be collected by the Director of Public
Works from residential users of certain public works services:
   (A)   For the supplementary collection of rubbish in addition to the regular
monthly collection service, the charge shall be $35;
   (B)   For the collection of bulky appliances, such as stoves, refrigerators
and the like, the charge shall be $25;
   (C)   For the residential use of a municipal truck for refuse collection,
the charge shall be $100. This service will be provided through reservations
only; and
   (D)   Under no circumstances will the city be responsible for the collection
of used tires.
(Prior Code, § 923.13) (Ord. 01-07, passed 4-3-2001)
§ 50.26 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   All accounts under this chapter shall be considered delinquent if not paid
by the last day of each month for which the service is rendered. All delinquent
accounts are subject to stoppage of service without notice. The Director shall
cease all refuse collections for the delinquent accounts.
(Prior Code, § 923.14)
CHAPTER 51: STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION
Section
Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination
   
51.01   Purpose and intent
   
51.02   Definitions
   
51.03   Application
   
51.04   Responsibility for administration
   
51.05   Illicit discharge and connection prohibitions
   
51.06   Watercourse protection
   
51.07   Industrial or construction activity discharges
   
51.08   Requirement to prevent, control and reduce stormwater pollutants
   
51.09   Access to facilities for inspection, monitoring and the like
   
51.10   Notification of spills
   
51.11   Stormwater Utility Board created
   
51.12   Notice of violation
   
51.13   Requirement for reconsideration; appeal of decision made by the Public
Works Director
   
51.14   Appeal of notice of violation
   
51.15   Enforcement measures after appeal
   
51.16   Injunctive relief
   
51.17   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
51.18   Remedies not exclusive
Construction Site Erosion and Sediment Control
   
51.30   Purpose and intent
   
51.31   Definitions
   
51.32   Application
   
51.33   Responsibility for administration
   
51.34   Approval of land disturbing activity
   
51.35   Submission or erosion and sediment control plan; modifications
   
51.36   Erosion and sediment control design requirements
   
51.37   Review and approval of land disturbing activity
   
51.38   Inspection of construction site
   
51.39   Notice of noncompliance and order to correct
   
51.40   Injunctive relief
   
51.41   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
51.42   Remedies not exclusive
 
   
51.99   Penalty
ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
§ 51.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the protection of the
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the
regulation of non-stormwater discharges into the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state
law. This subchapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with the city’s National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit.
   (B)   The objectives of this subchapter are:
      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by non-
stormwater discharges;
      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4;
      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
enforcement, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this subchapter; and
      (4)   To comply with applicable federal and state statutory and
regulatory requirements and schedules regarding the city’s stormwater
management requirements.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices
that, when used singly or in combination, contribute to the control of the
discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into stormwater, receiving
waters or the MS4. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures
and practices to contribute to the control of: site runoff of spillage or
leaks, sludge or water disposal or drainage from raw materials storage. BMPs
can be non-structural, which is an action that does not require construction,
or structural, which involves constructed facilities or measures.
   CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA). The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§
1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION. The act of building, grading, shaping, removing, demolishing,
repairing, erecting, extending, installing equipment or enlarging any building,
structure, grounds or premises.
   FACILITY. For the purposes of this subchapter, a building, structure,
installation, construction site or premises in which pollutants are produced
and/or generated as a result of an activity conducted within or around such
building, structure, installation, construction site or premises.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION. Includes:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illicit discharge to enter the MS4 or waters of the state
including, but not limited to, conveyances which allow any non-stormwater
discharge to enter the MS4 and any connection to the MS4 from indoor drains and
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection was previously allowed,
permitted or approved by the city or the state’s Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP); or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has hot been documented in plans, maps or equivalent
records and approved by a Stormwater Compliance Officer after the effective
date of the ordinance from which this subchapter derives and which has not been
located, identified, documented and provided to a Stormwater Compliance Officer
after written notice.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the MS4 or the waters of the state that
does not consist entirely of stormwater, is not a discharge containing no
pollutants covered under the city’s NPDES MS4 permit, or is not one of those
discharges listed in §
51.05.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. An activity subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE. A standard set forth in the CWA that requires
NPDES permittees to have controls in place that are designed to reduce the
discharge of pollutants to the MS4 and waters of the state, including
management practices, control techniques and system design and engineering
methods.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains) that are:
      (1)   Owned or operated by the city;
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
      (3)   Not a combined sewer; and
      (4)   Not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined in
40 C.F.R. § 122.2.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT. A permit issued by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or
by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants into waters of the United States.
   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGES. Unless otherwise provided in §
51.05, those discharges that include, but are not limited to, sanitary
wastewater, car wash wastewater, radiator flushing disposal, spills from
roadway accidents, carpet cleaning wastewater, effluent from septic tanks,
improper oil disposal, laundry wastewater/gray water, improper disposal of auto
and household toxics.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner’s agent.
   POLLUTANT. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution and may include,
but is not limited to:
      (1)   Paints, varnishes and solvents;
      (2)   Oil and other automotive fluids;
      (3)   Non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
      (4)   Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned
objects;
      (5)   Floatables;
      (6)   Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;
      (7)   Hazardous substances and wastes;
      (8)   Sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
      (9)   Dissolved and particulate heavy metals;
      (10)   Animal wastes;
      (11)   Wastes and residues that result from constructing or renovating a
building or structure;
      (12)   Noxious or offensive matter of any kind;
      (13)   Hyperchlorinated water; and
      (14)   Commercial car and building wash water.
   POLLUTION. The degradation of the physical, thermal, chemical, biological or
radioactive properties of the watercourses and water supplies located in or
running through the city and/or the discharge of any pollutant into the
watercourses and water supplies located in or running through the city which
will or is likely to create a nuisance or to render such waters harmful,
detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare or to impair the
beneficial use of the water and/or the water environment.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation, including groundwater discharge and floodwater.
   STORMWATER COMPLIANCE OFFICER or COMPLIANCE OFFICER. An employee of the city
or city’s Public Works Department designated by the city to administer,
implement and enforce this subchapter.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A document that describes the
best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person to
identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges into stormwater, the MS4 and/or
receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.   
   WATERCOURSE. A body of water flowing in a reasonably defined channel with a
bed and banks.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.03 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall apply to all stormwater and non-stormwater discharges
entering the MS4 from any premises located within the city unless explicitly
exempted by the city or the West Virginia Department of Environmental
Protection (WVDEP).
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The city’s Public Works Department Stormwater Compliance Officers shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.05 ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of illicit discharges.
      (1)   Except for stormwater, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the MS4 or waters of the state any materials, including, but
not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards or any other
federal, state or local regulations.
      (2)   The commencement or continuation of any illicit discharge to the
MS4 is prohibited except as described as follows.
         (a)   Discharges not containing pollutants from the following:
            1.   Potable water sources including waterline flushings from which
chlorine has been removed to the maximum extent practicable;
            2.   Landscape irrigation or lawn watering with potable water;
            3.   Diverted stream flows;
            4.   Rising groundwater;
            5.   Groundwater infiltration to storm drains;
            6.   Pumped groundwater;
            7.   Foundation or footing drains where flows are not contaminated
with pollutants (e.g., do not contain process materials such as solvents, heavy
metals and the like);
            8.   Crawl space pumps;
            9.   Air conditioning condensation;
            10.   Uncontaminated groundwater or spring water;
            11.   Springs;
            12.   Dewatering of work areas of collected stormwater and
groundwater (filtering or chemical treatment may be necessary prior to
discharge);
            13.   Water used to control dust;
            14.   Routine external building washdown that does not use
detergents or other chemicals;
            15.   Waters used to wash vehicles (of dust and soil, not process
materials such as oils, asphalt or concrete) where detergents are not used and
detention and/or filtering is provided before the water leaves the wash site;
            16.   Non-commercial washing of vehicles;
            17.   Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows;
            18.   Swimming pools (if dechlorinated to a concentration of one
PPM chlorine or less);
            19.   Firefighting activities; or
            20.   Any other water source not containing pollutants.
         (b)   Discharges approved in writing by a Compliance Officer as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
         (c)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires written
notification to a Compliance Officer prior to the time of the test.
         (d)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the EPA, provided that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or
order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge into the MS4.
   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.
      (1)   The construction, use or maintenance of continued existence of
illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
previously permitted by the city and/or permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. Where such connections
exist in violation of this subchapter and said connections were made prior to
the effective date of this subchapter or any other ordinance prohibiting such
connections, the property owner or the person using said connection shall
remove the connection within six months following the effective date of this
subchapter. However, the six- month grace period shall not apply to connections
which pose an immediate threat to health and safety, or are likely to result in
immediate injury and harm to real or personal property, natural resources,
wildlife or habitat.
      (3)   This prohibition includes any drain or conveyance connected from a
commercial or industrial land use to the MS4 that has not been documented in
plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by a Compliance Officer after
the effective date of this subchapter unless or until such drain or conveyance
is located, identified, documented and the documentation is provided to and
approved by a Compliance Officer. The property owner or person using such drain
or conveyance shall locate the same upon receipt of written notice from a
Compliance Officer. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within
which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the
drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and
that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system,
sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these
investigations are to be documented and provided to the requesting Compliance
Officer.
      (4)   A person shall be in violation of this subchapter if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to
continue.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee as a condition of its lease, shall keep and maintain that part
of the watercourse located within the property free of trash, debris, excessive
vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or cause the
flow of water through the watercourse to back up. In addition, the owner or
lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to
a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function or physical integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.07 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to a
Compliance Officer prior to the allowance of discharges into the MS4.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.08 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS.
   The city will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for
any activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution
or contamination of stormwater, the MS4 or waters of the state. The owner or
operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at his or
her own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses through the use of these
structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premises which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge,
may be required to implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural
and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to
the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention
plan as is necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.09 ACCESS TO FACILITIES FOR INSPECTION, MONITORING AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have
stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.
   (B)   Access to facilities.
      (1)   To the fullest extent permitted by law, Compliance Officers bearing
proper identification are authorized by this subchapter to enter and inspect
regulated facilities to determine compliance with this subchapter.
      (2)   Facility operators shall allow Compliance Officers reasonable
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspecting, monitoring,
sampling, measuring or testing the facility’s stormwater discharge. Compliance
Officers shall also be allowed reasonable access for the purpose of copying
records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit.
      (3)   If a Compliance Officer has been refused access to any part of the
premises of a facility from which stormwater is discharged, and he or she is
able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of
this subchapter involving illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into
stormwater, the MS4 or waters of the state; or that there is a need to inspect
and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to
verify compliance with this subchapter or any order issued hereunder; or to
protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then
the Compliance Officer may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction to conduct of an investigation concerning compliance
with the terms of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.10 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of state or federal law, as soon as any
person responsible for a facility or responsible for emergency response for a
facility has information of any known or suspected release of materials which
are resulting, or may result, in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging
into stormwater, the MS4 or waters of the state, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of all other illicit
discharges, said person shall notify the city’s Stormwater Management
Department in person or by phone or email, no later than the next business day.
All relevant contact information shall be listed on the city’s website.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Stormwater Management Department within three
business days of the notice. If the illicit discharge emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and
the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for
at least three years.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.11 STORMWATER UTILITY BOARD CREATED.
   (A)   There is hereby created in and for the city, the city’s Stormwater
Utility Board, which shall hear and decide appeals of any order or decision of
a Compliance Officer or any denial of a request for reconsideration by the city
issued pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   The Stormwater Utility Board shall be comprised of the Public Works
Director, the Mayor and a minimum of three persons appointed by the Mayor, two
of whom must be current members of the City Council and one person not employed
by the city who is qualified by knowledge and experience in matters pertaining
to construction and/or engineering. Members of the Board shall serve for terms
of three years and do not receive compensation, but shall be reimbursed for all
reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in the performance of their
official duties.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provisions in this code to the contrary, any
person employed by, owning an interest in or otherwise associated with an owner
or person that regularly conducts business in front of the Stormwater
Management Board may also serve as a member of the Stormwater Management Board
and shall not be disqualified from serving as a member because of a conflict of
interest as defined in W. Va. Code 61-10-15, and shall not be subject to
prosecution under provisions of that chapter when the violation is created
solely as a result of his or her relationship with the owner or person. The
member must, however, recuse himself or herself from any vote, discussion,
participation or other activity regarding any colorable conflict recognized
under state law.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provisions in this code to the contrary, any
person employed by, owning an interest in or otherwise associated with an owner
or person that regularly conducts business in front of the Stormwater
Management Board may also serve as a member of the Stormwater Management Board
and shall not be in violation of W. Va. Code 6B-2-5(g) if the member recuses
himself or herself from any vote, discussion, participation or other activity
regarding any conflict; provided, that such members do not constitute a
majority of the members of the Stormwater Management Board at the same time.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.12 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   When a Compliance Officer determines after reasonable observation or
investigation that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this subchapter, he or she may order compliance by written
notice of violation to that person. Such notice may require, without
limitation:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      (3)   That discharges, practices or operations that are in violation
shall cease and desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and/or
      (5)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (B)   Notice(s) of violation shall be served in accordance with the law of
the state concerning the service of process in civil actions, except that a
method of service effectuated by a mailing by the clerk of a court (e.g.,
service pursuant to State Rule of Civil Procedure 4(d)(1)(D)) shall be deemed
to be effectuated by a mailing by a Compliance Officer. If service is made by
certified mail consistent with State Rule of Civil Procedure 4(d)(1)(D) and
delivery of the notice of the violation is refused, the Compliance Officer,
promptly upon the receipt of the notice of such refusal, shall mail to the
person being noticed, by first class mail, postage prepaid:
      (1)   A copy of the notice of the violation(s);
      (2)   A notice that despite such refusal, the notice of the violation(s)
is valid; and
      (3)   Advising that the city will proceed to enforce the notice of
violation(s). So long as such first class mailing is not returned as
undeliverable by the U.S. Postal Service, service of the notice of violation(s)
will be conclusively presumed to have been effectuated. Proof of service shall
be made at the time of service by a written declaration, under oath, executed
by the enforcement official effecting service and shall declare the time, date
and manner by which service was made.
   (C)   Any notice of violation(s) under this section shall be in writing and
shall contain the following:
      (1)   The date the notice of violation is given;
      (2)   The name and address of the person(s) charged with the violation;
      (3)   The nature of the violation;
      (4)   A statement of the action required to be taken in order to correct
the violation and further prevent it;
      (5)   The time period allowed for the violation to be corrected. When
determining the time period allowed for correction, a Compliance Officer shall
take into consideration the threat posed by the violation to the health, safety
and welfare of the public and the nature of the work required to correct the
violation;
      (6)   The maximum fines that may be assessed if the violation is not
corrected and a citation is issued; and
      (7)   The name, address and telephone number of the Compliance Officer
issuing the notice of violation.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of Compliance
Officers to take any other lawfully prescribed enforcement action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
notice of violation.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.13 REQUIREMENT FOR RECONSIDERATION; APPEAL OF DECISION MADE BY THE PUBLIC
WORKS DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Any person receiving a notice of violation from a Compliance Officer
may submit a written request for reconsideration to the Public Works Director
by mailing said request to the Nitro Public Works Department, P.O. Box 308,
Nitro, WV 25143, or by hand delivering said request to the Public Works
Director, 194 Republic Way, Nitro, WV 25143. The request for reconsideration
must be received within ten days from the date of the notice of violation and
shall include a written explanation of the basis for the request. Upon receipt
of a timely request for reconsideration, the Public Works Director shall review
the request and shall:
      (1)   Uphold the notice of violation;
      (2)   Reverse the notice of violation; or
      (3)   Modify the notice of violation and shall provide written notice by
certified mail of his or her decision to the person within 15 days of receipt
thereof.
   (B)   When a notice of violation is upheld by the Public Works Director as
outlined in division (A) above, the person may appeal the decision of the
city’s Stormwater Utility Board by mailing a notice of appeal to Nitro
Stormwater Utility Board, c/o Office of the Mayor, P.O. Box 308, Nitro, WV
25143, or by hand delivering said request to the city’s Stormwater Utility
Board, Office of the Mayor, 2009 20th Street, Nitro, West Virginia, 25143. When
appealing a decision by the Public Works Director, the notice of appeal to the
Stormwater Utility Board must be received within ten days from the date of the
receipt of the written notice of the Public Works Directors decision. Hearing
on the appeal shall be before the city’s Stormwater Utility Board and said
hearing shall take place within 30 business days from the date of receipt of
the notice of appeal. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Stormwater Utility
Board shall either grant or deny the appeal in writing within ten days, and
provide written notice by certified mail of its decision to the person who
appealed. The decision of the Stormwater Utility Board shall be final. Failure
to file a notice of appeal within the period set forth herein shall constitute
a waiver of the right to appeal to the Stormwater Utility Board, shall result
in the decision of the Public Works Director being final, and the notice of
violation shall be fully enforceable as set forth in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.14 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any person receiving a notice of violation who chooses not to request
reconsideration by the Public Works Director may appeal the notice of violation
directly to the Stormwater Utility Board by mailing a notice of appeal to the
Nitro Stormwater Utility Board, c/o Office of the Mayor, P.O. Box 308, Nitro,
WV 25143, or by hand delivering said request to the city’s Stormwater Utility
Board, Office of the Mayor, 2009 20th Street, Nitro, West Virginia, 25143. When
appealing a notice of violation where no reconsideration by the Public Works
Director has been requested, the notice of appeal to the Stormwater Utility
Board must be received within ten days from the date of the notice of
violation.
   (B)   Hearing on the appeal shall be before the Stormwater Utility Board and
said hearing shall take place within 30 business days from the date of receipt
of the notice of appeal. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city’s
Stormwater Utility Board shall either grant or deny the appeal in writing
within ten days and provide written notice by certified mail of its decision to
the person who appealed. The decision of the Stormwater Utility Board shall be
final. Failure to file a notice of appeal within the period set forth herein
shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal to the city’s Stormwater
Utility Board and the notice of violation shall be fully enforceable as set
forth in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.15 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   (A)   If the violation has not been corrected within ten days or any other
period specified by the Stormwater Management Board in its decision, then the
Compliance Officer shall request the owner’s permission for access to the
subject private property to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to
abate the violation and/or bring the property into compliance.
   (B)   If refused access to the subject property, the Compliance Officer may
seek a warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter
upon the property.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.16 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this subchapter. If a person has
violated or continues to violate the provisions of this subchapter, the city
may petition a court of competent jurisdiction for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation. Any such person against whom such an injunction is issued shall be
responsible for paying all costs of the city in obtaining and enforcing such
injunction, including the court costs and attorney’s fees.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.17 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided in
this subchapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any
of the provisions of this subchapter shall be considered a threat to the public
health, safety, welfare and the environment, may be declared and deemed a
nuisance, and may be summarily abated and/or restored by, or at the direction
of, the city, by and through its Compliance Officer. The city may initiate any
administrative and civil actions as necessary to abate, enjoin or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance.
   (B)   The cost of such abatement and/or restoration shall be the sole
responsibility of the owner of the property and the cost thereof shall be a
lien upon and against the property. Such lien shall continue in existence until
the same shall be paid.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.18 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this subchapter are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is
within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
§ 51.30 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the protection of the
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the
regulation of those construction projects where the discharge of sediment and
other construction-related pollutants into adjacent waterways is likely to
occur.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLEARING. Any activity that removes or causes the removal of the vegetative
surface cover.
   CONSTRUCTION. The act of building, grading, shaping, removing, demolishing,
repairing, erecting, extending, installing equipment on/in, or enlarging any
building, structure, grounds or premises.
   CONSTRUCTION SITE. A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof
where land disturbing activity occurs.
   DRAINAGE WAY. Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the
construction site.
   EROSION. The wearing-away of land surface by natural or artificial forces
such as wind, water, ice, gravity or vehicle traffic.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN (ESCP). A set of plans indicating the
specific measures and sequencing to be used to control erosion and sediment on
a construction site.
   EROSION CONTROL. A measure that is designed to prevent erosion.
   GRADING. The cutting and/or filling of the land surface to a desired slope,
elevation or contour.
   IMPERVIOUS AREA. An area composed of any material which impedes or prevents
the natural infiltration of water into the soil, including, but not limited to,
concrete, asphalt and roof surfaces.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY (LDA). Any activity that results in the movement or
manipulation of soil, rock or other earth materials. This includes, but is not
limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavation, filling, embankment
construction, road grading, ditch cleaning, mineral extraction, commercial
timbering, initial landscape preparation and stockpiling of earth materials.
The activities set forth in §
51.34(B) are exempt from the definition of LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY for
purposes of this subchapter.
   PERIMETER CONTROL. A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by
filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner’s agent.
   PHASING. Disturbing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the
stabilization of each phase completed before disturbance of the next phase.
   SEDIMENT. Soil, sand, silt and minerals washed from land into water.
   SEDIMENT CONTROL. Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving a
construction site.
   STABILIZATION. The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The first land disturbing activity associated with a
construction project.
   STORMWATER COMPLIANCE OFFICER or COMPLIANCE OFFICER. An employee of the
city’s Public Works Department designated by the city to administer, implement
and enforce this subchapter.
   WATERCOURSE. A body of water flowing in a reasonably defined channel with a
bed and banks.
   WATERWAY. A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the
MS4.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.32 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall apply to all construction projects located within the
city that involve land disturbing activity (LDA) exceeding 5,000 square feet,
or an increase in impervious area by 1,000 square feet or greater unless
exempted by §
51.34(B).
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.33 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   City Public Works Department Stormwater Compliance Officers shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.34 APPROVAL OF LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Any person applying for a city building permit that proposes a
construction project involving LDA exceeding 5,000 square feet, or an increase
in impervious area by 1,000 square feet or greater, is required to obtain
approval for such LDA from the city’s Building Department’s office. Requests
for approval shall be made at the time of application for a building permit;
provided, however, that a building permit shall not be issued in the absence of
prior approval of LDA by the Public Works Department’s office.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, approval for LDA shall not be
required for the following activities:
      (1)   Interior renovations;
      (2)   Roof repair;
      (3)   Building facade maintenance;
      (4)   Milling and repaving of existing asphalt or concrete streets,
parking lots or sidewalks;
      (5)   Maintenance of existing landscaping or gardens;
      (6)   Cutting of trees and brush (provided the area remains vegetated and
no grubbing of root system occurs); and
      (7)   Maintenance of pervious sports fields such as replacement of the
clay surface to baseball infields, turf plugging of golf fairways and greens.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.35 SUBMISSION OR EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN; MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Any person requesting approval of LDA is required to submit an erosion
and sediment control plan (ESCP) to the city’s Building Department as part of
the building permit application for review and approval by the city’s Building
Department’s office. The ESCP shall comply with the provisions set forth in the
city’s Stormwater Management Guidance Manual regarding Erosion and Sediment
Control Measures. The Stormwater Management Guidance Manual will be available
to the public on the city’s website, as well as on file at the city’s Public
Works Department and the city’s Building Department offices.
   (B)   All control measures set forth in an approved ESCP shall be followed
and maintained at all times during the construction project unless modified
with the approval of the Public Works Department’s office. Any significant
modifications to an ESCP must be approved by the Public Works Director’s office
via written authorization to the permittee. Minor modifications to the ESCP may
be approved by the Public Works Department’s office at the construction site.
   (C)   A copy of the approved ESCP shall be kept on the construction site
during all stages of a construction project and shall be made available for
review upon request by a Compliance Officer.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.36 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices and
waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the most recent
version of the city’s Stormwater Management Guidance Manual and shall be
adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the construction site to
the satisfaction of the Public Works Department’s office.
   (B)   Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as protected habitats
and wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with the
Stormwater Management Guidance Manual.
   (C)   Clearing, except to the extent necessary to establish sediment control
devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed
and have been stabilized.
   (D)   Minimum erosion control requirements shall include:
      (1)   Temporary seeding must be applied if the construction site is idle
for more than 21 days;
      (2)   Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in the
Stormwater Management Guidance Manual on steep slopes or in drainage ways shall
be used to ensure stabilization;
      (3)   Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at all times;
      (4)   The entire construction site must be stabilized at the close of the
construction season, which may include, but is not limited to, temporary
seeding, mulching and the use of erosion controls;
      (5)   Techniques shall be employed to prevent the transportation of dust
or sediment from the construction site; and
      (6)   Techniques shall be employed to divert upstream runoff away from
LDA without causing any additional erosion.
   (E)   Minimum sediment control requirements shall include sediment basins,
sediment traps and/or perimeter controls.
   (F)   Minimum waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall
include:
      (1)   Approval of a waterway or watercourse crossing by all applicable
federal and state agencies having jurisdiction, which may include, but is not
limited to, the state’s Department of Natural Resources, United States Army
Corps of Engineers and the United States Environmental Protection Agency;
      (2)   Stabilization of a watercourse before, during and after any in-
channel work;
      (3)   All on-site stormwater conveyance channels designed according to
the criteria outlined in the Stormwater Management Guidance Manual; and
      (4)   Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of
all pipes and paved channels.
   (G)   Construction site access requirements shall include establishment and
maintenance of a stabilized construction site entrance as outlined in the
Stormwater Management Guidance Manual.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.37 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY.
   The Public Works Department’s office shall review each request for approval
of LDA and the corresponding ESCP to determine conformance with the
requirements of this subchapter. Within ten days after receiving a building
permit application and corresponding ESCP, the Public Works Department’s office
shall, in writing:
   (A)   Approve the requested LDA and corresponding ESCP;
   (B)   Approve the requested LDA and corresponding ESCP subject to conditions
as may be necessary to satisfy the objectives of this subchapter; or
   (C)   Deny the requested LDA and corresponding ESCP, indicating the reason
(s) for denial and the procedure for submitting a revised ESCP, if appropriate.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.38 INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION SITE.
   (A)   All construction sites involving LDA and requiring an approved ESCP
shall be inspected and approved by a Compliance Officer at each stage of
construction consistent with the seven stages set forth in this division (A).
Compliance Officers shall inspect construction sites as authorized by this
section and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall
notify the person receiving approval for the LDA that the work is not in
compliance with the approved ESCP. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating and
filling work bearing the stamp of approval of a Compliance Officer shall be
maintained at the construction site during all stages of the project. To obtain
the required inspections for each stage of construction, the person receiving
approval for the LDA shall notify the Public Works Department’s office at least
two working days before each of the following stages:
      (1)   Installation of erosion and sediment control measures;
      (2)   Start of construction;
      (3)   Completion of site clearing and rough grading;
      (4)   Installation of any stormwater conveyance structures;
      (5)   Completion of final grading;
      (6)   Close of the construction season; and
      (7)   Completion of project.
   (B)   The person receiving approval for LDA and corresponding ESCP shall
make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the
inspection schedule outlined in the approved ESCP. The purpose of such
inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the ESCP and the
potential need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be
documented in writing and submitted to the Public Works Department’s office at
the time intervals specified in the Stormwater Management Guidance Manual.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.39 NOTICE OF NONCOMPLIANCE AND ORDER TO CORRECT.
   (A)   When a Compliance Officer determines after reasonable observation or
investigation that a person has not complied with any provision of this
subchapter or has failed to comply with an approved ESCP, the Compliance
Officer may order compliance by written notice of noncompliance and order to
correct.
   (B)   (1)   Notice(s) of noncompliance and order(s) to correct shall be
served in accordance with the law of the state concerning the service of
process in civil actions, except that a method of service effectuated by a
mailing by the clerk of a court (e.g., service pursuant to State Rule of Civil
Procedure 4(d)(1)(D)) shall be deemed to be effectuated by a mailing by a
Compliance Officer. If service is made by certified mail consistent with State
Rule of Civil Procedure 4(d)(1)(D) and delivery of the notice of noncompliance
and order to correct is refused, the Compliance Officer, promptly upon the
receipt of the notice of such refusal, shall mail to the person being noticed,
by first class mail, postage prepaid:
         (a)   A copy of the notice of noncompliance and order to correct;
         (b)   A notice that despite such refusal, the notice of noncompliance
and order to correct is valid; and
         (c)   Advising that the city will proceed to enforce the notice of
noncompliance and order to correct.
      (2)   So long as such first class mailing is not returned as
undeliverable by the U.S. Postal Service, service of the notice of
noncompliance and order to correct will be conclusively presumed to have been
effectuated. Proof of service shall be made at the time of service by a written
declaration, under oath, executed by the enforcement official effecting service
and shall declare the time, date and manner by which service was made.
   (C)   Any notice of noncompliance and order to correct under this section
shall be in writing and shall contain the following;
      (1)   The date the notice of noncompliance and order to correct is given;
      (2)   The name and address of the person(s) charged with the
noncompliance;
      (3)   The nature of the noncompliance;
      (4)   A statement of the action required to be taken in order to correct
the noncompliance and further prevent it;
      (5)   The time period allowed for correction. When determining the time
period allowed for correction, a Compliance Officer shall take into
consideration the threat posed by the noncompliance to the health, safety and
welfare of the public and the nature of the work required to correct the
noncompliance;
      (6)   The maximum fines that may be assessed if the noncompliance is not
corrected and a citation is issued; and
      (7)   The name, address and telephone number of the Compliance Officer
issuing the notice of noncompliance and order to correct.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of Compliance
Officers to take any other lawfully prescribed enforcement action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
notice of noncompliance and order to correct.
   (E)   Failure to correct the noncompliance by the date set forth in the
notice of noncompliance and order to correct shall be reported to the Building
Department. Any subsequent work performed shall constitute work being performed
in a dangerous or unsafe manner or in a manner contrary to the State Building
Code, as adopted by the municipal code, and the person charged with the
noncompliance may be issued a stop work order or the building permit may be
revoked.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.40 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this subchapter. If a person has
violated or continues to violate the provisions of this subchapter, the city
may petition a court of competent jurisdiction for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation. Any such person against whom such an injunction is issued shall be
responsible for paying all costs of the city in obtaining and enforcing such
injunction, including the court costs and attorney’s fees.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.41 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided in
this subchapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any
of the provisions of this subchapter shall be considered a threat to the public
health, safety, welfare and the environment, may be declared and deemed a
nuisance, and may be summarily abated and/or restored by, or at the direction
of, the city, by and through its Compliance Officer. The city may initiate any
administrative or civil actions as necessary and appropriate to abate, enjoin
or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance.
   (B)   The cost of any such abatement and/or restoration by the city shall be
the sole responsibility of the owner of the property and the cost thereof shall
be a lien upon and against the property. Such lien shall continue in existence
until the same shall be paid.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.42 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this subchapter are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is
within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   In addition to, and not in lieu of, any administrative remedy provided
in §§
51.01 to
51.18, violations of §§
51.01 to
51.18 shall be a criminal misdemeanor, subject to criminal citation and
punishable by a fine of an amount not to exceed state law. Every day or portion
thereof that a person fails or refuses to remedy a violation shall be
considered a separate offense. Fines may be reduced by the Municipal Court only
upon agreement of the city by and through its prosecutor.
   (C)   In addition to any administrative remedy provided in §§
51.30 to
51.42, violations of §§
51.30 to
51.42 constitute a criminal misdemeanor, subject to criminal citation and
punishable by a fine of an amount not to exceed state law. Every day or portion
thereof that a person fails or refuses to remedy a violation shall be
considered a separate offense. Fines may be reduced by the municipal court only
upon agreement of the city by and through its prosecutor.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2016)
CHAPTER 52: SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Connections for existing buildings
   
52.03   Connections for buildings hereafter erected
   
52.04   Connections for buildings on premises which hereafter become accessible
   
52.05   Privies, cesspools and the like prohibited
   
52.06   Sewer tapping
   
52.07   Prohibited discharge of stormwater
   
52.08   Garbage not properly shredded
   
52.09   Industrial waste regulations
   
52.10   Prohibited removal of sewer and manhole covers
   
52.11   Private sewage disposal systems
   
52.12   Sanitary sewer service charge
   
52.13   Applicability of water rates and charges
   
52.14   Sewer rates
   
52.15   Deposit of revenues; no free service
   
52.16   Sinking fund
   
52.17   Delinquent accounts; remedies
 
   
52.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Sanitary Board, §§
32.045 to
32.049
Statutory reference:
   Deposit limitations, see W. Va. Code 24-3-8
   Power to collect charges, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(32), 16-13-16
   Review by Public Service Commission, see W. Va. Code 24-2-4
   Sewer connections, see W. Va. Code 8-18-22
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer designated to receive both sewage and stormwater
runoff.
   COMMERCIAL USER. A user of the city sewage system in a location where a
trade, business, profession or occupation is carried on or where a service is
rendered.
   DOMESTIC USER. Each family unit which uses the sewerage system of this city;
the family unit may consist of one or more persons, and where there is more
than one family unit using water from the same water meter or under the same
roof, each family unit shall be considered a separate DOMESTIC USER.
   GARBAGE. Solid waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. A user of the city sewerage system such as factories and
like organizations where more than 25 persons are employed.
   OCCUPIED BUILDING. Any structure erected and intended for continuous or
periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, or either thereof, is or may
be discharged.
   PREMISES ACCESSIBLE TO THE SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM. Any real estate which
adjoins, abuts or is adjacent to the public sanitary sewerage system, or any
real estate which might be connected to that system by construction of a
private sewer of not more than 100 feet in length.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, where no particle is greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM. All separate sanitary sewers, all combined
sewers, all sewage pumping stations, all sewage treatment works and other
facilities provided and owned by the city for the collection, transportation
and treatment of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, with their
appurtenances and any additions, extensions or improvements thereto that may be
made by the city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the city
limits which serve one or more persons and discharge into the city sanitary
sewerage system even though those sewers may not have been constructed by city
funds. It does not include separate storm sewers or culverts which have been
constructed for the sole purpose of carrying storm and surface runoff, the
discharge from which is not and does not become tributary to the city’s sewage
treatment facilities.
   PUBLIC USER. A user of the city sewerage system by governmental,
educational, church, charitable, benevolent, civic, service or like units or
organizations.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, industries and commercial
establishments, exclusive of stormwater runoff, surface water or groundwater.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage to which storm, surface and
groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface or stormwater as may be present.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage or other waste liquids.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer which is intended to carry stormwater runoff, surface
water, groundwater drainage and the like, but which is not intended to carry
any sanitary sewage or polluted industrial waste.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. The portion of the rainfall which reaches a drain.
(Prior Code, § 915.01)
§ 52.02 CONNECTIONS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS.
   All persons owning any occupied building existing within the city, as of the
effective date of this code, upon premises accessible to the public sanitary
sewerage system shall, if not already connected, make connection with the
sanitary sewerage system forthwith, at their own expense.
(Prior Code, § 915.02)
§ 52.03 CONNECTIONS FOR BUILDINGS HEREAFTER ERECTED.
   All persons owning any premises within the city accessible to the public
sanitary sewerage system upon which a building is hereafter erected, shall at
the time of erection of such building, and at their own expense, make the
connection with the public sanitary sewerage system.
(Prior Code, § 915.03)
§ 52.04 CONNECTIONS FOR BUILDINGS ON PREMISES WHICH HEREAFTER BECOME
ACCESSIBLE.
   All persons owning any occupied building within the city upon premises which
hereafter become accessible to the public sanitary sewerage system shall, at
their own expense, make the connection with the public sanitary sewerage system
within three months after notice to do so from the Sanitary Board or its
authorized representative.
(Prior Code, § 915.04)
§ 52.05 PRIVIES, CESSPOOLS AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person owning any occupied building within the city on premises
accessible to the public sewage system shall erect, construct, use or maintain,
or cause to be erected, used or maintained any privy, cesspool, sinkhole,
septic tank or other such receptacle on such premises for receiving sanitary
sewage.
   (B)   Any person who erects, constructs or maintains a privy, cesspool,
sinkhole, septic tank or other receptacle for receiving sanitary sewage on any
property within the city which is accessible to the public sewage system in
violation of this section shall be punished as provided in §
51.99, and each day that any person shall continue the violation of any of the
provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 915.05) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 SEWER TAPPING.
   (A)   Permit required from Building Inspector. No person shall cut, break,
pierce or tap any public sewer owned or controlled by the city or any
appurtenance thereof, or introduce any tube, pipe, trough or conduit into any
such public sewer or appurtenance thereof without a written permit from the
Building Inspector.
   (B)   Form and approval of permit. The Building Inspector shall prepare and
prescribe the form for such permit and such form shall show that the proposed
connection has been approved by the Building Inspector or someone designated by
him or her.
   (C)   Required inspection. Before the connection authorized to be made to
any sewer shall be covered, it shall be inspected by the Building Inspector or
a person designated by him or her and approved by him or her.
   (D)   Fees. Every person applying for a sewer connection permit shall, at
the time of making application, pay to the Building Inspector, in addition to
any fee or fees which may be required by the Plumbing Code, the inspection and
connection fees required under the provisions of §
52.14.
   (E)   Specifications. Every such tap or connection shall be made to conform
to the requirements of the Plumbing Code and specifications prepared and
approved by the Building Inspector.
   (F)   Notice to city when work ready for inspection. Each permit holder
under this section shall give the Building Inspector 24 hours’ notice of the
need for inspection of the work of tapping or connecting to the sewer,
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted; and such inspection shall normally be
made within 48 hours of the time requested for such inspection.
(Prior Code, § 915.06) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.07 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER.
   (A)   No person shall, knowingly or through gross negligence, suffer or
allow surface or stormwater accumulating on roofs, buildings, sidewalks, lawns
or from any other source owned by him or her or under his or her control to
drain into the sanitary sewer system of the city; and all persons connecting
property to the public sanitary sewerage system shall provide adequate means
for excluding stormwater runoff in the event connection is made to separate
sanitary sewers.
   (B)   The provisions of this section do not prohibit the present or future
discharge of stormwater runoff to combined sewers.
(Prior Code, § 915.07) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.08 GARBAGE NOT PROPERLY SHREDDED.
   The discharge of garbage to the public sanitary sewerage system is expressly
prohibited unless such garbage is first properly shredded.
(Prior Code, § 915.08) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.09 INDUSTRIAL WASTE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge any
industrial waste having any of the following characteristics to the public
sanitary sewerage system:
      (1)   Wastes containing liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of
their nature or quality, may cause fire, explosion or be in any other way
injurious to persons, the structures or the sewerage system or its operation;
      (2)   Wastes having a temperature in excess of 160°F or less than 32°F;
      (3)   Wastes having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazards to structures, equipment or personnel of the public sanitary sewerage
system;
      (4)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which, either singly or
by interaction with sewage or other wastes, is, in the opinion of the Sanitary
Board, likely to create a public nuisance or hazard of life, or prevent entry
to sewers for their maintenance and repair;
      (5)   Solids, greases, lime slurry or viscous materials of such character
or in such quantity that, in the opinion of the Sanitary Board, they may cause
an obstruction to the flow in sewer or otherwise interfere with the proper
operation of the public sanitary sewerage system; or
      (6)   Any toxic radioactive isotopes without a special permit.
   (B)   No provision contained in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement to be entered into between the
Sanitary Board and any person whereby any industrial waste of unusual strength
or character may be admitted to the public sanitary sewerage system either
before or after pretreatment by the producer of such industrial waste.
(Prior Code, § 915.09) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.10 PROHIBITED REMOVAL OF SEWER AND MANHOLE COVERS.
   No unauthorized person shall remove any lid or cover from any sewer line or
sewer line manhole within the city.
(Prior Code, § 915.10) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.11 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not accessible, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying
with all applicable rules and regulations of the state and county Boards of
Health.
   (B)   At such time as a public sanitary or combined sewer becomes accessible
to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any
septic tank, cesspool and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be
abandoned and the location thereof shall be put in a safe and sanitary
condition.
   (C)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
(Prior Code, § 915.11)
§ 52.12 SANITARY SEWER SERVICE CHARGE.
   There is hereby levied and assessed against all owners, tenants or occupants
of each and every lot or parcel of real estate or building having any active
connection with the public sanitary sewage system or otherwise discharging
sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids, either directly or
indirectly, into that system or any part thereof, a service charge, payable as
hereinafter provided for and in the amount hereinafter provided for.
(Prior Code, § 915.12)
§ 52.13 APPLICABILITY OF WATER RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   The sanitary sewer rates and charges shall be based, insofar as
possible, upon the quantity of water supplied each month to the respective
premises as the same is measured by the West Virginia - American Water Company
water meter or meters therein used.
   (B)   In the event a building or premises discharging sewage, water or other
liquid wastes into the city sanitary sewage system uses water supplied on other
than a metered basis from the West Virginia - American Water Company or from
any other source of water supply, the owner or occupant may be required to
cause a water meter or other measuring device to be installed, but, pending
such installation, the sewer service rates and charges to such building or
premises shall be at least equivalent to the average water bill based on the
rates and charges as established in this chapter, in the previous year of
similar buildings or premises with similar occupancy which are served by the
West Virginia - American Water Company.
(Prior Code, § 915.13)
§ 52.14 SEWER RATES.
   (A)   Findings.
      (1)   The city owns and operates a certain wastewater collection and
treatment system in and around the city.
      (2)   The Sanitary Board, acting on behalf of the Nitro Regional Waste
Water Utility, has determined that a step one 11.5% rate increase in the
existing rates is necessary and a second step increase of 7% over the step one
increase effective one year after the implementation of the step one increase
is also necessary.
      (3)   The Sanitary Board has requested the City Council to amend and
reenact the city’s rate Ordinance by an Ordinance with a tariff containing
incurred rates, tolls and charges for furnishing sanitary sewer service to
4,166 customers in the city and its environs in the Counties of Kanawha and
Putnam in order to provide for such step one 11.5% increase and to further
provide for such 7% increase over the step one increase, such second increase
to be effective one year from the date of implementation of the step one
increase.
   (B)   Step one and subsequent sewer rates.
      (1)   On and after the effective date of this chapter, the step one rates
and charges for the use and services rendered by the sanitary sewer system of
the city shall be as follows.
Service Fee
Service                                Fee
First 2,000 gallons used per month     $10.31 per 1,000 gallons
Next 3,000 gallons used per month      $8.65 per 1,000 gallons
Next 25,000 gallons used per month     $6.72 per 1,000 gallons
All over 30,000 gallons used per month $6.04 per 1,000 gallons
Minimum rate                           $20.63 based upon 2,000 gallons
Average bill                           4,000 gallons $37.93
                                       Each un-metered residential customer
Residential flat rate                  shall be charged a flat rate of $39.49
                                       per month
 
      (2)   On and after the end of the 12 months immediately succeeding the
effective date of the step one rates approved in this section, the step two
rates and charges for the use of and services rendered by the Nitro Regional
Wastewater Utility shall be as follows.
Service Fee
Service                                Fee
First 2,000 gallons used per month     $11.04 per 1,000 gallons
Next 3,000 gallons used per month      $9.26 per 1,000 gallons
Next 25,000 gallons used per month     $7.19 per 1,000 gallons
All over 30,000 gallons used per month $6.47 per 1,000 gallons
Minimum rate                           $22.07 based upon 2,000 gallons
Average bill                           4,000 gallons $40.59
                                       Each un-metered residential customer
Residential flat rate                  shall be charged a flat rate of $42.26
                                       per month.
 
   (C)   Other fees and charges.
      (1)   Deposits and connection fees. On and after the effective date of
this section, all customers of the Nitro Regional Waste Water Utility, in
addition to the foregoing volume based rates, will also be subject to the fees
and charges provided below.
 
Service                       Fee
Security deposit              $70*
Service connection inspection $25
fee
Service connection (tap) fee  $400
*A security deposit shall be collected from all new applicants for service
to secure the payment of service rates, fees and charges in the event they
become delinquent. In any case where a deposit is forfeited to pay service
rates, fees and charges which were delinquent at the time of disconnection
or termination of service, service may not be reconnected or reinstated
until another deposit is collected. After 12 months of prompt payment
history, a customer’s deposit shall either be returned to the customer or
credited to the customer’s account, in either case with interest at such
rate as may be prescribed by the Public Service Commission; provided, that
where the customer is a tenant, the deposit need not be returned until the
customer discontinues service.
 
      (2)   Delayed payment penalty.
         (a)   The above schedule is net. For any bill not paid in full within
20 days, 10% will be added to the net amount thereof. This delayed payment
penalty is not interest and is only to be collected once for each bill where
appropriate.
 
Service        Fee
Disconnect fee $20
Reconnect fee  $20
 
         (b)   The above disconnect fee is applicable when the Nitro Regional
Waste Water Utility requests that a customer’s water service be disconnected
for non-payment of the sewer bill, whether or not such service is actually
disconnected.
         (c)   The above reconnect fee is applicable when a customer’s water
service is disconnected for non-payment of the sewer bill, and such service is
thereafter reconnected.
      (3)   Interest. In the event any bill is not paid within 30 days,
interest on the amount of such bill will be charged at the rate of 10% per
annum.
      (4)   Return check charge. In the event any check, draft or order given
in payment for a sanitary sewer bill is dishonored because of insufficient
funds, a service charge of $25 shall be imposed.
      (5)   Surcharge for surface and stormwater runoff discharging into the
city’s combined sewer system.
         (a)   The charge for roof drains, downspouts, storm sewers, catch
basins or similar facilities discharging surface and stormwater runoff or other
precipitation into the combined sewer system of the city will be calculated on
a basis of the following formula and will not be cumulative upon any metered
rate for sewer service charges.
            S = A x P x .6233 x C
            1.   S - The surcharge in dollars.
            2.   A - The average area under roof and the area of such other
water/precipitation collecting surfaces connected to the combined sewer system
(“water collecting area”) in square feet.
            3.   P - The measured monthly precipitation in inches (as measured
by the National Weather Service or other best available source of precipitation
data).
            4.   .6233 - A conversion factor to convert A x P to thousand
gallons.
            5.   C - The applicable rate per thousand gallons of metered water
usage.
         (b)   The surcharge shall not apply to:
            1.   Any owner, tenant or occupant of each and every dwelling,
structure or other improvement to property, the construction of which is
substantially completed on or before the effective date of the ordinance first
enacting this exemption to the surcharge (“existing structures/ improvements”);
and
            2.   Any owner, tenant or occupant of each and every dwelling,
structure or other improvement to property (other than replacement structures/
improvements), the construction of which is substantially completed after the
effective date of the ordinance first enacting this exemption to the surcharge
(“new structures/improvements”) and for which the water collecting area is
1,200 square feet or less.
            3.   Any owner, tenant or occupant of each and every dwelling,
structure or other improvement to property:
               a.   The construction of which is substantially completed after
the effective date of the ordinance first enacting this exemption to the
surcharge;
               b.   That was constructed to replace any existing structures/
improvements that were moved off the property, torn down or otherwise destroyed
(“replacement structures/improvements”); and
               c.   Which has a total water collecting area that is not more
than 1,200 square feet greater than the water collecting area of the existing
structures/improvements being replaced.
         (c)   Any owner, tenant or occupant of new structures/improvements
with a water collecting area that exceeds 1,200 square feet, and any owner,
tenant or occupant of replacement structures/improvements with a water
collecting area that is more than 1,200 square feet greater than the water
collecting area of the existing structures/improvements being replaced, shall
be subject to the surcharge on only the square footage of the water collecting
areas that exceeds the respective applicable square footage exemptions set
forth in divisions (C)(5)(b)2. and (C)(5)(b)3. above.
      (6)   Application of rates and charges. Except as otherwise specifically
provided herein, the above rates and charges shall be applicable for any owner,
tenant, or occupant of each and every lot or parcel of land or building
situated within or outside the corporate limits of the city and having any
connection to the combined sewer system of the city.
   (D)   Industrial users. Any industrial customer served pursuant to a
specific sewer service agreement shall be charged as provided in such
agreement.
   (E)   Poca River service area.
      (1)   On and after June, 2001, being the date on which sanitary sewerage
service was available to the residents of the Poca River Service Area, the
rates and charges for the use of, and services rendered to, such customers by
the sanitary sewer system of the Nitro Regional Waste Water Utility shall be
equal to the regularly enacted rates and charges for all other users of the
system, plus a surcharge in the amount of $13.69 per month.
      (2)   The above surcharge shall be applicable for any owner, tenant or
occupant of each and every lot or parcel of land or building situated within
Poca River Service Area and having any connection to the sanitary sewer system
of the Nitro Regional Waste Water Utility.
   (F)   Discharge/hauler rates.
      (1)   On and after the effective date of this section, each hauler shall
pay the charge as applicable below.
 
Non-Domestic/Pretreated Rates
0 through 2,000 gallons     $75 per load
2,001 through 4,000 gallons $150 per load
4,001 through 6,000 gallons $250 per load
6,001 through 8,000 gallons $350 per load
All over 8,000 gallons      $600 per load
 
Septic/Package Plant Rates
0 through 2,000 gallons     $50 per load
2,001 through 4,000 gallons $100 per load
4,001 through 6,000 gallons $200 per load
6,001 through 8,000 gallons $300 per load
All over 8,000 gallons      $500 per load
 
      (2)   All haulers discharging non-domestic/pretreated/septic/package
plant wastewater must go through a permit modification process before the city
will accept batch discharges. A surcharge may apply when characteristics of the
wastewater exceed allowable limits.
(Prior Code, § 915.14) (Ord. 12-11, passed 12-18-2012; Ord. 13-6, passed 11-19-
2013)
§ 52.15 DEPOSIT OF REVENUES; NO FREE SERVICE.
   All money collected by the Sanitary Board or by the city pursuant to this
chapter shall be deposited in the “Sewer Revenue Fund” of the city; and no free
services of the municipal sewage system shall be allowed.
(Prior Code, § 915.15)
§ 52.16 SINKING FUND.
   There is hereby created a Sinking Fund to accumulate and hold all the
proceeds to be derived from the sanitary sewer service charges levied and
collected pursuant to this chapter, and such proceeds shall be remitted to and
administered by the State Sinking Fund Commission as follows: proceeds shall be
paid out on order of the Sanitary Board for such legal purposes as are incident
to the acquisition, construction, enlargement, extension, replacement,
improvement, operation, management, maintenance and repair of the sewage system
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 915.16)
§ 52.17 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS; REMEDIES.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code 16-13-16, the rates and
charges for the use of and service rendered by the municipal sewage system
shall be paid by or on behalf of the owner of each and every lot, parcel of
real estate or building connected with, served by or using such sewage system,
and the amount of all such rates or charges, if not paid when due, shall be a
lien upon the premises served by such system, and if the bill for such rates or
charges is not paid within 30 days after due it shall be deemed delinquent and
the amount thereof shall be recovered by the Sanitary Board in a civil action
in the name of the city, together with a penalty of 10% and the lien procured
in connection with any such action shall be foreclosed in due course against
the lot, parcel of land or building charged with the amount due; provided, that
if the water bills are in the name of a party other than the owner of the lot,
parcel of real estate or building connected with, served by or using the
municipal sewage system, and consequently, the bill for sewer service rates or
charges shall be directed to such party, then in the event any such bill shall
not be paid within the allotted time and shall become delinquent, the Sanitary
Board shall mail such delinquent bill to the owner of such lot, parcel of real
estate or building at the last known address of such owner, together with a
notice that such owner is the party charged by law with the liability for the
payment thereof, and if such bill is not paid within 30 days after such
mailing, the amount thereof shall be recovered by the Sanitary Board together
with the penalty aforesaid, as in the case of other delinquent bills and the
lien procured in connection with any such action shall be foreclosed in due
course against the lot, parcel of land or building charged with the amount due.
   (B)   In the event of failure to pay the sewer service charge or surcharge
after they become delinquent, the Sanitary Board may be authorized to remove or
close the sewer connection and shall have the right to enter upon the property
of the user of the service for such purpose and to take such steps as may be
necessary to accomplish such removal or closing, and the cost of such removal
or closing, as well as the expense of restoring any such service shall likewise
be a debt due the city, and may be recovered by the city by civil action in the
name of the city, and such sewage service shall not again be turned on, nor the
sewer connection restored until all service charges, including the expense of
removal, closing and restoration shall have been paid.
   (C)   Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall
not be cause for reducing or eliminating these penalties.
(Prior Code, § 915.17)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined or
imprisoned or both, and the fine shall not exceed state law, and the
imprisonment shall not exceed state law.
   (B)   Each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (C)   The conviction of any person for a violation or failure to comply with
any provision of this chapter, or any imposition of any penalty therefor, shall
not excuse the violation, neglect or noncompliance, and any person violating,
neglecting or failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations within a reasonable time, and
each day that any such violation, neglect or noncompliance shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense. The application or use of any penal provisions
shall not be held to prevent the removal of the prohibited conditions, and the
city shall have the right, in addition to such penal provisions, to proceed in
any court having jurisdiction for the correction thereof by any lawful
procedure provided for by the statutes of the state.
(Prior Code, § 915.99) (Ord. 85-1, passed 3-19-1985)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   STREETS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
      
72.   SAFETY REGULATIONS AND LICENSING
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   RAILROADS
      
75.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
76.   PARKING SCHEDULES
      
77.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.001   Definitions
   
70.002   General authority of Police Chief
   
70.003   Authority of Chief to install traffic control devices
Traffic Violations
   
70.015   Jurisdiction of Municipal Court
   
70.016   Arrest or appearance in answer to charge of violation
   
70.017   Employees without authority to excuse fines or posting of bonds
   
70.018   When bond for double the amount of fine required
   
70.019   Failure to obey notice or condition of bond
   
70.020   Disposition of fines and forfeitures
Accidents
   
70.035   Accidents involving death or personal injuries
   
70.036   Accidents involving damage to vehicle
   
70.037   Duty to give information and render aid
   
70.038   Collision with unattended vehicle
   
70.039   Collision with fixtures upon a street or highway
   
70.040   Immediate reports of accidents
   
70.041   When driver unable to report
   
70.042   Garages to report bullet damage
Driving Under the Influence; Reckless Driving;
Use of Electronic Communications Devices
   
70.055   Driving under the influence
   
70.056   Reckless driving
   
70.057   Hazardous driving
   
70.058   Prohibited use of electronic communication devices
Speed Restrictions
   
70.070   Maximum speed limits
   
70.071   Slow speed
   
70.072   Special speed limitations
   
70.073   Racing on streets and highways prohibited
   
70.074   Prima facie evidence of speed by radar
Driving on Right; Passing
   
70.085   Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions
   
70.086   Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions
   
70.087   Overtaking and passing vehicle or bicycle proceeding in same
direction; passing to left generally; driver's duties; penalty
   
70.088   Overtaking and passing upon right
   
70.089   Overtaking, passing to left of center
   
70.090   Additional restrictions on driving upon left side of roadway
   
70.091   Hazardous or no passing zones
   
70.092   One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
   
70.093   Driving in marked lanes or continuous lines of traffic
   
70.094   Following too closely
   
70.095   Driving upon divided roadways
   
70.096   Entering and exiting controlled-access highway
Turning and Starting; Signals
   
70.110   Conformity with provisions required
   
70.111   Right turns
   
70.112   Left turns on two-way roadways
   
70.113   Left turns on other than two-way roadways
   
70.114   Specified turns at intersections
   
70.115   “U” turns restricted
   
70.116   Starting vehicle
   
70.117   Signals before changing course, turning or stopping
   
70.118   Signals to be given by hand and arm or signal device
   
70.119   Hand and arm signals
Right-of-Way
   
70.130   Right-of-way at intersections
   
70.131   Right-of-way when turning left
   
70.132   Right-of-way at through street or highway or stop intersections
   
70.133   Driving onto roadway from private road or driveway; duty to yield
   
70.134   Right-of-way of emergency vehicle
   
70.135   Turning into private driveway, alley or building
Miscellaneous Rules
   
70.150   Unattended motor vehicle
   
70.151   Backing a vehicle
   
70.152   Drivers’ view and control to be unobstructed by load or persons
   
70.153   Passengers in seat with operator
   
70.154   Passengers on running board
   
70.155   Following authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.156   Driving over fire hose
   
70.157   Funeral processions
   
70.158   Opening door of vehicle on traffic side
   
70.159   Boarding or alighting from vehicle
   
70.160   Unauthorized riding or jumping onto vehicles
   
70.161   Squealing tires, cracking exhaust noises
   
70.162   Taking, injuring or tampering with vehicle
   
70.163   Driving upon sidewalk, street lawn or curb
   
70.164   Shortcutting; avoiding traffic control devices
   
70.165   Coasting prohibited
   
70.166   Driving through safety zone
   
70.167   Driving upon street posted as closed for repair
   
70.168   Obstruction of traffic
   
70.169   Vehicle security
   
70.170   Littering from a motor vehicle
Enforcement; Impounding and Penalty
   
70.185   Authority of Police and Fire Department officials
   
70.186   Application to vehicles upon streets and highways; exceptions
   
70.187   Obedience to police officers; fleeing
   
70.188   Application to government vehicles; exception
   
70.189   Authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.190   Application to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles
   
70.191   Impounding of vehicles; redemption
   
70.192   Rights of owners of real property
 
   
70.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Obedience to traffic control devices, see §
71.15
   Removal of glass and the like from highway, see §
71.01
Statutory reference:
   Authority to designate through streets and stop intersections, see W. Va.
Code 17C-2-8(a)(6), 17C-12-5
   Authority to establish one-way streets, see W. Va. Code 17C-2-8(4)
   Authority to prohibit driving under the influence, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5
(21)
   Authority to regulate speed, see W. Va. Code 17C-2-8, 17C-6-3
   Authority to regulate the turning of vehicles, see W. Va. Code 17C-2-8(a)(9)
   Authority to require local accident report, see W. Va. Code 17C-4-15
   Authority to specify different courses for turns, see W. Va. Code 17C-8-5
   Disposition of abandoned vehicles, see W. Va. Code Chapter 22
   Implied consent, see W. Va. Code 17C-5A
   Minimum speed regulations, see W. Va. Code 17C-6-3(a)
   Powers of municipality, see W. Va. Code 17C-2-8
   Procedure upon arrest; reports, see W. Va. Code Art. 17C-19
   Special speed limitations, see W. Va. Code 17C-6-4 et seq.
   Uniformity with state law required, see W. Va. Code 17C-2-7
   Use of radar, see W. Va. Code 17C-6-7
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.001 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases when used in this traffic code shall, for
the purpose of this traffic code, have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this section.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-1)
   ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of
lots or buildings in urban districts and not intended for the purpose of
through vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 301.40)
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, duly
chartered rescue squad, Police Department, ambulance service, state, county or
municipal agency and such privately owned ambulances, tow trucks, wreckers,
flag car services, vehicles providing road service to disabled vehicles,
service vehicles of a public service corporation, postal service vehicles, snow
removal equipment, Class A vehicles of firefighters, Class A vehicles of
members of ambulance services, and Class A vehicles of members of duly
chartered rescue squads, and all other emergency vehicles as are designated by
the agency responsible for the operation and control of these persons or
organizations. Class A vehicles are as defined by W. Va. Code 17A-10-1. Agency
authorization and emergency equipment are defined in W. Va. Code 17C-15-26.
Agencies responsible for issuing authorization for emergency vehicle permits
may promulgate such regulations that are necessary for the issuance of permits
for emergency vehicles.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-6) (Prior Code, § 301.02)
   BICYCLE. Every device which does not have a motor attached and which is
propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem
wheels either of which is more than 20 inches in diameter.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-8) (Prior Code, § 301.03)
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than seven passengers
and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than
a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-13) (Prior Code, § 301.04)
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a street or
highway when within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use
for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels,
banks or office buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy
at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both
sides of the street or highway.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-45) (Prior Code, § 301.05)
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
such highway, street or roadway.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-41) (Prior Code, § 301.06)
   CROSSWALK. Includes:
      (1)   That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
street or highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the
edges of the traversable roadway; and
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-43) (Prior Code, § 301.07)
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-31) (Prior Code, § 301.08)
   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly
used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosive and which contains
any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by
percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or
of destroying life or limb.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-24) (Prior Code, § 301.09)
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F, or less, as
determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-25) (Prior Code, § 301.10)
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any
load thereon.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-26) (Prior Code, § 301.11)
   INTERSECTION. Includes:
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two streets or highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
streets or highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict; and
      (2)   Where a street or highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street or highway by
an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate INTERSECTION. In the
event such intersecting street or highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such streets or highways
shall be regarded as a separate INTERSECTION.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-42) (Prior Code, § 301.12)
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-39) (Prior Code, § 301.13)
   MOPED. Every motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless otherwise specified in
this traffic code, which is equipped with two or three wheels, foot pedals to
permit muscular propulsion and an independent power source providing a maximum
of two brake horsepower. If a combustion engine is used, the maximum piston or
rotor displacement shall be 50 cubic centimeters regardless of the number of
chambers in such power source. The power source shall be capable of propelling
the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not to exceed 30 mph on a level road
surface and shall be equipped with a power drive system that functions directly
or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting by the operator
after the drive system is engaged.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-5a) (Prior Code, § 301.14)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-3) (Prior Code, § 301.17)
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-4) (Prior Code, § 301.15)
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle having a piston displacement of more
than 50 cubic centimeters but not more than 150 cubic centimeters, or with not
more than five brake horsepower.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-5) (Prior Code, § 301.16)
   OWNER. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or in the event a
vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is
entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the OWNER for the purpose of this traffic code.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-32) (Prior Code, § 301.18)
   PARK. When prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-54) (Prior Code, § 301.19)
   PARKING AREA. Lots, areas or other accommodations for the parking of
vehicles off the street or highway and open to public use with or without
charge.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-60) (Prior Code, § 301.20)
   PASSENGER VAN. Any van or other motor vehicle owned by any agency, business
or other legal entity and operated for the purpose of transportation of
children under the age of 18 years, other than a van utilized for private use,
taxicab, bus or school bus. PASSENGER VANS include, but are not limited to,
vehicles used by daycare centers, after-school centers and nursery schools;
provided, that the term PASSENGER VAN does not include any van or other motor
vehicle which is utilized for the specific purpose of transporting children to
medical facilities for the purpose of medical or dental treatment and which
loads and unloads the children on private property, making no stops for loading
or unloading along public roads or highways.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-64) (Prior Code, § 301.201)
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-30) (Prior Code, § 301.21)
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-29) (Prior Code, § 301.22)
   POLE TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by
another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or
pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle and
ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as
poles, pipes, trusses or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-17) (Prior Code, § 301.23)
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to
make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-33) (Prior Code, § 301.24)
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Real estate in private ownership without regard to the
manner in which it is used.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-36) (Prior Code, § 301.25)
   PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(Prior Code, § 301.25)
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property, upon cars, other than
streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-21) (Prior Code, § 301.26)
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal or device erected by authority of
a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-49) (Prior Code, § 301.27)
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-22) (Prior Code, § 301.28)
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a street or
highway not comprising a business district when the property on such street or
highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with
residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-46) (Prior Code, § 301.29)
   RESIDENTIAL STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way, whether publicly or privately maintained, located within any subdivision,
development or other similar area used primarily for residential purposes when
any part thereof is open to the common use of those living in such area for the
purpose of vehicular travel.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-62) (Prior Code, § 301.30)
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-51) (Prior Code, § 301.31)
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
street or highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as
used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such
roadways collectively.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-37) (Prior Code, § 301.32)
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-44) (Prior Code, § 301.33)
   SCHOOL BUS. Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and
operated for the transportation of children to or from school, or privately
owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or
from school.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-7) (Prior Code, § 301.34)
   SCHOOL GROUNDS. Includes the land on which a school is built, together with
such other land used by students for play, recreation or athletic events while
attending school.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-55) (Prior Code, § 301.35)
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-16) (Prior Code, § 301.36)
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street or highway between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-38) (Prior Code, § 301.37)
   STOP. When required, means complete cessation from movement.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-52) (Prior Code, § 301.38)
   STOP, STOPPING or STANDING. When prohibited, means any stopping or standing
of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-53) (Prior Code, § 301.39)
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-35) (Prior Code, § 301.40)
   THROUGH STREET or THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway or portion
thereof at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets
or highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and
when stop signs are erected as provided in this traffic code.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-40) (Prior Code, § 301.41)
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and
other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street or highway
for purposes of travel.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-50) (Prior Code, § 301.42)
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. Any sign, signal, marking and device not
inconsistent with this traffic code placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-47) (Prior Code, § 301.43)
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-48) (Prior Code, § 301.44)
   TRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-15) (Prior Code, § 301.45)
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-12) (Prior Code, § 301.46)
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(W. Va. Code 17C-1-2) (Prior Code, § 301.47)
§ 70.002 GENERAL AUTHORITY OF POLICE CHIEF.
   (A)   When not otherwise specifically provided in any case, the Chief of
Police and, under his or her direction, the police and traffic officers of this
city shall administer and enforce the provisions of this traffic code.
   (B)   For the purpose of implementing the provisions of this traffic code
and carrying into effect the policies of Council thereunder, the Chief of
Police is hereby authorized and empowered, when he or she deems it advisable
for the public safety and convenience, to close any street or part thereof to
all traffic, or to traffic of certain classes or descriptions or to direct the
traffic thereon or divert or direct the course of traffic thereon for such
periods of time as he or she may deem advisable, in which cases he or she shall
cause the necessary traffic control signs, signals, markings or devices
controlling such traffic to be placed or installed by the Police Department.
   (C)   Whenever, pursuant to any of the provisions of this traffic code a
permit is required for any purpose and no other issuing authority is specified,
such permit shall be issued by the Chief of Police. Any permit issued by the
Chief of Police pursuant to the foregoing authority shall not be valid for a
period of time exceeding 12 months from the issuance thereof, nor shall such a
permit be valid for more than any lesser period of time which may be specified
in the permit. Any permit so issued may be revoked by the Chief of Police at
any time for good cause. Council may grant permits for longer periods of time.
   (D)   Upon taking any action authorized by divisions (B) or (C) above, the
Chief of Police shall, without undue delay, report such action to the Mayor,
who may give such instructions to the Chief of Police with respect thereto as
he or she may deem to be in the best interest of the city; and the Mayor may
also submit such report of the Chief of Police to a regular or special meeting
of Council or to a majority of the members thereof and obtain their advice and
instructions to be given the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 305.01)
§ 70.003 AUTHORITY OF CHIEF TO INSTALL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   The Chief of Police, with the approval of Council, is hereby authorized to
erect and install such traffic control devices, at such places and for such
purposes within the city, as he or she may deem necessary for the proper
regulation of traffic and the protection of persons and property.
(Prior Code, § 305.02)
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS
§ 70.015 JURISDICTION OF MUNICIPAL COURT.
   The Municipal Court of the city shall have jurisdiction of all offenses
under this traffic code and the Judge thereof shall have the power to assess
and collect fines and costs from any person who fails or refuses to comply with
the provisions of this traffic code or with the rules and regulations of the
Chief of Police made in conformity therewith.
(Prior Code, § 307.01)
§ 70.016 ARREST OR APPEARANCE IN ANSWER TO CHARGE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any person who has violated any provision of this traffic code may be
arrested and brought before the Municipal Court of the city, or given notice to
appear and answer to a violation of any provision of this traffic code before
the Municipal Court at a time specified in the notice. Before the time
specified in such notice, the person so summoned may appear before the
Municipal Court Clerk or other municipal officer designated by the Municipal
Judge and make answer to the violation set forth in such notice, and pay the
fine fixed by the Municipal Judge for such offense to the Clerk or other
officer so designated. Acceptance of the prescribed fine by the Clerk or other
officer shall be complete satisfaction for the violation, and the Clerk or
other officer shall give the violator a receipt to that effect, and pay the
fine into the Municipal Court; provided, that any person so summoned to appear
before the Municipal Court to answer a violation of any of the provisions of
this traffic code may deposit with the Clerk of the Municipal Court, cash or
other bond, in amount equal to the fine fixed by the Municipal Judge for such
violation conditioned for his or her appearance to answer such charge in court
at the time specified by the Clerk or other officer taking the bond. In case
any person posting a bond for his or her appearance shall fail to appear at the
time specified, such bond shall be forfeited by the Court, and in case such
bond posted in cost, it shall be taken by the Municipal Court as satisfaction
for the violation.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, any person given
notice to appear and answer to a charge of failure to stop in event of an
accident, reckless driving or speeding, must in fact appear in the Municipal
Court and answer to such charge, and forfeiture of any bond given by him or her
shall not be taken as satisfaction for the alleged violation.
(Prior Code, § 307.02)
§ 70.017 EMPLOYEES WITHOUT AUTHORITY TO EXCUSE FINES OR POSTING OF BONDS.
   Neither the Municipal Court Clerk nor any other officer or employee of the
city shall have the authority to excuse anyone charged with a violation of this
traffic code from paying the fine or posting the bonds required hereinbefore,
except as may be authorized by the Municipal Judge.
(Prior Code, § 307.03)
§ 70.018 WHEN BOND FOR DOUBLE THE AMOUNT OF FINE REQUIRED.
   Any person who has been guilty of more than three violations of the
provisions of this traffic code or who has had more than three bonds forfeited
for violation of the provisions of this traffic code within the next preceding
12 months, shall be required to deposit cash or other bond in an amount double
the fine fixed by the Municipal Judge for such violation, for his or her
appearance in Municipal Court, at a time fixed by the Chief of Police or other
official taking his or her bond, for trial of his or her case, and in such
cases, a forfeiture of such bond shall not constitute satisfaction of the
violation.
(Prior Code, § 307.04)
§ 70.019 FAILURE TO OBEY NOTICE OR CONDITION OF BOND.
   (A)   Any person who fails to appear in response to a notice given as
provided in §
70.016 or in response to any bond given for his or her appearance, to answer a
violation of any of the provisions of this traffic code, shall be guilty of an
offense against this section regardless of the disposition of the traffic
violation he or she was so summoned or gave bond to appear and answer, and may
be punished for such offense of not appearing, in the same manner and to the
same extent as for the violation he or she was notified or gave bond to appear
and answer, and such punishment may be in addition to the punishment given for
such traffic violation.
   (B)   Any person failing to appear in answer to any notice or bond given for
his or her appearance to answer a violation of any of the provisions of this
traffic code shall have his or her bond forfeited and may be arrested on a
warrant issued by the Municipal Judge, charging him or her with such failure to
appear and be dealt with as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 307.05)
§ 70.020 DISPOSITION OF FINES AND FORFEITURES.
   (A)   All fines and forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon forfeiture
of bail of any person charged with a violation of any provision of this traffic
code shall be paid into the City Treasury and deposited in a special fund to be
known as the Traffic Improvement Fund, which is hereby created and which shall
be used exclusively in the construction, maintenance and repair of public
streets, bridges and street structures, or for the installation and maintenance
of traffic control devices thereon, and for the promoting of the correct use
thereof.
   (B)   Failure, refusal or neglect on the part of any judicial or other
officer or employee receiving or having custody of any such fine or forfeiture,
either before or after deposit in the Traffic Improvement Fund, to comply with
the foregoing provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office
and shall be grounds for removal therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 307.06)
ACCIDENTS
§ 70.035 ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person shall immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the
accident or as close thereto as possible, but shall then forthwith return to
and shall remain at the scene of the accident until he or she has complied with
the requirements of §
70.037; provided, that the driver may leave the scene of the accident as may
reasonably be necessary for the purpose of rendering assistance to an injured
person as required by §
70.037. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
(W. Va. Code 17C-4-2) (Prior Code, § 331.01)
§ 70.036 ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in
damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately
stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as
possible, but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the
scene of such accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of §
70.037.
   (B)   Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary. Any person failing to stop or comply with such requirements under
such circumstances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(W. Va. Code 17C-4-2) (Prior Code, § 331.02) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.037 DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any
person shall give his or her name, address and the registration number of the
vehicle he or she is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit
his or her driver’s license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of
or person attending any vehicle collided with, and shall render to any person
injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or the
making arrangements for the carrying, of such person to a physician, surgeon or
hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such
treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person.
(W. Va. Code 17C-4-3) (Prior Code, § 331.03)
§ 70.038 COLLISION WITH UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is
unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and
notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the
driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave
in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck, a written notice giving the name
and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking
and a statement of the circumstances thereof.
(W. Va. Code 17C-4-4) (Prior Code, § 331.04)
§ 70.039 COLLISION WITH FIXTURES UPON A STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage
to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take
reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such
property of such fact and of his or her name and address and of the
registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving, and shall, upon
request and if available, exhibit his or her driver’s license and shall make
report of such accident when and as required.
(W. Va. Code 17C-4-5) (Prior Code, § 331.05)
§ 70.040 IMMEDIATE REPORTS OF ACCIDENTS.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $500 or
more shall immediately by the quickest means of communication, whether oral or
written, give notice of such accident to the Police Department.
(W. Va. Code 17C-4-6) (Prior Code, § 331.06)
§ 70.041 WHEN DRIVER UNABLE TO REPORT.
   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making an
immediate report of an accident as required in §
70.040 and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the
accident capable of making a report, such occupant shall make or cause to be
made such report not made by the driver.
(W. Va. Code 17C-4-8) (Prior Code, § 331.07)
§ 70.042 GARAGES TO REPORT BULLET DAMAGE.
   The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any
motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been struck by any bullet, shall
report to the Police Department within 24 hours after such motor vehicle is
received, giving the engine number, registration number and the name and
address of the owner or operator of such vehicle.
(W. Va. Code 17C-4-12) (Prior Code, § 331.08)
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE; RECKLESS DRIVING; USE OF ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS
DEVICES
§ 70.055 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (A)   Any person who:
      (1)   Drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she:
         (a)   Is under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Is under the influence of any controlled substance;
         (c)   Is under the influence of any other drug;
         (d)   Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled
substance or any other drug; or
         (e)   Has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of 0.08% or
more, by weight.
      (2)   While driving does any act forbidden by law or fails to perform any
duty imposed by law in the driving of the vehicle, which act or failure
proximately causes the death of any person within one year next following the
act or failure; and
      (3)   Commits the act or failure in reckless disregard of the safety of
others and when the influence of alcohol, controlled substances or drugs is
shown to be a contributing cause to the death if guilty of a felony and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned in a state correctional facility for a
term not to exceed state law and shall be fined an amount not to exceed state
law.
   (B)   Any person who:
      (1)   Drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she:
         (a)   Is under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Is under the influence of any controlled substance;
         (c)   Is under the influence of any other drug;
         (d)   Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled
substances or any other drug; and
         (e)   Has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of 0.08% or
more, by weight.
      (2)   While driving does any act forbidden by law or fails to perform any
duty imposed by law in the driving of the vehicle, which act or failure
proximately causes the death of any person within one year next following the
act or failure is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be confined in jail for not less than 90 days nor more than one year and shall
be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
   (C)   Any person who:
      (1)   Drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she:
         (a)   Is under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Is under the influence of any controlled substance;
         (c)   Is under the influence of any other drug;
         (d)   Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled
substance or any other drug; or
         (e)   Has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of 0.08% or
more, by weight.
      (2)   While driving does any act forbidden by law or fails to perform any
duty imposed by law in the driving of the vehicle, which act or failure
proximately causes bodily injury to any person other than himself or herself,
is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in
jail for not less than one day nor more than one year, which jail terms is to
include actual confinement of not less than 24 hours, and shall be fined an
amount not to exceed state law.
   (D)   Any person who:
      (1)   Drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she:
         (a)   Is under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Is under the influence of any controlled substance;
         (c)   Is under the influence of any other drug; or
         (d)   Has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of 0.08% or
more, by weight, but less than 0.15% by weight.
      (2)   Is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
confined in jail for up to six months and shall be fined an amount not to
exceed state law. A person sentenced pursuant to this division (D) shall
receive credit for any period of actual confinement he or she served upon
arrest for the subject offense.
   (E)   Any person who drives a vehicle in this state while he or she has an
alcohol concentration in his or her blood of 0.15% or more, by weight, is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail
for not less than two days nor more than six months, which jail term is to
include actual confinement of not less than 24 hours, and shall be fined an
amount not to exceed state law. A person sentenced pursuant to this division
(E) shall received credit for any period of actual confinement he or she served
upon arrest for the subject offense.
   (F)   Any person who, being an habitual used of narcotic drugs or
amphetamine or any derivative thereof, drives a vehicle in this municipality is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail
for not less than one day nor more than six months, which jail terms is to
include actual confinement of not less than 24 hours, and shall be fined an
amount not to exceed state law. A person sentenced pursuant to this division
(F) shall receive credit for any period of actual confinement he or she served
upon arrest for the subject offense.
   (G)   Any person who:
      (1)   Knowingly permits his or her vehicle to be driven in this
municipality by any person who:
         (a)   Is under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Is under the influence of any controlled substance:
         (c)   Is under the influence of any other drug;
         (d)   Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any controlled
substance or any other drug; or
         (e)   Has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of 0.08% or
more, by weight.
      (2)   Is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
confined in jail for not more than six months and shall be fined an amount not
to exceed state law.
   (H)   Any person who knowingly permits his or her vehicle to be driven in
this municipality by any other person who is an habitual user of narcotic drugs
or amphetamine or any derivative thereof is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail for not more than six months and
shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
   (I)   (1)   Any person under the age of 21 years who drives a vehicle in
this state while he or she has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of
0.02% or more, by weight, but less than 0.08%, by weight, for a first offense
under this division (I) is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law. For a second or
subsequent offense under this division (I)(1), the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail for 24
hours and shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law. A person who is
charged with a first offense under the provisions of this division (I)(1) may
move for a continuance of the proceedings, from time to time, to allow the
person to participate in the Motor Vehicle Alcohol Test and Lock Program as
provided in W. Va. Code 17-5A-3a. Upon successful completion of the Program,
the court shall dismiss the charge against the person and expunge the person’s
record as it relates to the alleged offense. In the event the person fails to
successfully complete the program, the court shall proceed to an adjudication
of the alleged offense. A motion for a continuance under this division (I)(1)
may not be construed as an admission or be used as evidence.
      (2)   A person arrested and charged with an offense under the provisions
of this division (I) or divisions (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H)
above may not also be charged with an offense under this division (I) arising
out of the same transaction or occurrence.
   (J)   Any person who:
      (1)   Drives a vehicle in this municipality while he or she:
         (a)   Is under the influence of alcohol;
         (b)   Is under the influence of any controlled substance;
         (c)   In under the influence of any other drug; or
         (d)   Has an alcohol concentration in his or her blood of 0.08% or
more, by weight.
      (2)   The person while driving has on or within the motor vehicle one or
more other persons who are unemancipated minors who have not reached their
sixteenth birthday is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be confined in jail for not less than two days nor more than 12 months,
which jail terms is to include actual confinement of not less than 48 hours and
shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
   (K)   A person violating any provision of divisions (B), (C), (D), (E), (F),
(G) or (I) above, for the second offense under this section, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail for not
less than six months nor more than one year and the court may, in its
discretion, impose a fine of an amount not to exceed state law.
   (L)   Any person violating any provision of divisions (B), (C), (D), (E),
(F), (G) or (I) above, for the third or any subsequent offense under this
section, is guilty of a felony and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
imprisoned in a state correctional facility for a term not to exceed state law,
and the court may, in it discretion, impose a fine of an amount not to exceed
state law.
   (M)   For purposes of divisions (K) and (I) above relating to the second,
third and subsequent offenses, the following types of convictions are to be
regarded as convictions under this section:
      (1)   Any conviction under the provisions of divisions (A), (B), (C),
(D), (E), (F) or (G) above or under a prior enactment of this section for an
offense which occurred within the ten-year period immediately preceding the
date of arrest in the current proceeding; and
      (2)   Any conviction under a municipal ordinance of this state or any
other state or a statute of the United States or of any other state of an
offense which has the same elements as an offense described in divisions (A),
(B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G) or (H) above, which offense occurred within the
ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the arrest in the current
proceeding.
(W. Va. Code 17C-5-2a) (Prior Code, § 333.01) (Ord. 08-08, passed 10-7-2008)
§ 70.056 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle upon any street or highway, or upon
any residential street, or in any parking area, or upon the ways of any
institution of higher education, whether public or private or upon the property
of the Board of Education, or upon any property within the municipal park and
public recreation system, in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of
persons or property.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to those areas
which have been temporarily closed for racing sport events or which may be set
aside by the municipality within the park and recreation system for exclusive
use by motorcycles or other recreational vehicles.
   (C)   Every person convicted of reckless driving is guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (1)   Upon a first conviction thereof, shall be confined in jail for a
period of not less than five days nor more than 15 days, or fined no more than
$250, or both; and
      (2)   Upon a second or subsequent conviction thereof, shall be confined
in jail no more than 30 days, or fined no more than $500, or both;
      (3)   Plus for each conviction court costs to be determined by the court.
(W. Va. Code 17C-5-3) (Prior Code, § 333.02) (Ord. passed 10-3-2023) Penalty,
see §
70.999
§ 70.057 HAZARDOUS DRIVING.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without
exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a weaving or
zigzag course unless such irregular course is necessary for safe operation or
in compliance with law.
   (C)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without giving
his or her full time and attention to the operation of such vehicle.
   (D)   Every person convicted of hazardous driving is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
      (1)   Upon a first conviction thereof shall be fined no more than $50;
and
      (2)   For a second such offense within one year thereafter, such person
shall be fined an amount no more than $250; and
      (3)   Upon a third or subsequent offense, such person shall be shall be
fined no more than $500;
      (4)   Plus for each conviction court costs to be determined by the court.
(Prior Code, § 333.03) (Ord. passed 10-3-2023) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.058 PROHIBITED USE OF ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICES.
   (A)   Except as provided below, a person may not drive or operate a motor
vehicle on a public roadway within this city while:
      (1)   Texting; or
      (2)   Using a cell phone or other electronic communications device,
unless the use is accomplished by hands-free equipment.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE. Operating a motor vehicle, with the motor
running, including while temporarily stationary because of traffic, a traffic
control device or other momentary delays, but does not include operating a
motor vehicle after the driver has moved the vehicle to the side of, or off a
highway and halted in a location where the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
      SMARTWATCH. A wearable computer that provides a local touchscreen for
daily use, associated with applications, and connected to a cellular or Wi-Fi
network.
      STAND-ALONE ELECTRONIC DEVICE. A portable device other than a wireless
telecommunications device which stores audio or video data files to be
retrieved on demand by a user.
      UTILITY SERVICES. Includes electric, natural gas, water, wastewater,
cable, telephone, or telecommunications services, or the repair, location,
relocation, improvement, or maintenance of utility poles, transmission
structures, pipes, wires, fibers, cables, easements, rights-of-way, or
associated infrastructure.
      VOICE-OPERATED OR HANDS-FREE FEATURE OR FUNCTION. A feature or function
that allows a person to use a wireless telecommunications device without the
use of either hand, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate the feature or
function with a single touch or single swipe.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. One of the following portable
devices:
         (a)   A cellular telephone which means a cellular, analog, wireless or
digital telephone;
         (b)   A portable telephone;
         (c)   A text-messaging device;
         (d)   A personal digital assistant;
         (e)   A stand-alone computer including, but not limited to, a tablet,
laptop, or notebook computer;
         (f)   A handheld global positioning system receiver;
         (g)   A device capable of displaying a video, movie, broadcast
television image, or visual image;
         (h)   Any substantially similar portable wireless device that is used
to initiate or receive communication, information, or data.
         (i)   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE does not include a
smartwatch, any type of radio including but not limited to, radios used by
first responders or school bus operators; citizens band radio or radio hybrid;
commercial two-way radio communication device or its functional equivalent;
subscription-based emergency communication device; prescribed medical device;
amateur or ham radio device, or any built-in vehicle equipment for security,
navigation, communications, or remote diagnostics.
   (C)   The driver of a school bus shall not use or operate a wireless
telecommunications device or two-way radio while loading or unloading
passengers.
   (D)   The driver of a school bus shall not use or operate a wireless
telecommunications device while the bus is in motion nor while stationary in
traffic nor at a traffic control signal, unless that device is being used in a
similar manner as a two-way radio to allow live communication between the
driver and school officials or public safety officials.
   (E)   A driver shall exercise due care in operating a motor vehicle on the
public roadways of this city and shall not engage in any actions involving any
stand-alone electronic device or wireless telecommunications device that
distracts such driver from the safe operation of the vehicle.
   (F)   While operating a motor vehicle on any public roadway in this city, no
driver may:
      (1)   Physically hold or support, with any part of his or her body, a
wireless communication device or stand-alone electronic device; provided that
such prohibition shall not apply to the wearing of a smartwatch;
      (2)   Write, send, or read any text-based communication including, but
not limited to, a text message, instant message, e-mail, or social media
interaction on a wireless telecommunications device or stand-alone electronic
device; provided that such prohibition shall not apply to a voice-operated or
hands-free communication feature which is automatically converted by such
device to be sent as a message in a written form;
      (3)   Make any communication involving a wireless telecommunications
device, including a phone call, voice message, or one-way voice communication;
provided that such prohibition shall not apply to a voice operated or hands-
free communication feature or function;
      (4)   Engage in any form of electronic data retrieval or electronic data
communication on a wireless telecommunications device or stand-alone electronic
device;
      (5)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into any website,
search engine, or application on a wireless telecommunications device or stand-
alone electronic device;
      (6)   Watch a video or movie on a wireless telecommunications device or
stand-alone electronic device other than watching data related to the
navigation of such vehicle;
      (7)   Record, post, send, or broadcast video, including a video
conference on a wireless telecommunications device or stand-alone electronic
device; provided that such prohibition does not apply to electronic devices
used for the sole purpose of continuously recording or broadcasting video
within or outside of the motor vehicle; or
      (8)   Actively play any game on a wireless telecommunications device or
stand-alone electronic device.
   (G)   While operating a commercial motor vehicle on any public roadway in
this city, no driver may:
      (1)   Use more than a single button on a wireless telecommunications
device to initiate or terminate a voice communication; or
      (2)   Reach for a wireless telecommunications device or stand-alone
electronic device in such a manner that requires the driver to:
         (a)   No longer be in a seated driving position; or
         (b)   No longer be properly restrained by a safety belt.
         (c)   Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (H)   It is a misdemeanor for any driver to violate any of the provisions of
this section. Every driver convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any of
the provisions of this section shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   For a first conviction with no prior conviction of and no plea of
no contest accepted to a charge of violating this section within the previous
24-month period, as measured from the date of any prior conviction or plea, a
fine of not more than $100 plus court costs as determined by the court;
      (2)   For a second conviction within a 24-month period, as measured from
the date of any prior conviction or plea, a fine of not more than $200 plus
court costs as determined by the court.
      (3)   For a third or subsequent conviction within a 24-month period, as
measured from the date of any prior conviction or plea:
         (a)   A fine of not more than $350 plus court costs as determined by
the court;
         (b)   Three points on the driver's record maintained by the Division
of Motor Vehicles; and
         (c)   At the court's discretion, suspension of the driver's license
for a period of 90 days;
      (4)   Any driver who causes physical harm to property as the proximate
result of committing a violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable up to 30 days in jail or a fine not more than $500 plus court costs
as determined by the court;
      (5)   Any driver who causes serious physical harm to another person as
the proximate result of committing a violation of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined $500 plus court costs as determined by the
court, or confined in jail up to 30 days, or both fined and confined.
   (I)   The city shall cause to be erected signs upon any public roadway
entering the city, each sign to bear an inscription clearly communicating to
motorists entering the city that texting, or the use of a wireless
communication device without hands-free equipment, is illegal within this city.
   (J)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to authorize
seizure of a cell phone or electronic device by the city's law-enforcement
agency.
   (K)   No policy providing liability coverage for personal lines insurance
shall contain a provision which may be used to deny coverage or exclude payment
of any legal damages recoverable by law for injuries proximately caused by a
violation of this section, as long as such amounts are within the coverage
limits of the insured.
   (L)   This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Drivers reporting to state, county, or city authorities a traffic
accident, medical emergency, fire, an actual or potential criminal or
delinquent act, or a road condition that causes an immediate and serious
traffic or safety hazard;
      (2)   An employee or contractor of a utility services provider acting
within the scope of his or her employment while responding to a utility
emergency;
      (3)   A driver operating a commercial vehicle while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (4)   A law-enforcement officer, firefighter, emergency medical services
personnel, ambulance driver, or other similarly employed public safety first
responder during the performance of his or her official duties; or
      (5)   While in a motor vehicle that is lawfully parked.
(Ord. 12-3, passed 6-7-2012) (Ord. passed 10-3-2023) Penalty, see §
70.999
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
§ 70.070 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No person may drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the existing conditions and the actual and
potential hazards. In every event, speed shall be controlled as necessary to
avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the
highways in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to
use due care.
   (B)   Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for
compliance with division (A) of this section, the speed of any vehicle not in
excess of the limits specified in this section or established as authorized in
this section is lawful, but any speed in excess of the limits specified in this
division or established as authorized in this section is unlawful. The
following speed limits apply:
      (1)   Fifteen miles per hour in a school zone during school recess or
while children are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours.
A SCHOOL ZONE is all school property, including school grounds and any street
or highway abutting the school grounds and extending 125 feet along the street
or highway from the school grounds and, in the case of school property not
abutting a street or highway but accessed through a right-of-way granted for
entrance to school property, a school zone established by an engineering study
conducted by the Division of Highways is all school property, including school
grounds and any property within the access right-of-way, and extending 125 feet
along the street or highway from the entrance to the access right-of-way. The
West Virginia Division of Highways shall erect signage indicating the place of
entry and exit of each school zone. Upon a formal vote and a written request by
a county Board of Education to expand a school zone to a road that is adjacent
to school property or from the entrance to an access right-of-way, the West
Virginia Division of Highways shall expand the school zone by erecting new
signage indicating the expanded school zone's location and speed limit within
90 days of receiving the request; provided that the school zone may not be
expanded more than 125 feet along an adjacent road unless the division
determines that the additional extension is needed and necessary for the safety
of the school children. The speed restriction does not apply to vehicles
traveling on a controlled-access highway which is separated from the school or
school grounds by a fence or barrier approved by the Division of Highways;
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in any business or residence district;
and
      (3)   Fifty-five miles per hour on open country highways, except as
otherwise provided by this chapter.
      (4)   The speeds set forth in this section may be altered as authorized
in this section.
   (C)   The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of
division (A) of this section, drive at an appropriate reduced speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when
approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when
traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway and when a special hazard exists
with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway
conditions.
   (D)   The speed limit on controlled access highways and interstate highways,
where no special hazard exists that requires a lower speed, shall be not less
than 55 miles per hour and the speed limits specified in division (B) of this
section do not apply.
   (E)   Unless otherwise provided in this section, any person who violates the
provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not more than $100; upon a second conviction within one
year thereafter, shall be fined not more than $200; and, upon a third or
subsequent conviction within two years thereafter, shall be fined not more than
$500; provided, that if the third or subsequent conviction is based upon a
violation of the provisions of this section where the offender exceeded the
speed limit by 15 miles per hour or more, then upon conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500 or confined in jail for not more than six months, or both
fined and confined.
   (F)   Any person who violates the provisions of division (B)(1) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $500; provided, that if the conviction is
based upon a violation of the provisions of division (B)(1) of this section
where the offender exceeded the speed limit by 15 miles per hour or more in the
presence of one or more children, then upon conviction, shall be fined not less
than $100 nor more than $500 or confined in jail for not more than six months,
or both fined and confined; provided, however, that if the signage required by
division (B)(1) is not present in the school zone at the time of the violation,
then any person who violates said provision is guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $25.
   (G)   If an owner or driver is arrested under the provisions of this section
for the offense of driving above the posted speed limit on a controlled access
highway or interstate highway and if the evidence shows that the motor vehicle
was being operated at ten miles per hour or less above the speed limit, then,
upon conviction thereof, that person shall be fined not more than $5, plus
court costs.
   (H)   Any person operating a commercial motor vehicle engaged in the
transportation of coal on the coal resource transportation road system who
violates divisions (A), (B) or (C) of this section shall, upon conviction, be
subject to fines in triple the amount otherwise provided in of this section.
   (I)   If an owner or driver is convicted under the provisions of this
section for the offense of driving above the speed limit on a controlled access
highway or interstate highway of this state and if the evidence shows that the
motor vehicle was being operated at ten miles per hour or less above the speed
limit, then notwithstanding the provisions of this code, a certified abstract
of the judgment on the conviction shall not be transmitted to the Division of
Motor Vehicles; provided that the provisions of this division do not apply to
conviction of owners or drivers who have been issued a commercial driver's
license as defined in this code, if the offense was committed while operating a
commercial vehicle.
   (J)   If an owner or driver is convicted in another state for the offense of
driving above the maximum speed limit on a controlled access highway or
interstate highway and if the maximum speed limit in the other state is less
than the maximum speed limit for a comparable controlled access highway or
interstate highway in this state, and if the evidence shows that the motor
vehicle was being operated at ten miles per hour or less above what would be
the maximum speed limit for a comparable controlled access highway or
interstate highway in this state, then notwithstanding the provisions this
code, a certified abstract of the judgment on the conviction shall not be
transmitted to the Division of Motor Vehicles or, if transmitted, shall not be
recorded by the division, unless within a reasonable time after conviction, the
person convicted has failed to pay all fines and costs imposed by the other
state; provided, that the provisions of this division do not apply to
conviction of owners or drivers who have been issued a commercial driver's
license as defined in this code, if the offense was committed while operating a
commercial vehicle.
(W. Va. Code 17C-6-1) (Prior Code, § 335.01) (Ord. passed 6-2-2015; Ord. passed
6-16-2015; Ord. passed 11-8-2023; Ord. passed - - )  
70.999
§ 70.071 SLOW SPEED.
   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
      (1)   Upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100; and
      (2)   Upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and
      (3)   Upon a third or subsequent conviction within two years thereafter,
shall be fined not more than $500; and
      (4)   Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-6-3a(a)) (Ord. passed 10-3-2023) (Prior Code, § 335.02)
Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.072 SPECIAL SPEED LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Subject to all other speed restrictions of this traffic code, no
person shall drive a vehicle not designed for carrying passengers and equipped
with pneumatic tires at a speed in excess of:
      (1)   Twenty miles per hour in any business district;
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in any residence district;
      (3)   Forty miles per hour on an open country highway; and
      (4)   Trucks licensed at 8,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less shall
be permitted the same speed as passenger cars.
(W. Va. Code 17C-6-4)
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle equipped with other than pneumatic
tires at a speed greater than a maximum of ten mph.
   (C)   No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated
structure constituting a part of a street or highway at a speed which is
greater than the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such
bridge or structure, when such structure is so signposted.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
      (1)   Upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
      (2)   Upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and
      (3)   Upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than
$500; and
      (4)   Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-6-5) (Prior Code, § 335.03) (Ord. passed 10-3-2023) Penalty,
see §
70.999
§ 70.073 RACING ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in, or aid or abet by serving as lookout or
timer or in any other capacity whatever, any speed race, as defined herein, on
any public street or highway in this municipality.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, SPEED RACE means:
      (1)   The operation of a motor vehicle in speed acceleration competition
with another motor vehicle or motor vehicles;
      (2)   The operation of a motor vehicle in speed acceleration competition
against time; or
      (3)   The operation of a motor vehicle in speed competition with another
motor vehicle or motor vehicles where the speed exceeds the lawful speed limit.
   (C)   Any person who violates the provisions of division (A) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
follows:
      (1)   For a first offense by a fine of no more than $100;
      (2)   For a second offense by a fine of no more than $500, or by
imprisonment no more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment;
      (3)   For a third and each subsequent offense by a fine of no more than
$1,000, or by imprisonment for no more than 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; plus
      (4)   Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-6-8(a)) (Prior Code, § 335.04) (Ord. passed 10-3-2023)
Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.074 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF SPEED BY RADAR.
   The speed of a motor vehicle may be proved by evidence obtained by use of
any device designed to measure and indicate or record the speed of a moving
object by means of microwaves, when such evidence is obtained by members of the
Police Department. The evidence so obtained shall be accepted as prima facie
evidence of the speed of such vehicle.
(W. Va. Code 17C-6-7) (Prior Code, § 335.05)
DRIVING ON RIGHT; PASSING
§ 70.085 DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
      (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; or
      (4)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
   (B)   Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal
speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing
shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
      (1)   Upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
      (2)   Upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and
      (3)   Upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than
$500;
      (4)   Plus court costs as determined by the court.
(W. Va. Code 17C-7-1) (Prior Code, § 337.01) (Ord. passed 10-3-2023)
§ 70.086 PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-
half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(W. Va. Code 17C-7-2) (Prior Code, § 337.02)
§ 70.087 OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLE OR BICYCLE PROCEEDING IN SAME
DIRECTION; PASSING TO LEFT GENERALLY; DRIVER'S DUTIES; PENALTY.
   The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to these limitations, exceptions and
special rules hereinafter stated.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall give an audible signal and pass to the left thereof at a
safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until
safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking a bicycle traveling in the same
direction shall pass to the left of the bicycle at a distance of not less than
three feet at a careful and reduced speed, and may not again drive to the right
side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken bicycle.
   (C)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his or
her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-7-3) (Prior Code, § 337.03) (Ord. passed 11-7-2023)
§ 70.088 OVERTAKING AND PASSING UPON RIGHT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      (2)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in
each direction; or
      (3)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled
portion of the roadway.
(W. Va. Code 17C-7-4) (Prior Code, § 337.04)
§ 70.089 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTER.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing
to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In
every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the
roadway before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-7-5) (Prior Code, § 337.05) (Ord. passed 11-7-2023) Penalty,
see §  
70.999
§ 70.090 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the street
or highway where the driver’s view is obstructed within such distance as to
create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing; or
      (3)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct or tunnel.
   (B)   The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $200. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-7-6) (Prior Code, § 337.06) (Ord. passed 11-7-2023) Penalty,
see §  
70.999
§ 70.091 HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an
ordinarily observant person indicating that overtaking and passing or driving
to the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous, every driver of a
vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-7-7) (Prior Code, § 337.07) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 70.092 ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of such island.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added for each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-7-8(b), (c)) (Prior Code, § 337.08) (Ord. passed 12-5-2023)
§ 70.093 DRIVING IN MARKED LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent
herewith shall apply.
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within
a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall
not be driven in the center lane which is clearly marked as a left turn lane
except in preparation for a left turn or where such center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use
a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added for each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-7-9) (Prior Code, § 337.09) (Ord. passed 12-5-2023)
§ 70.094 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (A)   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the street or highway.
   (B)   No operator of any motor truck, registered for a gross weight of more
than 8,000 pounds, bus, special mobile equipment or any motor vehicle drawing
another vehicle operating upon any roadway outside of a business or residence
district, shall follow within 200 feet of another motor truck, bus, special
mobile equipment or any motor vehicle drawing another vehicle, provided that
this provision shall not be construed to:
      (1)   Prevent overtaking and passing;
      (2)   Apply upon any lane specially designated for the use of motor
trucks or combinations of vehicles, or within any section of a roadway posted
or marked as a “no-passing zone”;
      (3)   Apply to any convoy of vehicles of the military service of the
United States or of this state; and
      (4)   Apply to funeral processions.
   (C)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or
residence district in a caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other
vehicles, shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such
vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter
and occupy such space without danger. This provision shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions; or
      (2)   Any convoy of vehicles of the military service of the United States
or of this state.
(W. Va. Code 17C-7-10) (Prior Code, § 337.10) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.095 DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Whenever any street or highway has been divided into two roadways by
leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated
dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle
shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway and no vehicle shall be driven
over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except
through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space or at
a crossover or intersection established by public authority.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-7-11) (Prior Code, § 337.11) (Ord. passed 12-5-2023) Penalty,
see §  
70.999
§ 70.096 ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access
roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public
authority.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-7-12) (Prior Code, § 337.12) (Ord. passed 12-5-2023) Penalty,
see §  
70.999
TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS
§ 70.110 CONFORMITY WITH PROVISIONS REQUIRED.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
provided in this subchapter.
(W. Va. Code 17C-8-1) (Prior Code, § 339.01)
§ 70.111 RIGHT TURNS.
   (A)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-8-2) (Prior Code, § 339.02) (Ord. passed 12-5-2023)
§ 70.112 LEFT TURNS ON TWO-WAY ROADWAYS.
   (A)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall
be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the
roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in
that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-8-3) (Prior Code, § 339.03) (Ord. passed 12-5-2023)
§ 70.113 LEFT TURNS ON OTHER THAN TWO-WAY ROADWAYS.
   (A)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as
to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being
entered.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and for a first offense thereof shall be fined not more than $100;
for a second such offense within one year thereafter, such person shall be
fined not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent offense, such person
shall be fined not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall
be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-8-4) (Prior Code, § 339.04) (Ord. passed 3-19-2024)
§ 70.114 SPECIFIED TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.
   Council or other designated traffic authority may cause markers, buttons or
signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and
direct that a different course from that specified in this subchapter be
traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers, buttons or
signs are so placed no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an
intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or
signs.
(W. Va. Code 17C-8-5) (Prior Code, § 339.05)
§ 70.115 “U” TURNS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any curve, or upon the approach to, or near the crest of a grade, where
such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within 500 feet.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district, or upon any
other street unless such movement can be made in safety and without
interference with other traffic.
(W. Va. Code 17C-8-6) (Prior Code, § 339.06) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.116 STARTING VEHICLE.
   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(W. Va. Code 17C-8-7) (Prior Code, § 339.07) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.117 SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE, TURNING OR STOPPING.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle
is in proper position upon the roadway as required in §§
70.111 to
70.114, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway or otherwise turn
a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn
any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter
provided in the event any other traffic may be affected by such movement.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be
given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning.
   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
such signal.
(W. Va. Code 17C-8-8) (Prior Code, § 339.08) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.118 SIGNALS TO BE GIVEN BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE.
   Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means
of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device,
but when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that hand and arm signal would
not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle, then such signals
must be given by such a lamp or lamps or signal device.
(W. Va. Code 17C-8-9) (Prior Code, § 339.09)
§ 70.119 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (A)   All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from
the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn: hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn: hand and arm extended upward; and
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed: hand and arm extended downward.
   (B)   Whoever violates the provisions of this §
70.119, shall, for a first offense thereof, be fined not more than $100; for a
second such offense within one year thereafter, such person shall be fined an
amount not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent offense, such person
shall be fined an amount not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the
court shall be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-8-10) (Prior Code, § 339.10) (Ord. passed 3-19-2024)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 70.130 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
street or highway.
   (B)   When two vehicles enter an intersection from a different street or
highway at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left
shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (C)   The right-of-way rules declared in divisions (A) and (B) above are
modified at through streets or highways and otherwise as hereinafter stated in
this subchapter.
   (D)   Whoever violates the provisions of this §
70.130, shall, for a first offense thereof, be fined an amount not more than
$200; for a second such offense within one year thereafter, such person shall
be fined an amount not more than $300; and upon a third or subsequent offense,
such person shall be fined an amount not more than $600. Court costs as
determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-9-1) (Prior Code, § 341.01) (Ord. passed 3-19-2024)
§ 70.131 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having
given a signal when and as required by this traffic code, may make such left
turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from
the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicles making the
left turn.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and for a first offense thereof shall be fined not more than $100;
for a second such offense within one year thereafter, such person shall be
fined not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent offense, such person
shall be fined not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall
be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-9-2) (Prior Code, § 341.02) (Ord. passed 2-20-2024; Ord.
passed 3-19-2024)
§ 70.132 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY OR STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop, as required by §
71.39, at the entrance to a through street or highway and shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from such
through streets or highways or which are approaching so closely on such through
street or highway as to constitute an immediate hazard but the driver having so
yielded may proceed.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall likewise stop in obedience to a stop
sign as required herein at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one
or more entrances thereto although not a part of a through street or highway
and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which
are within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard, but may then proceed.
   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and for a first offense thereof shall be fined not more than $100;
for a second such offense within one year thereafter, such person shall be
fined not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent offense, such person
shall be fined not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall
be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-9-3) (Prior Code, § 341.03) (Ord. passed 2-20-2024; Ord.
passed 3-19-2024)
§ 70.133 DRIVING ONTO ROADWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY; DUTY TO YIELD.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a street or highway
from a private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the street or highway.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and for a first offense thereof shall be fined not more than $200;
for a second such offense within one year thereafter, such person shall be
fined not more than $400; and upon a third or subsequent offense, such person
shall be fined not more than $600. Court costs as determined by the court shall
be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-9-4) (Prior Code, § 341.04) (Ord. passed 2-20-2024)
§ 70.134 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
equipped with at least one flashing lighted lamp of a color authorized by §
72.018, which is visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of
500 feet to the front of such vehicle, other than a police vehicle when
operated as an authorized emergency vehicle, and when the driver is giving
audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of every other
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position
parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the
roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position
until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a police officer.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the street or highway.
   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and for a first offense thereof shall be fined not more than $200;
for a second such offense within one year thereafter, such person shall be
fined not more than $300; and upon a third or subsequent offense, such person
shall be fined not more than $600. Court costs as determined by the court shall
be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-9-5) (Prior Code, § 341.05) (Ord. passed 2-20-2024; Ord.
passed - -)
§ 70.135 TURNING INTO PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or driveway,
alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed by the
following rules.
   (A)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof.
   (C)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction, approach
for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the
left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. It shall be the duty of the driver of
any vehicle entering a private road or driveway, alley or building to yield the
right- of-way to pedestrians lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway, private road, driveway or building.
   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and for a first offense thereof shall be fined not more than $100;
for a second such offense within one year thereafter, such person shall be
fined not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent offense, such person
shall be fined not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall
be added to each conviction.
(Prior Code, § 341.06) (Ord. passed 2-20-2024; Ord. passed 4-16-2024)
MISCELLANEOUS RULES
§ 70.150 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to
stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing
upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the street or
highway.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and for a first offense thereof shall be fined not more than $100;
for a second such offense within one year thereafter, such person shall be
fined not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent offense, such person
shall be fined not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall
be added to each conviction.
(Prior Code, § 349.01) (Ord. passed 2-20-2024; Ord. passed 4-16-2024) Penalty,
see §
70.999
§ 70.151 BACKING A VEHICLE.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement
be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-14-2) (Prior Code, § 349.02) (Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
 
70.999
§ 70.152 DRIVERS’ VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his or her
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-14-4) (Prior Code, § 349.03) (Ord. passed 4-16-2024) Penalty,
see §  
70.999
§ 70.153 PASSENGERS IN SEAT WITH OPERATOR.
   (A)   No more than three persons, including the operator, shall ride or be
permitted by such operator to ride in the seat with the operator of any motor
vehicle while such motor vehicle is being operated on the streets or highways
of this municipality; provided, however, that the limitation of this section
shall not apply to a truck cab or truck crew compartment properly designed for
the occupancy of four persons, including the operator, and so designated on the
registration card by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-14-5) (Prior Code, § 349.04) (Ord. passed 4-16-2024) Penalty,
see §  
70.999
§ 70.154 PASSENGERS ON RUNNING BOARD.
   (A)   No passenger shall ride nor shall the operator permit any passenger to
ride on the running boards of any motor vehicle while such vehicle is being
operated on the streets or highways of this municipality.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-14-6) (Prior Code, § 349.05) (Ord. passed 5-21-2024) (Penalty,
see §
70.999)
§ 70.155 FOLLOWING AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business may not
follow any authorized emergency vehicle traveling in response to a fire alarm
or other emergency closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle
within the block where such authorized emergency vehicle has stopped in answer
to a fire alarm or other emergency.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-14-9) (Prior Code, § 349.06) (Ord. passed 5-21-2024) Penalty,
see §  
70.999
§ 70.156 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire
Department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any
fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in
command.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-14-10) (Prior Code, § 349.07) (Ord. passed 5-21-2024) Penalty,
see §  
70.999
§ 70.157 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FUNERAL DIRECTOR and FUNERAL ESTABLISHMENT. Have the same meaning as set
forth in W. Va. Code 30-6-4.
      FUNERAL ESCORT. A person or entity that provides escort services for
funeral processions, including law-enforcement personnel and agencies.
      FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle that escorts a funeral
procession.
      FUNERAL LEAD VEHICLE. Any authorized law enforcement or nonlaw-
enforcement motor vehicle or a funeral escort vehicle being used to lead and
facilitate the movement of a funeral procession. A funeral hearse may serve as
a FUNERAL LEAD VEHICLE.
      FUNERAL PROCESSION. Two or more vehicles accompanying the body of a
deceased person, or traveling to the church, chapel, cemetery or other location
at which the funeral service or final disposition is to be held, including a
funeral lead vehicle or a funeral escort vehicle.
   (B)   Funeral procession right-of-way.
      (1)   Regardless of any traffic control device or right-of-way provisions
prescribed by state or local ordinance, pedestrians and operators of all
vehicles, except as stated in division (B)(3) below, shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle which is part of a funeral procession being led by a funeral
escort vehicle or a funeral lead vehicle.
      (2)   When the funeral lead vehicle lawfully enters an intersection,
either by reason of a traffic control device or at the direction of law-
enforcement personnel, the remaining vehicles in the funeral procession may
follow through the intersection regardless of any traffic control devices or
right- of-way provisions prescribed by state or local law.
      (3)   Funeral processions have the right-of-way at intersections
regardless of traffic control devices subject to the following conditions and
exceptions:
         (a)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the
right-of-way to an approaching emergency vehicle giving an audible or visible
signal;
         (b)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the
right-of-way when directed to do so by a police officer; and
         (c)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession must exercise due
care when participating in a funeral procession.
   (C)   Driving in procession.
      (1)   All vehicles comprising a funeral procession shall follow the
preceding vehicle in the funeral procession as closely as is practical and
safe.
      (2)   Any ordinance, law or rule stating that motor vehicles shall be
operated to allow sufficient space enabling any other vehicle to enter and
occupy such space without danger is not applicable to vehicles in a funeral
procession.
   (D)   Liability. Liability for any death, personal injury or property damage
suffered on or after July 1, 1999, by any person in a funeral procession may
not be imposed upon a funeral director or funeral establishment or their
employees or agents unless the death, personal injury or property damage is
proximately caused by the negligent or intentional act of a funeral director or
funeral establishment or their employees or agents.
   (E)   Equipment. All nonlaw-enforcement funeral escort vehicles and funeral
lead vehicles may be equipped with at least one lighted circulation flashing
lamp exhibiting an amber or purple light or lens. Flashing amber or purple
lights may be used when such vehicles are used in a funeral procession.
   (F)   Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
(W. Va. Code Art. 17C-23) (Prior Code, § 349.08) (Ord. passed 5-21-2024)
§ 70.158 OPENING DOOR OF VEHICLE ON TRAFFIC SIDE.
   (A)   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall
any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving
traffic for a period of time longer than is necessary to load or unload
passengers.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 349.09) (Ord. passed 5-21-2024) Penalty, see §  
70.999
§ 70.159 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is
in motion.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 349.10) (Ord. passed 5-21-2024) Penalty, see §  
70.999
§ 70.160 UNAUTHORIZED RIDING OR JUMPING ONTO VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not
designated or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion.
This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary
discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended
for merchandise.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 349.11) (Ord. passed 7-2-2024) Penalty, see §  
70.999
§ 70.161 SQUEALING TIRES, CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES.
   (A)   No person shall unnecessarily race the motor of any vehicle and no
person shall operate any motor vehicle, except in an emergency, in such a
manner that the vehicle is so rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped
position that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or chattering noise
unusual to its normal operation, or whereby the tires of such vehicle squeal or
leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly called “peeling”.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 349.12) (Ord. passed 7-2-2024) Penalty, see §  
70.999
§ 70.162 TAKING, INJURING OR TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle, not his or her own, without consent
of the owner thereof, and with intent temporarily to deprive such owner of his
or her possession of such vehicle, but without intent to steal the vehicle. The
consent of the owner of a vehicle to its taking or driving shall not in any
case be presumed or implied because of such owner’s consent on a previous
occasion to the taking or driving of such vehicle by the same or a different
person. Any person who assists in, or is a party or accessory to or an
accomplice in any such unauthorized taking or driving, shall also be guilty of
a violation of this section.
(W. Va. Code 17A-8-4)
   (B)   No person either individually or in association with one or more
persons shall willfully injure or tamper with any vehicle or break or remove
any part or parts of or from a vehicle without the consent of the owner.
   (C)   No person with intent to commit any malicious mischief, injury or
other crime shall climb into or upon a vehicle whether it is in motion or at
rest or with like intent attempt to manipulate any of the levers, starting
mechanism, brakes or other mechanism or device of a vehicle while the same is
at rest and unattended or with like intent set in motion any vehicle while the
same is at rest and unattended.
(W. Va. Code 17A-8-6)
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500, or
confined in the county or regional jail not more than 30 days, or both. Court
costs as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(Prior Code, § 349.13) (Ord. passed 7-2-2024; Ord. passed 4-15-2025) Penalty,
see §  
70.999
§ 70.163 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK, STREET LAWN OR CURB.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle, upon a
sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary
driveway.
   (B)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a street lawn area or the curb of a
street, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway or when
otherwise lawfully authorized.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 349.14) (Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §  
70.999
§ 70.164 SHORTCUTTING; AVOIDING TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle across public or private
property marked with signs “No Through Traffic” or words of similar import for
the purpose of passing from one roadway to another.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle across public or private
property for the purpose of avoiding compliance with a traffic control device.
   (C)   It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section for
the operator of a motor vehicle to cross public or private property as provided
herein without using the service of such property, stopping the engine or both.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 349.15) (Ord. passed 7-2-2024) Penalty, see §  
70.999
§ 70.165 COASTING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The operator of any motor vehicle when traveling on a down grade on
any street, alley or highway shall not coast with the gears of such vehicle in
neutral.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 349.16) (Ord. passed 7-2-2024)
   No operator of a vehicle shall drive the same over or through a safety zone.
(Prior Code, § 349.17) Penalty, see §
§ 70.166 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No operator of a vehicle shall drive the same over or through a safety
zone.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 349.17) (Ord. passed 8-6-2024) Penalty, see §  
70.999
§ 70.167 DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR.
   (A)   No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or
any part thereof, which has been closed in the process of its construction,
reconstruction or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by the authority
having jurisdiction to close such street or highway.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 349.18) (Ord. passed 8-6-2024) Penalty, see §  
70.999
§ 70.168 OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC.
   (A)   No person shall operate, stop, stand or park any motor vehicle on any
street or alley within the municipality so as to obstruct or hinder the free
flow of motor vehicle traffic except in compliance with a lawful order of a
police officer or in compliance with a traffic control sign, signal or marking.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 349.19) (Ord. passed 8-6-2024) Penalty, see §  
70.999
§ 70.169 VEHICLE SECURITY.
   (A)   Every owner or registrant of a motor vehicle shall maintain security
upon such vehicle as required by W. Va. Code Article 17D-2A, and no person
shall knowingly drive or operate on any street within the municipality any
motor vehicle upon which security is required by such Article unless the
security is provided, and violation of any of the provisions of W. Va. Code
Article 17D-2A, including failure to have a certificate of insurance, if
required, shall constitute a violation under this section.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500.
Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(Prior Code, § 349.20) (Ord. passed 8-6-2024; Ord. passed 4-15-2025) Penalty,
see §  
70.999
§ 70.170 LITTERING FROM A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any driver or passenger of a motor vehicle or other
conveyance to place, deposit, dump, throw or cause to be placed, deposited,
dumped or thrown, any litter from a motor vehicle or other conveyance in or
upon any public or private highway, road, street or alley; any private
property; any public property; or the waters of the state or within 100 feet of
the waters of this state, except in a proper litter or other solid waste
receptacle.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, LITTER means all waste material
including, but not limited to, any garbage, refuse, trash, disposable package,
container, can, bottle, paper, ashes, cigarette or cigar butt, carcass of any
dead animal or any part thereof, or any other offensive or unsightly matter,
but not including the wastes of primary processes of mining, logging, saw
milling, farming or manufacturing.
   (C)   When there is more than one occupant in a motor vehicle or other
conveyance and it can not be determined which occupant is responsible for
violating this section, the driver shall be presumed to be responsible for the
violation.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-14-14) (Prior Code, § 349.21) (Ord. passed 8-6-2024) Penalty,
see §  
70.999
ENFORCEMENT; IMPOUNDING AND PENALTY
§ 70.185 AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department to
enforce all street traffic laws of this municipality and all of the state
vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this municipality.
   (B)   Officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided,
that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
   (C)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 303.01)
§ 70.186 APPLICATION TO VEHICLES UPON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code relating to the operation of
vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon streets and
highways except where a different place is specifically referred to in a given
section.
   (B)   The provisions of this traffic code, except §§
72.070 to
72.074, shall apply upon streets and highways as defined in §
72.090.
(W. Va. Code 17C-2-1) (Prior Code, § 303.02)
§ 70.187 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS; FLEEING.
   (A)   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of any police officer or special officer invested by law
with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
   (B)   No person shall operate a vehicle so as to willfully elude or flee a
police officer or special officer after receiving a visible or audible signal
from such an officer to bring his or her vehicle to a stop.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-2-3(c)) (Prior Code, § 303.03) (Ord. passed 8-6-2024) Penalty,
see §
70.999
§ 70.188 APPLICATION TO GOVERNMENT VEHICLES; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of
vehicles upon the streets or highways shall apply to the drivers of all
vehicles owned or operated by the United States, this state or any county,
municipality, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state,
except as provided in this section and subject to such specific exceptions as
are set forth in this traffic code with reference to authorized emergency
vehicles.
   (B)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this traffic
code shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street or highway but
shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work.
(W. Va. Code 17C-2-4) (Prior Code, § 303.04)
§ 70.189 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this traffic code;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the speed limits so long as he or she does not endanger life
or property; and
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
   (C)   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible
signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and
when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted flashing lamp, as
authorized by §
72.018, which is visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of
500 feet to the front of such vehicle, except that an authorized emergency
vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a
warning light visible from in front of the vehicle.
   (D)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(W. Va. Code 17C-2-5) (Prior Code, § 303.05)
§ 70.190 APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN
VEHICLES.
   Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this traffic code, except those
provisions of this traffic code which by their very nature can have no
application.
(W. Va. Code 17C-2-6) (Prior Code, § 303.06)
§ 70.191 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION.
   (A)   Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal and
impounding of a vehicle under the following circumstances:
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or
causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably interfere with
street cleaning or snow removal operations;
      (2)   When any vehicle has been abandoned or junked on private or public
property as provided in W. Va. Code Chapter 22;
      (3)   When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of
the owner;
      (4)   When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to
display the current lawfully required license plates;
      (5)   When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission
of a felony;
            (6)   When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be
inoperable or violates equipment provisions of this traffic code or W. Va. Code
Article 17C-15 whereby its continued operation would constitute a condition
hazardous to life, limb or property;
      (7)   When any vehicle is left unattended due to the removal of an ill,
injured or arrested operator;
      (8)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to
stop in case of an accident or collision;
      (9)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving
without a lawful license or while his or her license has been suspended or
revoked; or
      (10)   When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for
violations of this traffic code have been issued and the owner or operator
thereof has failed to respond to such citation tags as lawfully required.
   (B)   Any vehicle removed under authority of division (A)(2) above shall be
disposed of as provided under W. Va. Code Article 17-24. Any other vehicle
removed under authority of this section shall be ordered into storage and the
Police Department shall forthwith notify the registered vehicle owner of the
fact of such removal and impounding, reasons therefor and the place of storage.
Any person desiring to redeem an impounded vehicle shall appear at the Police
Department to furnish satisfactory evidence of identity and ownership or right
to possession. Prior to issuance of a release form, the claimant, owner or
operator shall either pay the amount due for any fines for violations on
account of which such vehicle was impounded or, as the court may require, post
a bond in an amount set by the court, to appear to answer to such violations.
The pound operator shall release such vehicle upon the receipt of the release
form and payment of all towage and storage charges.
(Prior Code, § 303.07)
§ 70.192 RIGHTS OF OWNERS OF REAL PROPERTY.
   Nothing in this traffic code shall be construed to prevent an owner of real
property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of
the owner and not as matter of right from prohibiting such use, or from
requiring other or different or additional conditions than those specified in
this traffic code, or otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such
owner.
(W. Va. Code 17C-2-9) (Prior Code, § 303.08)
§ 70.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which another
penalty is not provided, shall, for a first offense thereof, be fined an amount
not to exceed state law or be imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law, or
both; for a second such offense within one year thereafter, such person shall
be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term not to
exceed state law, or both; and upon a third or subsequent offense, such person
shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term not
to exceed state law, or both.
(Prior Code, § 303.99)
   (B)   Whoever violates §
70.056 shall, for a first offense, be fined an amount not to exceed state law,
or imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law; for a second or subsequent
offense, shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law, or imprisoned for a
term not to exceed state law, or both.
(Prior Code, § 333.99)
   (C)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
70.058(A) is guilty of a traffic offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall
for a first offense be fined an amount not to exceed state law; for a second
offense be fined an amount not to exceed state law; and for a third or
subsequent offense be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
   (D)   Whoever violates §
70.073 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law; for a second offense,
fined an amount not to exceed state law, or by imprisonment for a term not to
exceed state law, or both; and for a third and each subsequent offense, fined
an amount not to exceed state law, or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed
state law or both. For the purposes of this section, a forfeiture of bail or
collateral deposited to secure such person’s appearance in court, which
forfeiture has not been vacated, shall be equivalent to a final conviction. If
at the time of any violation of the provisions of §
70.073 by any person as an operator of a motor vehicle, such person was not
entitled to operate a motor vehicle in this state because his or her operator’s
or chauffeur’s license, or privilege to drive in this state if such person be a
nonresident, had earlier been suspended or revoked, then in addition to the
penalties provided for in this section, the provisions of §
72.094 shall be applicable.
(W. Va. Code 17C-6-8) (Prior Code, § 335.99)
   (E)   Whoever violates § 70.162 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state
law or imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law, or both.
(Prior Code, § 349.99)
(Ord. 79-8, passed 7-17-1979; Ord. 12-3, passed 6-7-2012)
CHAPTER 71: STREETS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section
Street Obstructions and Special Uses
   
71.01   Placing injurious material
   
71.02   Play streets
   
71.03   Toy vehicles on streets
   
71.04   Zones of quiet, in street
Traffic Control Devices
   
71.15   Obedience to traffic control devices
   
71.16   Obedience to traffic control instructions at street construction
   
71.17   Traffic control signal terms and lights
   
71.18   Pedestrian control signals
   
71.19   Flashing traffic signals
   
71.20   Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view and advertising
   
71.21   Alteration, injury or removal of traffic control devices
   
71.22   Effect of previously installed traffic control devices
   
71.23   Traffic violations in construction zones
   
71.24   Speed bumps authorized
Special Stops Required
   
71.35   Driving across grade crossing
   
71.36   Stops at dangerous grade crossings
   
71.37   Stopping at grade crossing
   
71.38   Moving heavy equipment across grade crossings
   
71.39   Through streets and stop intersections
   
71.40   Driving onto roadway from place other than roadway; stopping at
sidewalk
   
71.41   Stopping for school bus; signs and warning lights; sale of school bus
   
71.42   Stopping for passenger van; signs and warning lights
   
71.43   Obstructing intersection or crosswalk
 
   
71.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Dropping, leaking loads, see §
72.073
   Traffic control devices defined, see §
70.001
   Traffic control signal defined, see §
70.001
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish through streets and stop intersections, see W. Va.
Code 17C-2-8(a)(6)
   Authority to place traffic control devices, see W. Va. Code 17C-2-8(a)(2),
17C-3-3
   Authority to prohibit littering in streets, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(3)
   Authority to regulate processions or assemblages, see W. Va. Code 17C-2-8(a)
(3)
   Local regulations requiring traffic control devices, see W. Va. Code 17C-2-8
(c)
   Placing traffic control devices on state highways, see W. Va. Code 17C-2-8
(b), 17C-3-2
STREET OBSTRUCTIONS AND SPECIAL USES
§ 71.01 PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or highway any glass
bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure
any person, animal or vehicle upon such street or highway.
   (B)   Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any
street or highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately
remove the same or cause it to be removed.
   (C)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
street or highway from such vehicle.
(W. Va. Code 17C-14-11)
   (D)   No person shall throw, place or deposit upon any street or highway any
material, article or substance which injures or damages, or is likely to injure
or damage, the street or highway.
   (E)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 311.01) (Ord. passed 9-3-2024)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 PLAY STREETS.
   (A)   No person shall use the public streets, highways, alleys,
thoroughfares, roads or avenues of the municipality for the purpose of engaging
in or playing any games or athletic activities, except public ways specifically
set aside for such purposes.
   (B)   When authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part
thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or highway or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or
whose residence is within such closed area, and then any such driver shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or highway or
portion thereof.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 311.02) (Ord. passed 9-3-2024)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 TOY VEHICLES ON STREETS.
   (A)   No person on roller skates or riding in or by means of any sled, toy
vehicle, skateboard or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk and except on streets set aside as play
streets.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 311.03) (Ord. passed 9-3-2024)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 ZONES OF QUIET, IN STREET.
   (A)   Whenever official traffic control signs are erected indicating a zone
of quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound
the horn or other warning device of the vehicle except in an emergency.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 311.04) (Ord. passed 9-3-2024)  Penalty, see §
71.99
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
§ 71.15 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or
police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this traffic code.
   (B)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required shall
be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged
violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section
does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even
though no signs are erected or in place.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-3-4) (Prior Code, § 313.01) (Ord. passed 9-3-2024)
§ 71.16 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL INSTRUCTIONS AT STREET CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the traffic control instructions
of any law enforcement officer or persons authorized by the Commissioner of
Highways or by proper local authorities to operate traffic control devices, act
as flag person or operate authorized vehicles engaged in work at or near the
site of street or highway construction maintenance work, for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic, subject to the exceptions granted the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this traffic code.
   (B)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-3-4a) (Prior Code, § 313.02) (Ord. passed 9-3-2024)
§ 71.17 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL TERMS AND LIGHTS.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the
words “go”, “caution” or “stop”, or exhibiting different colored lights
successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be
used and such terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles
and pedestrians as follows.
   (A)   Green alone or “go”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited under §
71.36, may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such
place prohibits either such turn, but vehicular traffic, including vehicles
turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the
time such signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   Yellow alone or “caution” when showing following the green or “go”
signal.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
or “stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or “stop”
signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to
cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
   (C)   Red alone or “stop”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or “go” is
shown alone except as provided in divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) below.
      (2)   A vehicle which is stopped in obedience to a red or “stop” signal
as close as practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection, may
cautiously make a right turn but such vehicle shall yield the right-of- way to
pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other vehicular traffic
proceeding as directed by the signal at such intersection, except that Council
may by ordinance prohibit any such right turn against a red or “stop” signal at
any intersection which ordinance shall be effective when a sign is erected at
such intersection giving notice thereof.
      (3)   A vehicle which is stopped in obedience to a red or “stop” signal
as close as practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection on a
one-way street which intersects another one-way street on which traffic moves
to the left, may cautiously make a left turn into the one-way street but such
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk
and to other vehicular traffic proceeding as directed by the signal at such
intersection, except that Council may by ordinance prohibit any such left turn
against a red or “stop” signal at any intersection, which ordinance shall be
effective when a sign is erected at such intersection giving notice thereof.
      (4)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Red with green arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (E)   Application. In the event an official traffic control signal is
erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of
this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the
absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (F)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-3-5) (Prior Code, § 313.03) (Ord. passed 10-1-2024)
§ 71.18 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“wait” are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows.
   (A)   Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in
the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers
of all vehicles.
   (B)   Wait. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction
of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his or her
crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while
the wait signal is showing.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500.
(W. Va. Code 17C-3-6) (Prior Code, § 313.04) (Ord. passed 10-1-2024)
§ 71.19 FLASHING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic
sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.
   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if
none, then before entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
   (C)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-3-7) (Prior Code, § 313.05) (Ord. passed 10-1-2024)
§ 71.20 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, HIDING FROM VIEW AND ADVERTISING.
   (A)   No local authority or person shall place, maintain or display upon or
in view of any street or highway any unauthorized traffic control device or
traffic control signal, or any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device
which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic
control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or
signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any street or highway any traffic control device bearing thereon
any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection
upon private property adjacent to a street or highway of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official
signs.
   (B)   Every such prohibited device, signal, sign or marking is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and the Commissioner of Highways or other
authority having jurisdiction over the street or highway is hereby empowered to
remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
   (C)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-3-8) (Prior Code, § 313.06) (Ord. passed 10-1-2024) Penalty,
see §  
71.99
§ 71.21 ALTERATION, INJURY OR REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact
alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device
or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon,
or any other part thereof.
   (B)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-3-9) (Prior Code, § 313.07) (Ord. passed 12-3-2024)  Penalty,
see §
71.99
§ 71.22 EFFECT OF PREVIOUSLY INSTALLED TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   All traffic control devices, signals, signs and markings heretofore
installed by authority of Council and which are in place on the effective date
of this traffic code shall be deemed to be official traffic control devices
until such time as they may be removed by authority of Council, and until they
are so removed it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any
instruction or directive indicated by any such official traffic control device.
   (B)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
such conviction.
(Prior Code, § 313.08) (Ord. passed 12-3-2024)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.23 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS IN CONSTRUCTION ZONES.
   (A)   At each and every location where street or highway construction work
is to be conducted, a sign shall be posted at least 1,000 feet from the
construction site, or as close to 1,000 feet from the construction site, as is
practicable given the location of the site when workers are present, notifying
all motorists as to the speed limit and displaying the words “construction
work”.
   (B)   No person shall violate any posted speed restriction or traffic
restriction at such construction site referred to in division (A) above.
      (1)   Any person who exceeds any posted speed restriction or traffic
restriction at a construction site referred to in division (A) above by less
than 15 miles per hour is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $100; upon a second conviction within one year
thereafter, shall be fined not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent
conviction, shall be fined not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the
Court shall be added to each conviction.
      (2)   Any person who exceeds any posted speed restriction or traffic
restriction at a construction site referred to in division (A) above by 15
miles per hour or more is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $200; upon a second conviction within one year
thereafter, shall be fined not more than $300; and upon a third or subsequent
conviction, shall be fined not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the
court shall be added to each conviction.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude prosecution of
any operator of a motor vehicle who commits a violation of any other provision
of this traffic code for such violation.
(W. Va. Code 17C-3-4b) (Prior Code, § 313.09) (Ord. passed 12-3-2024)  Penalty,
see §
71.99
§ 71.24 SPEED BUMPS AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Upon authorization by the City Council, the Department of Public Works
shall construct and install, on specified city roadways, automobile speed
control devices commonly called speed bumps. The speed bumps shall be of a size
and at intervals jointly determined by the Department of Public Works and the
Police Department to be appropriate.
   (B)   Division (A) above shall not apply to state or county roads located
within the city unless authorization is first received from the appropriate
state or county agency.
(Ord. 12-4, passed 9-18-2012)
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
§ 71.35 DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSING.
   (A)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of
such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he or she can do so
safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
      (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
      (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flag person gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;
      (3)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the
street or highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such
railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an
immediate hazard; and/or
      (4)   Any approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-12-1) (Prior Code, § 343.01) (Ord. passed 12-3-2024) Penalty,
see §
71.99
§ 71.36 STOPS AT DANGEROUS GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   Council or other designated traffic authority with the approval of the
State Commissioner of Highways is hereby authorized to designate particularly
dangerous highway grade crossings of railroads and to erect stop signs thereat.
   (B)   When such stop signs are erected, the driver of any vehicle shall stop
within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad
and shall proceed only upon exercising due care.
   (C)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-12-2) (Prior Code, § 343.02) (Ord. passed 12-3-2024)
§ 71.37 STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSING.
   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of
any bus, or of any vehicle required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. part 172
carrying explosive substances, flammable liquids or hazardous materials as a
cargo or part of a cargo, or of any vehicle owned by an employer which, in
carrying on such employer’s business or in carrying employees to and from work,
is carrying more than six employees of such employer, before crossing at grade
any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within 50 feet but
not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so
stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any
approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, except
as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he or she can do so
safely. After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it is safe
to do so, the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the
vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing
such crossing and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or
tracks.
   (B)   The following commercial vehicles are required to stop at railroad
tracks or tracks at grade:
      (1)   Every bus transporting passengers;
      (2)   Every commercial motor vehicle transporting any quantity of a
United States Department of Transportation defined division 2.3 chlorine;
      (3)   Every commercial motor vehicle which, in accordance with United
States Department of Transportation regulations, is marked or placarded and is
required to stop in accordance with 49 C.F.R. part 392.10(a)(3) (2001);
      (4)   Every cargo tank motor vehicle, loaded or empty, used for the
transportation of any hazardous material, as defined in federal Department of
Transportation hazardous materials rules, 49 C.F.R. parts 107 through 180
(2001);
      (5)   Every cargo tank motor vehicle transporting a commodity which, at
the time of loading, has a temperature above its flashpoint as determined by 49
C.F.R. 173.120 (2001); and
      (6)   Every cargo tank motor vehicle, whether loaded or empty,
transporting any commodity exemption in accordance with 49 C.F.R. part 107
subpart B (2001).
   (C)   All drivers of commercial vehicles not required to stop at railroad
tracks or tracks at grade as provided in division (A) above may not cross a
railroad track or tracks at grade unless he or she first slows the commercial
motor vehicle to a speed which will permit the commercial motor vehicle to be
stopped before reaching the nearest rail of the railroad crossing and permit
exercise of due caution to ascertain that the tracks are clear of an
approaching train.
   (D)   All drivers of commercial motor vehicles may not proceed to cross a
railroad crossing unless there is sufficient space to drive completely through
the crossing without stopping and the vehicle has sufficient undercarriage
clearance to drive completely through the crossing without stopping.
   (E)   No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a
traffic control signal directs traffic to proceed.
   (F)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-12-3) (Prior Code, § 343.03) (Ord. passed 12-3-2024)
§ 71.38 MOVING HEAVY EQUIPMENT ACROSS GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating
speed of ten or less mph or a vertical body or load clearance of less than one-
half inch per foot of the distance between any two adjacent axles or in any
event, of less than nine inches, measured above the level surface of a roadway,
upon or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying
with this section.
   (B)   Notice of any such intended crossing shall be given to a station agent
of such railroad and a reasonable time be given to such railroad to provide
proper protection at such crossing.
   (C)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same not less than 15 feet nor
more than 50 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so stopped
shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching
train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall not
proceed until the crossing can be made safely.
   (D)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal or crossing gates or a flag person or otherwise of the immediate
approach of a railroad train or car. If a flag person is provided by the
railroad, movement over the crossing shall be under his or her direction.
   (E)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined no more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500.
(Prior Code, § 343.04) (Ord. passed 1-21-2025)
§ 71.39 THROUGH STREETS AND STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Council or other designated traffic authority may designate through
streets or highways and erect stop signs at specified entrances thereto or may
designate any intersection as a stop intersection and erect like signs at one
or more entrances to such intersection.
   (B)   Every such sign shall bear the word “Stop” in letters not less than
six inches in height and such sign shall at nighttime be rendered luminous by
steady or flashing internal illumination, or by a fixed floodlight projected on
the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the
sign.
   (C)   Every stop sign shall be erected as near as practicable to the nearest
line of the crosswalk on the near side of the roadway.
   (D)   Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event
there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none,
then at the point nearest the intersecting street or highway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting street or highway before
entering the intersection except when directed to proceed by a police officer
or traffic control signal.
   (E)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-12-5) (Prior Code, § 343.05) (Ord. passed 2-18-2025)
§ 71.40 DRIVING ONTO ROADWAY FROM PLACE OTHER THAN ROADWAY; STOPPING AT
SIDEWALK.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district
emerging from any alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway or private driveway, and shall yield the right-
of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon
entering the roadway shall yield the right-of- way to all vehicles approaching
on such roadway.
   (B)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-12-6) (Prior Code, § 343.06) (Ord. passed 2-18-2025)
§ 71.41 STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; SIGNS AND WARNING LIGHTS; SALE OF SCHOOL BUS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school children shall stop the vehicle before reaching such
school bus when there is in operation on such school bus flashing warning
signal lights, as referred to in W. Va. Code 17C-12-8, and such driver shall
not proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or is signaled by the school
bus driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer actuated. This
section applies wherever the school bus is receiving or discharging children,
including, but not limited to, any street, highway, parking lot, private road
or driveway; provided, that the driver of a vehicle upon a controlled access
highway need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a
different roadway or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross the roadway. If the identity of the driver cannot be
ascertained, then any such owner or lessee of the vehicle in violation of this
division (A) shall be subject to the penalty provided for a violation of this
division (A); provided, however, that such conviction shall not subject such
owner or lessee to further administrative or other penalties for such offense,
notwithstanding other provisions of the state code or this traffic code to the
contrary.
   (B)   Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear
upon the front and rear thereof a plainly visible sign containing the words
“school bus” in letters not less than eight inches in height. When a contract
school bus is being operated upon a street or highway for purposes other than
the actual transportation of children either to or from school, all markings
thereon indicating “school bus” shall be covered or concealed. Any school bus
sold or transferred to another owner by a county board of education, agency or
individual, shall have all flashing warning lights disconnected and all
lettering removed or permanently obscured, except when sold or transferred for
the transportation of school children.
   (C)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined $500,
confined to jail for 30 days, or both confined to jail for 30 days and fined
$500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-12-7) (Prior Code, § 343.07) (Ord. passed 3-18-2025) Penalty,
see §
71.99
§ 71.42 STOPPING FOR PASSENGER VAN; SIGNS AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (A)   Every passenger van used for the transportation of children shall bear
upon the front and rear thereof a plainly visible sign containing the warning
“Caution: Loading and Unloading Passengers” in letters not less than six inches
in height. Every such passenger van shall be equipped with either flashing
warning signal lights as are contemplated and referred to in W. Va. Code 17C-
12-8, or a red caution flag which the driver or some other adult must use by
exiting the passenger van and displaying while assisting in the loading or
unloading of passengers. Such vehicles may also be equipped with a white
flashing strobotron warning light that meets the requirements set forth in W.
Va. Code 17C-15-26(e).
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from any direction
any passenger van which has stopped for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers, shall stop his or her vehicle before reaching the passenger van
when there is in operation on the passenger van flashing warning signal lights
or when an adult is outside the passenger van with a red caution flag and
assisting with the loading or unloading of passengers. The driver of a vehicle
may not proceed until he or she is signaled by the passenger van driver to
proceed, the passenger van flashing signal lights are no longer actuated or the
passenger resumes motion. This section applies whenever the passenger van is
loading or unloading children on any street, highway, parking lot, private road
or driveway; provided, that the driver of a vehicle upon a controlled access
highway need not stop upon meeting or passing a passenger van which is on a
different roadway or adjacent to the highway and where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross the roadway.
   (C)   Any driver acting in violation of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $200. If the identity of the driver cannot be ascertained, then any
owner or lessee of the vehicle in violation of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-12-7a) (Prior Code, § 343.08) (Ord. passed 2-18-2025)
§ 71.43 OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK.
   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.
   (B)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
(Prior Code, § 343.09) (Ord. passed 3-18-2025)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
71.41(A) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a
term not to exceed state law, or both.
(Prior Code, § 343.99)
CHAPTER 72: SAFETY REGULATIONS AND LICENSING
Section
Safety and Equipment
   
72.001   Driving unsafe vehicles; application; farm and road equipment
exceptions
   
72.002   When lighted lights required
   
72.003   Measurement of distances and heights
   
72.004   Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles
   
72.005   Tail light; illumination of rear license plate
   
72.006   Red light or red flag on extended loads
   
72.007   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles
   
72.008   Lights on slow-moving vehicles
   
72.009   Spotlights and auxiliary lights
   
72.010   Signal lamps and signal devices
   
72.011   Cowl, fender and backup lights; flashing hazard lights
   
72.012   Multiple-beam road-lighting equipment requirements
   
72.013   Use of headlight beams
   
72.014   Single-beam road-lighting equipment
   
72.015   Lights on motorcycles, motor-driven cycles and mopeds
   
72.016   Alternate road-lighting equipment
   
72.017   Number of driving lights required or permitted
   
72.018   Special restrictions on lights
   
72.019   Motor vehicle or motorcycle brakes
   
72.020   Inspection of brakes on motorcycles, motor-driven cycles and mopeds
   
72.021   Horn, siren and theft alarm signal
   
72.022   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise
   
72.023   Rear-view mirror
   
72.024   Windshield to be unobstructed; windshield wiper
   
72.025   Tire equipment restrictions
   
72.026   Safety glass in motor vehicles
   
72.027   Vehicles transporting explosives
   
72.028   Television receiver, video monitor, television or video screen in
driver’s view prohibited
   
72.029   Safety equipment for motorcyclists, motorcycles, motor-driven cycles
and mopeds
   
72.030   Certification labels on mopeds
   
72.031   Child passenger safety device required
   
72.032   Certificate of inspection and approval
   
72.033   Alteration of motor vehicles; bumper height limits
   
72.034   Sun screening devices
   
72.035   Operation of vehicles with safety belts
Pedestrians
   
72.050   Compliance with traffic regulations
   
72.051   Right-of-way in crosswalk
   
72.052   Crossing roadway outside crosswalk
   
72.053   Drivers to exercise due care
   
72.054   Moving upon right half of crosswalk
   
72.055   Walking along streets and highways; soliciting rides
   
72.056   Persons working on streets and highways
   
72.057   Protection of blind pedestrians
Commercial and Heavy Vehicles
   
72.070   Oversize or overweight vehicles
   
72.071   Projecting loads on passenger vehicles
   
72.072   Maximum width, height and length
   
72.073   Loads dropping or leaking
   
72.074   Towing requirements
Licensing Generally
   
72.085   Registration, certificate of title required
   
72.086   Registration card
   
72.087   Display of registration plates
   
72.088   Operation of vehicle without evidence of registration; use of
temporary facsimile
   
72.089   Improper use of registration card, plate or permit
   
72.090   Driver or motorcycle license required
   
72.091   Persons exempt from license
   
72.092   Display of license
   
72.093   Certain acts prohibited
   
72.094   Driving under suspension or revocation
   
72.095   Owner or operator allowing another to drive
   
72.096   Administrative fee
Commercial Drivers
   
72.110   Definitions
   
72.111   Limitation on number of driver’s licenses
   
72.112   Employer responsibilities
   
72.113   Commercial driver’s license required
   
72.114   Exemptions
 
   
72.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Bicycle equipment, see §§
73.01 to
73.10
   Impounding unlicensed vehicle, see §
70.191
   Pedestrian control signal, see §
71.18
   Pedestrian defined, see §
70.001
   Pedestrians at traffic signal, see §
71.17
Statutory reference:
   Authority to designate weight limits on local streets, see W. Va. Code 17C-
2-8(a)(7)
   Authority to permit oversized buses, see W. Va. Code 17C-17-2(b)
   Obscured light on vehicles in combination, see W. Va. Code 17C-15-13
   Uniform Commercial Driver’s License Act, see W. Va. Code Art. 17E-1
   Warning devices for commercial vehicles, see W. Va. Code 17C-15-39
SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
§ 72.001 DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES; APPLICATION; FARM AND ROAD EQUIPMENT
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move and no owner shall cause or knowingly
permit to be driven or moved on any street or highway any vehicle or
combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any
person, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped
with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as
required in this subchapter, or which is equipped in any manner in violation of
this subchapter, or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform
any act required under this subchapter.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit
the use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle not inconsistent
with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   The provisions of this subchapter, with respect to equipment on
vehicles, shall not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road
rollers or farm tractors except as herein made applicable. Every farm tractor
equipped with an electric lighting system shall at all times, as mentioned in §
72.002, display a red tail lamp and either multiple-beam or single-beam head
lamps meeting the requirements of §
72.002.
   (D)   Any person failing to comply with the requirements of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $100; upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined
not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-1) (Prior Code, § 345.01) (Ord. passed 3-18-2025) Penalty,
see §
71.99
§ 72.002 WHEN LIGHTED LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every vehicle other than a school bus, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle
or moped operated upon a street or highway within this municipality at any time
from sunset to sunrise or during fog, smoke, rain or other unfavorable
atmospheric conditions, or at any other time when there is not sufficient light
to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the street or highway at
a distance of 500 feet ahead, shall display lighted head lamps and illuminating
devices as hereinafter respectively required for different classes of vehicles,
subject to exceptions with respect to parked vehicles as provided for in §
72.007(C). Lighted lamps and other lighting devices that consist of multiple
light-emitting diodes (LEDs) or other illuminating components that function as
a single lighting unit are deemed to be functional so long as at least 66% of
the LEDs or other illuminating components are functional; provided, that the
lighted lamps or lighting devices must still project sufficient illumination to
satisfy all other requirements contained in this chapter.
   (B)   Every school bus, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and moped shall
display lighted head lamps at all times when upon the street or highway.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-2) (Prior Code, § 345.02) (Ord. passed 4-15-2025)
§ 72.003 MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.
   (A)   Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to the distance from
which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible or within which
such lamps or devices shall be visible, such provisions shall apply during the
times stated in §
72.002 in respect to a vehicle without load when upon a straight, level,
unlighted street or highway under normal atmospheric conditions unless a
different time or condition is expressly stated.
   (B)    Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to the mounted height
of lamps or devices, it shall mean from the center of such lamp or device to
the level ground upon which the vehicle stands when such vehicle is without a
load.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-3) (Prior Code, § 345.03) (Ord. passed 5-20-2025)
§ 72.004 HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or
moped, shall be equipped with at least two head lamps with at least one on each
side of the front of the motor vehicle, which head lamps shall comply with the
requirements and limitations set forth in this subchapter.
   (B)   Every motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and moped shall be equipped with
at least one and not more than two head lamps which shall comply with the
requirements and limitations of this subchapter.
   (C)    Every head lamp upon every motor vehicle, including every motorcycle,
motor-driven cycle and moped, shall be located at a height measured from the
center of the head lamp of not more than 54 inches nor less than 24 inches to
be measured as set forth in §
72.003.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-4) (Prior Code, § 345.04) (Ord. passed 5-20-2025)
§ 72.005 TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, and any other vehicle
which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles, shall be equipped with
at least one tail lamp mounted on the rear, which, when lighted as hereinbefore
required, shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear, provided that, in the case of a train of vehicles, only the tail lamp
on the rearmost vehicle need actually be seen from the distance specified.
   (B)   Every tail lamp upon every vehicle shall be located at a height of not
more than 60 inches nor less than 20 inches to be measured as set forth in §
72.003(B).
   (C)    Either a tail lamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate and
render it clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. Any tail lamp
or tail lamps, together with any separate lamp for illuminating the rear
registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the head lamps
or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-5) (Prior Code, § 345.05) (Ord. passed 5-20-2025)
§ 72.006 RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS.
   (A)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in §
72.002, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the sides and rear. The red light or lantern required under this
section shall be in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle.
At any time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red
flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square and so hung that the entire area
is visible to the driver of a vehicle approaching from the rear.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-14) (Prior Code, § 345.06) (Ord. passed 5-20-2025)
§ 72.007 LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during
the hours between sunset and sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light
to reveal any person or object within a distance of 500 feet upon such street
or highway, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours between
sunset and sunrise and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or
object within a distance of 500 feet upon such street or highway, such vehicle
so parked or stopped shall be equipped with one or more lamps meeting the
following requirements. At least one lamp shall display a white or amber light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and the same
lamp or at least one other lamp shall display a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear of the vehicle, and the location of such lamp
or lamps shall always be such that at least one lamp or combination of lamps
meeting the requirements of this section is installed as near as practicable to
the side of the vehicle which is closest to passing traffic. The foregoing
provisions shall not apply to a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped.
   (C)    Any lighted head lamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-15) (Prior Code, § 345.07) (Ord. passed 6-17-2025)
§ 72.008 LIGHTS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES.
   (A)   All vehicles, including animal-drawn vehicles and including those
referred to in §
72.001(C) not hereinbefore specifically required to be equipped with lamps,
shall at the times specified in §
72.002 be equipped with at least one lighted lamp or lantern exhibiting a white
light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle and with
a lamp or lantern exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-16) (Prior Code, § 345.08) (Ord. passed 6-17-2025)
§ 72.009 SPOTLIGHTS AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS.
   (A)   Spot lamps. Any motor vehicle, except a public utility company
maintenance vehicle, may be equipped with not to exceed one spot lamp and every
lighted spot lamp shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another vehicle
that no part of the high-intensity portion of the beam will be directed to the
left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle nor more than
100 feet ahead of the vehicle. A public utility company maintenance vehicle may
be equipped with more than one spot lamp but all lighted spot lamps shall be
aimed and used in conformity to the requirements of this division (A).
   (B)   Fog lamps. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed two
fog lamps mounted on the front at a height not less than 12 inches nor more
than 30 inches above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands and so
aimed that, when the vehicle is not loaded, none of the high- intensity portion
of the light to the left of the center of the vehicle shall at a distance of 25
feet ahead project higher than a level of four inches below the level of the
center of the lamp from which it comes.
   (C)   Auxiliary passing lamp. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to
exceed one auxiliary passing lamp mounted on the front at a height not less
than 24 inches nor more than 42 inches above the level surface upon which the
vehicle stands and every auxiliary passing lamp shall meet the requirements and
limitations set forth in this subchapter.
   (D)   Auxiliary driving lamp. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to
exceed one auxiliary driving lamp mounted on the front at a height not less
than 16 inches nor more than 42 inches above the level surface upon which the
vehicle stands and every such auxiliary driving lamp shall meet the
requirements and limitations set forth in this subchapter.
   (E)   Roof-mounted off-road light bar lighting device. Any motor vehicle may
be equipped with a roof-mounted off-road light bar lighting device comprised of
multiple lamps; provided, that whenever the vehicle is operated or driven upon
any road or highway in this city, the roof-mounted off-road light bar lighting
device shall be turned off while the vehicle is being operated on any road or
highway in this city.
   (F)   For the purposes of this section, a lamp or lighting device meets the
requirements specified so long as any portion of the illuminating surface of
the lamp or lighting device is within the specified range. All lamps and
lighting devices covered in this section may be installed so that the entire
lamp or lighting device exceeds 42 inches above the level surface upon which
the vehicle stands so long as such lamps or lighting devices are either covered
or dimmable.
   (G)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-17) (Prior Code, § 345.09) (Ord. passed 6-17-2025)
§ 72.010 SIGNAL LAMPS AND SIGNAL DEVICES.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped and when required under this traffic
code shall be equipped with the following signal lamps or devices:
      (1)   A stop lamp on the rear which shall emit a red or yellow light and
which shall be actuated upon application of the service (foot) brake and which
may, but need not, be incorporated with a tail lamp; and
      (2)   A lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device capable of clearly
indicating any intention to turn either to the right or to the left and which
shall be visible both from the front and rear.
   (B)   A stop lamp shall be plainly visible and understandable from a
distance of 100 feet to the rear, both during normal sunlight and at nighttime
and signal lamp or lamps indicating intention to turn shall be visible and
understandable during daytime and nighttime from a distance of 100 feet, both
to the front and rear. When a vehicle is equipped with a stop lamp or other
signal lamps, such lamp or lamps shall at all times be maintained in good
working condition. No stop lamp or signal lamp shall project a glaring or
dazzling light.
   (C)    All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminated when in use
at the times mentioned in §
72.002.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-18) (Prior Code, § 345.10) (Ord. passed 6-17-2025)
§ 72.011 COWL, FENDER AND BACKUP LIGHTS; FLASHING HAZARD LIGHTS.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two side cowl or
fender lamps which shall emit an amber or white light without glare.
   (B)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one running-board
courtesy lamp on each side thereof which shall emit a white or amber light
without glare.
   (C)   Except for school buses as provided in this division (C), any motor
vehicle may be equipped with not more than two back-up lamps, either separately
or in combination with other lamps, but any such back-up lamp shall not be
lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion. School buses used for the
transportation of school children in this municipality, whether owned and
operated by a county board of education or privately owned and operated under
contract with a county board of education, shall be equipped with two back-up
lamps, one on each side of the rear door, with white lens or reflectors,
capable of lighting the roadway and objects to the rear of the bus for safe
backing during darkness, and which, at the option of the county board of
education, may each provide 50 candlepower in illumination intensity instead of
32 candlepower.
   (D)   Any vehicle may be equipped with lamps which may be used for the
purpose of warning the operators of other vehicles of the presence of a
vehicular traffic hazard requiring the exercise of unusual care in approaching,
overtaking or passing, and when so equipped may display such warning in
addition to any other warning signals required by this subchapter. The lamps
used to display such warning to the front shall be mounted at the same level
and as widely spaced laterally as practicable and shall display simultaneously
flashing white or amber lights, or any shade of color between white and amber.
The lamps used to display such warning to the rear shall be mounted at the same
level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable, and shall show
simultaneously flashing amber or red lights or any shade of color between amber
and red.
   (E)   Vehicles used by “rural mail carriers” in carrying or delivering mail
in rural areas may be equipped with amber flashing lights. Such lights shall be
on the front and rear of the vehicle and may be activated when the vehicle is
stopped or decreasing speed in order to stop in the course of carrying,
delivering or picking up mail along the route.
   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, any
motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one electro luminescent solid
state ceramic front identification plate without glare, mounted in conformance
with the manufacturer’s specifications.
   (G)    Vehicles used as the lead car in a funeral procession are hereby
authorized to be equipped with, but are not required to use, purple lamps or
purple flashing lights. Such lamps may be used for the purpose of warning the
operators of other vehicles of the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard
requiring the exercise of unusual care in approaching, overtaking or passing a
funeral procession, and when so equipped may display such warning in addition
to any other warning signals required by this subchapter. The lamps or flashing
lights used to display such warning to the front shall be mounted at the same
level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable and shall display
simultaneously either illuminating or flashing purple lights. The lamps used to
display such warning to the rear shall be mounted at the same level and as
widely spaced laterally as practicable, and shall show simultaneously flashing
or illuminated purple lights.
   (H)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-19) (Prior Code, § 345.11) (Ord. passed 6-17-2025)
§ 72.012 MULTIPLE-BEAM ROAD-LIGHTING EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Except as hereinafter provided, the head lamps or the auxiliary driving lamp
or the auxiliary passing lamp or combinations thereof on motor vehicles, other
than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped, shall be so arranged that the
driver may select at will between distributions of light projected to different
elevations and such lamps may, in addition, be so arranged that such selection
can be made automatically, subject to the following limitations.
   (A)   There shall be an uppermost distribution of light, or composite beam,
so aimed and of such intensity as to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance
of at least 350 feet ahead for all conditions of loading.
   (B)   There shall be a lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam,
so aimed and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a
distance of at least 100 feet ahead; and on a straight level road under any
condition of loading, none of the high-intensity portion of the beam shall be
directed to strike the eyes of an approaching driver.
   (C)    Every new motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle
or moped, registered in the state after January 1, 1952, which has multiple-
beam road-lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator, which
shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the head
lamps is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. Such indicator shall be so
designed and located that when lighted it will be readily visible without glare
to the driver of the vehicle so equipped.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-20) (Prior Code, § 345.12) (Ord. passed 6-17-2025)
§ 72.013 USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in §
72.002, the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam,
directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles
at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following
requirements and limitations.
      (1)   Whenever a driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle
within 500 feet, such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite
beam, so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the
oncoming driver. The lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam
specified in §
72.012(B) shall be deemed to avoid glare at all times regardless of road
contour and loading.
      (2)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle follows another vehicle within 200
feet to the rear, except when engaged in the act of overtaking and passing,
such driver shall use a distribution of light permissible under this traffic
code other than the uppermost distribution of light specified in §
72.012(A).
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction, shall be fined not more than $200; and upon a third
or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than $500. Court costs as
determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-21) (Prior Code, § 345.13) (Ord. passed 7-15-2025)
§ 72.014 SINGLE-BEAM ROAD-LIGHTING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Head lamps arranged to provide a single distribution of light shall be
permitted on motor vehicles manufactured and sold prior to July 1, 1952 in lieu
of multiple-beam road-lighting equipment herein specified if the single
distribution of light complies with the following requirements and limitations.
      (1)   The head lamps shall be so aimed that when the vehicle is not
loaded, none of the high-intensity portion of the light shall, at a distance of
25 feet ahead, project higher than a level of five inches below the level of
the center of the lamp from which it comes, and in no case higher than 42
inches above the level on which the vehicle stands at a distance of 75 feet
ahead.
      (2)   The intensity shall be sufficient to reveal persons and vehicles at
a distance of at least 200 feet.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction shall be fined not more than $200; and upon a third or
subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than $500. Court costs as
determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-22) (Prior Code, § 345.14) (Ord. passed 7-15-2025)
§ 72.015 LIGHTS ON MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES AND MOPEDS.
   The head lamp or head lamps upon every motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and
moped may be of the single-beam or multiple-beam type, but in either event
shall comply with the requirements and limitations as follows.
   (A)   Every such head lamp or head lamps shall be of sufficient intensity to
reveal a person or a vehicle at a distance of not less than 100 feet when the
motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped is operated at any speed less than 25
mph and at a distance of not less than 200 feet when it is operated at a speed
of 25 mph or more.
   (B)   In the event the motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped is equipped
with a multiple- beam type head lamp or head lamps, the upper beam shall meet
the minimum requirements set forth above and shall not exceed the limitations
set forth in §
72.012(A) and the lowermost beam shall meet the requirements applicable to a
lowermost distribution of light as set forth in §
72.012(B).
   (C)   In the event the motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped is equipped
with a single-beam lamp or lamps, such lamp or lamps shall be so aimed that,
when the vehicle is loaded, none of the high- intensity portion of light, at a
distance of 25 feet ahead, shall project higher than the level of the center of
the lamp from which it comes.
   (D)   (1)   Subject to division (D)(2) below, a motorcycle may be equipped
with, and an operator of a motorcycle may use, the following auxiliary
lighting:
         (a)   Amber and white illumination;
         (b)   Standard bulb running lights; or
         (c)   Light-emitting diode pods and strips.
      (2)   Lighting under this division (D) shall be:
         (a)   Nonblinking;
         (b)   Nonflashing;
         (c)   Nonoscillating; and
         (d)   Directed toward the engine and the drive train of the motorcycle
to prevent interference with the driver’s operation of the vehicle.
   (E)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-23) (Prior Code, § 345.15) (Ord. passed 7-15-2025)
§ 72.016 ALTERNATE ROAD-LIGHTING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in §
72.002 when equipped with two lighted lamps upon the front thereof capable of
revealing persons and objects 75 feet ahead in lieu of lamps required in §§
72.012 or
72.014, provided that at no time shall it be operated at a speed in excess of
20 mph.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within a year thereafter, shall be fined not more than
$200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than
$500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-24) (Prior Code, § 345.16) (Ord. passed 7-15-2025)
§ 72.017 NUMBER OF DRIVING LIGHTS REQUIRED OR PERMITTED.
   (A)   At all times specified in §
72.002, at least two lighted lamps shall be displayed, one on each side at the
front of every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or
moped, except when such vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing
lights on parked vehicles.
   (B)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with head lamps as herein required
is also equipped with any auxiliary lamps or a spot lamp or any other lamp on
the front thereof projecting a beam of intensity greater than 300 candlepower,
not more than a total of four of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall
be lighted at any one time when upon a street or highway.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-25) (Prior Code, § 345.17) (Ord. passed 7-15-2025
§ 72.018 SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS ON LIGHTS.
   (A)   Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than head lamps, spot lamps, auxiliary lamps or flashing front-direction
signals, which projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300
candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level
of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet
from the vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any street
or highway with any lamp or device thereon displaying other than a white or
amber light visible from directly in front of the center thereof except as
authorized by division (D) below.
   (C)   Except as authorized in divisions (D) and (F) below and §
72.011, flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles; provided, that any
vehicle as a means for indicating right or left turn, or any vehicle as a means
of indicating the same is disabled or otherwise stopped for an emergency may
have blinking or flashing lights.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this traffic code, the
following colors of flashing warning lights are restricted for the use of the
type of vehicle designated.
      (1)   Blue flashing warning lights are restricted to police vehicles.
Authorization for police vehicles shall be designated by the chief
administrative official of each Police Department.
      (2)    Except for standard vehicle equipment authorized by §
72.011, red flashing warning lights are restricted to ambulances; firefighting
vehicles; hazardous material response vehicles; industrial fire brigade
vehicles; rescue squad vehicles not operating out of the Fire Department;
school buses; Class A vehicles, as defined by W. Va. Code 17A-10-1, of those
firefighters who are authorized by their Fire Chiefs to have such lights; Class
A vehicles of members of ambulance services or duly chartered rescue squads who
are authorized by their respective Chiefs to have such lights; and Class A
vehicles of out-of- state residents who are active members of West Virginia
Fire Departments, ambulance services or duly chartered rescue squads who are
authorized by their respective Chiefs to have such lights; West Virginia
Department of Agriculture emergency response vehicles; vehicles designated by
the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security for emergency response or
emergency management by the Division of Corrections, Regional Jail and
Correctional Facility Authority, Division of Juvenile Services, and Division of
Homeland Security and Emergency Management; Class A vehicles of emergency
response or emergency management personnel as designated by the Secretary of
the Department of Homeland Security and the county commission of the county of
residence; and emergency management and operations vehicles operated by
airports. Red flashing warning lights attached to such Class A vehicles shall
be operated only when responding to or engaged in handling an emergency
requiring the attention of such firefighters, members of such ambulance
services or chartered rescue squads.
      (3)   The use of red flashing warning lights shall be authorized as
follows.
         (a)   Authorization for all ambulances shall be designated by the
Department of Health and Human Resources and the Sheriff of the county of
residence.
         (b)   Authorization for all Fire Department vehicles shall be
designated by the Fire Chief and the State Marshal’s office.
         (c)   Authorization for all hazardous material response vehicles and
industrial fire brigades shall be designated by the Chief of the Fire
Department and the State Fire Marshal’s office.
         (d)   Authorization for all rescue squad vehicles not operating out of
a Fire Department shall be designated by the Squad Chief, the Sheriff of the
county of residence and the Department of Health and Human Resources.
         (e)   Authorization for school buses shall be designated as set out in
W. Va. Code 17C-14-12.
         (f)   Authorization for firefighters to operate Class A vehicles shall
be designated by their Fire Chiefs and the State Fire Marshal’s office.
         (g)   Authorization for members of ambulance services or any other
emergency medical service personnel to operate Class A vehicles shall be
designated by their chief official, the Department of Health and Human
Resources and the Sheriff of the county of residence.
         (h)   Authorization for members of duly chartered rescue squads not
operating out of a Fire Department to operate Class A vehicles shall be
designated by their Squad Chiefs, the Sheriff of the county of residence and
the Department of Health and Human Resources.
         (i)    Authorization for out-of-state residents operating Class A
vehicles who are active members of a West Virginia Fire Department, ambulance
services or duly chartered rescue squads shall be designated by their
respective Chiefs.
         (j)   Authorization for West Virginia Department of Agriculture
emergency response vehicles shall be designated by the Commissioner of the
Department of Agriculture.
         (k)   Authorization for vehicles for emergency response or emergency
management by the Division of Corrections, Regional Jail and Correctional
Facility Authority, Division of Juvenile Services, and Division of Homeland
Security and Emergency Management shall be designated by the Secretary of the
Department of Homeland Security.
         (l)   Authorization for Class A vehicles of emergency response or
emergency management personnel as designated by the Secretary of the Department
of Homeland Security and the county commission of the county of residence.
         (m)   Authorization for emergency management and operations vehicles
operated by airports shall be designated by the airport director and the
Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security.
      (4)   Yellow flashing warning lights are restricted to the following:
         (a)   All other emergency vehicles, including tow trucks and wreckers,
authorized by the W. Va. Code Chapter 17C and 17C-15-27;
         (b)   Postal service vehicles and rural mail carriers, as authorized
in §
72.011;
         (c)   Rural newspaper delivery vehicles;
         (d)   Flag car services;
         (e)   Vehicles providing road service to disabled vehicles;
         (f)   Service vehicles of a public service corporation;
         (g)   Snow removal equipment; and
         (h)    School buses; and
         (i)   Automotive fire apparatus owned by a municipality or other
political subdivision, by a volunteer or part-volunteer fire company or
department, or by an industrial fire brigade.
      (5)   The use of yellow flashing warning lights shall be authorized as
follows.
         (a)   Authorization for tow trucks, wreckers, rural newspaper delivery
vehicles, flag car services, vehicles providing road service to disabled
vehicles, service vehicles of a public service corporation and postal service
vehicles shall be designated by the Sheriff of the county of residence.
         (b)   Authorization for snow removal equipment shall be designated by
the Commissioner of the Division of Highways.
         (c)    Authorization for school buses shall be designated as set out
in W. Va. Code 17C-14-12.
         (d)   Authorization for automotive fire apparatus designated by the
Fire Chief in conformity with the NFPA 1901 Standard for Automotive Fire
Apparatus as published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) on
July 18, 2003, and adopted by the state Fire Commission by legislative rule (87
CSR 1 et seq.), except as follows:
            1.   With the approval of the State Fire Marshal, used automotive
fire apparatus may be conformed to the NFPA standard in effect on the date of
its manufacture or conformed to a later NFPA standard; and
            2.   Automotive fire apparatus may be equipped with blinking or
flashing headlamps.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, any vehicle
belonging to a county board of education, an organization receiving funding
from the state or federal transit administration for the purpose of providing
general public transportation, or hauling solid waste may be equipped with a
white flashing strobotron warning light. This strobe light may be installed on
the roof of a school bus, a public transportation vehicle or a vehicle hauling
solid waste not to exceed one-third the body length forward from the rear of
the roof edge. The light shall have a single clear lens emitting light 360
degrees around its vertical axis and may not extend above the roof more than
six and one-half inches. A manual switch and a pilot light must be included to
indicate the light is in operation.
   (F)    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, any waste
service vehicle as defined in W. Va. Code § 17C-6-11 may be equipped with
yellow or amber flashing warning lights.
   (G)   No person shall install or use flashing warning lights of an
unauthorized color on a vehicle other than as specified in this section, except
that a police vehicle may be equipped with either or both blue or red warning
lights.
   (H)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-26) (Prior Code, § 345.18) (Ord. passed 7-15-2025)
§ 72.019 MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE BRAKES.
   (A)   Brake equipment required.
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or
moped, when operated upon a street or highway, shall be equipped with brakes
adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle,
including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall
be effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate
means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so
constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not
leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and moped, when operated upon
a street or highway, shall be equipped with at least one brake which may be
operated by hand or foot.
      (3)   Every trailer or semitrailer of a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or
more when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with brakes
adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold such vehicle, and
so designed as to be applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its
cab, and such brakes shall be so designed and connected that in case of an
accidental breakaway of the towed vehicle the brakes shall be automatically
applied.
      (4)   Every new motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer hereinafter sold in
this state and operated upon the streets or highways shall be equipped with
service brakes upon all wheels, with the following exceptions:
         (a)   Trucks and truck-tractors having three or more axles need not
have brakes on the front wheels, except when such vehicles are equipped with at
least two steerable axles, the wheels of one such axle need not be equipped
with brakes; and
         (b)   Any motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped and any semitrailer
of less than 1,500 pounds gross weight need not be equipped with brakes.
      (5)   In any combination of motor-driven vehicles, means shall be
provided for applying the rearmost trailer brakes, of any trailer equipped with
brakes, in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle and
developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest
rate; or means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the
rearmost trailer equipped with brakes; or both of the above means capable of
being used alternatively may be employed.
      (6)   Every such vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles,
motor-driven cycles and mopeds, shall be equipped with parking brakes adequate
to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under all conditions
of loading on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material. The parking
brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the foregoing
requirements by the driver's muscular effort or by spring action or by
equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power, provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness, despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind. The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies,
brake shoe anchors and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally
associated with the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service
brakes and the parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and
the service brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that
a failure of any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (7)   The brake shoes operating within or upon the drums on the vehicle
wheels of any motor vehicle may be used for both service and hand operation.
   (B)   Performance ability of brakes. Every motor vehicle or combination of
motor-drawn vehicles shall be capable, at all times and under all conditions of
loading, of being stopped on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose
material, upon application of the service (foot) brake, within the distances
specified below, or shall be capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate
corresponding to the following.
 
                              Feet to Stop from 20 MPH Deceleration in Feet per
                                                       Second
Vehicle or combinations of
vehicles having brakes on all 30                       14
wheels
Vehicles or combinations of
vehicles not having brakes on 40                       10.7
all wheels
 
   (C)   Maintenance of brakes. All brakes shall be maintained in good working
order and shall be so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with
respect to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-31) (Prior Code, § 345.19) (Ord. passed 9-2-2025)
§ 72.020 INSPECTION OF BRAKES ON MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES AND MOPEDS.
   (A)   No person shall operate on any street or highway any motorcycle,
motor-driven cycle or moped in the event the Commissioner of Highways has
disapproved the brake equipment upon such vehicle or type of vehicle.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-32) (Prior Code, § 345.20) (Ord. passed 9-2-2025)
§ 72.021 HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a street or highway shall be
equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound
audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet, but
no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound
or a whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to
ensure safe operation, give audible warning with his or her horn but shall not
otherwise use such horn when upon a street or highway.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a
vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise permitted in this
section.
   (C)   It is permissible but not required that any commercial vehicle be
equipped with a theft alarm signal device which is so arranged that it cannot
be used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal. Any authorized emergency
vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting
sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet
and of a type approved by the Department of Motor Vehicles, but such siren
shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an
emergency or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law, in which such latter events the driver of such vehicle shall sound such
siren when reasonably necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the
approach thereof.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-33) (Prior Code, § 345.21) (Ord. passed 9-2-2025)
§ 72.022 MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in
good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual
noise. Such muffler shall be the muffler originally installed by the
manufacturer of the vehicle or, if a replacement, the equivalent thereof. No
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a street or highway.
   (B)   The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be so
equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or smoke.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-34) (Prior Code, § 345.22) (Ord. passed 9-2-2025)
§ 72.023 REAR-VIEW MIRROR.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle which is so constructed or loaded as to obstruct
the driver's view to the rear thereof from the driver's position shall be
equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the
street or highway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such
vehicle.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-35) (Prior Code, § 345.23) (Ord. passed 9-2-2025)
§ 72.024 WINDSHIELD TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED; WINDSHIELD WIPER.
   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster or other
nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings or side or rear
windows of such vehicle which obstructs the driver's clear view of the street
or highway or any intersecting street or highway.
   (B)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield, which device
shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the
vehicle.
   (C)   Every windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in
good working order.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-36) (Prior Code, § 345.24) (Ord. passed 9-2-2025)
§ 72.025 TIRE EQUIPMENT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Every solid rubber tire on a vehicle shall have rubber on its entire
traction surface at least one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the
entire periphery.
   (B)   No person shall operate or move on any highway any motor vehicle,
trailer or semitrailer having any metal tire in contact with the roadway.
   (C)   No tire on a vehicle moved on a highway shall have on its periphery
any block, stud, flange, cleat or spike or any other protuberance of any
material other than rubber which projects beyond the tread of the traction
surface of the tire, except that:
      (1)   It shall be permissible to use farm machinery with tires having
protuberances which will not injure the street or highway;
      (2)   It shall be permissible to use tire chains of reasonable
proportions upon any vehicle when required for safety because of snow, ice or
other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to skid; and
      (3)   It shall be permissible to use studded tires during the period from
November 1 of each year until April 15 of the following year; provided, that in
the interest of highway maintenance, no vehicle moved on a street or highway,
other than school buses, shall be equipped with studded tires which are
operational with a recommended air pressure greater than 40 pounds per square
inch.
   (D)   No studded tires or chains shall be sold or used within the
municipality which do not meet the specifications established by the rules and
regulations which the Commissioner of Highways shall promulgate.
   (E)   Council may, in its discretion, issue special permits authorizing the
operation upon the street or highway of traction engines or tractors having
movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the periphery of such movable
tracks or farm tractors or other farm machinery, the operation of which upon a
highway would otherwise be prohibited under this traffic code.
   (F)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-37) (Prior Code, § 345.25) (Ord. passed 9-2-2025)
§ 72.026 SAFETY GLASS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   On and after July 1, 1951, no person shall operate any motor vehicle
as specified herein, nor shall any motor vehicle as specified herein be
registered thereafter unless such vehicle is equipped with safety glass of a
type approved by the Commissioner of Highways wherever glass is used in doors,
windows and windshields. The foregoing provisions shall apply to all passenger-
type motor vehicles, including passenger buses and school buses, but in respect
to trucks, including truck tractors, the requirements as to safety glass shall
apply to all glass used in doors, windows and windshields in the drivers’
compartments of such vehicles.
   (B)   The term SAFETY GLASS shall mean any product composed of glass, so
manufactured, fabricated or treated as substantially to prevent shattering and
flying of the glass when struck or broken, or such other or similar product as
may be approved by the Commissioner.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 345.26) (Ord. passed 9-2-2025)
§ 72.027 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   Any person operating any vehicle transporting any explosive as a cargo or
part of a cargo upon a street or highway shall at all times comply with the
provisions of this section.
   (A)   Such vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and the rear
with the word “Explosives” in letters not less than eight inches high, or there
shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than 24
inches square marked with the word “Danger” in white letters six inches high.
   (B)   Every such vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use and placed at a convenient
point on the vehicle so used.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-41) (Prior Code, § 345.27) (Ord. passed 9-2-2025)
§ 72.028 TELEVISION RECEIVER, VIDEO MONITOR, TELEVISION OR VIDEO SCREEN IN
DRIVER’S VIEW PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street or highway in this
municipality when equipped with a television receiver, video monitor,
television or video screen unless such receiver, video monitor, television or
video screen is so placed that the screen or picture tube of such receiver,
video monitor, television or video screen is not in the view of the operator
while the vehicle is in motion but visible only in the rear seat of such motor
vehicle and not in view of the operator of such motor vehicle or it falls
within one or more of the categories set forth in divisions (B) or (C) below.
   (B)   This prohibition does not apply to the following equipment installed
in a vehicle:
      (1)   A visual display if it does not show video or television broadcast
images in view of the operator while the motor vehicle is in motion;
      (2)   A global positioning device;
      (3)   A mapping display;
      (4)   A visual display used to enhance or supplement the driver’s view
forward, behind or to the sides of a motor vehicle for the purpose of
maneuvering the vehicle;
      (5)   A visual display used to enhance or supplement a driver’s view of
vehicle occupants; or
      (6)   Television-type receiving equipment used exclusively for safety or
traffic engineering information.
   (C)   A television receiver, video monitor, television or video screen or
other similar means of visually displaying a television broadcast or video
signal is not prohibited if the equipment has an interlock device that, when
the motor vehicle is driven, disables the equipment for all uses except as a
visual display described in divisions (B)(1) through (6) above.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-42) (Prior Code, § 345.28) (Ord. passed 9-2-2025)
§ 72.029 SAFETY EQUIPMENT FOR MOTORCYCLISTS, MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR- DRIVEN CYCLES
AND MOPEDS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on any motorcycle or motor-
driven cycle unless he or she is wearing, securely fastened on his or her head
by either a neck or chin strap, a protective helmet designed to deflect blows,
resist penetration and spread impact forces. Any helmet worn by an operator or
passenger shall meet the current performance specifications established by the
American National Standards Institute Standard, Z 90.1, the United States
Department of Transportation Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 218 or
Snell Safety Standards for Protective Headgear for Vehicle Users.
   (B)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on any motorcycle or motor-
driven cycle unless he or she is wearing safety, shatter-resistant eyeglasses
(excluding contact lenses), or eye goggles or face shield that complies with
the performance specifications established by the American National Standards
Institute for Head, Eye and Respiratory Protection, Z 2.1. In addition, if any
motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped is equipped with a windshield or
windscreen, the windshield or windscreen shall be constructed of safety,
shatter-resistant material that complies with the performance specifications
established by Department of Transportation Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standard No. 205 and American National Standards Institute, Safety Glazing
Materials for Glazing Motor Vehicles Operated on Land Highways, Standard Z
26.1.
   (C)   No person shall operate a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped on
which the handlebars or grips are more than 15 inches higher than the uppermost
part of the operator’s seat when the seat is not depressed in any manner.
   (D)   A person operating a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or moped shall
ride in a seated position facing forward and only upon a permanent operator’s
seat attached to the vehicle. No operator shall carry any other person nor
shall any other person ride on such a vehicle unless the vehicle is designed to
carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride behind the
operator upon the permanent operator’s seat if it is designed for two persons,
or upon another seat firmly attached to the vehicle to the rear of the
operator’s seat and equipped with footrests designed and located for use by the
passenger or in a sidecar firmly attached to the vehicle. No person shall ride
sidesaddle on a seat. An operator may carry as many passengers as there are
seats and footrests to accommodate those passengers. Additional passengers may
be carried in a factory produced side car provided that there is one passenger
per seat. Passengers riding in a sidecar shall be restrained by safety belts.
   (E)   Every motorcycle, motor-driven cycle and moped shall be equipped with
a rearview mirror affixed to the handlebars or fairings and adjusted so that
the operator shall have a clear view of the road and condition of traffic
behind him or her for a distance of at least 200 feet.
   (F)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-44) (Prior Code, § 345.29) (Ord. passed 10-7-2025) Penalty,
see §
72.999
§ 72.030 CERTIFICATION LABELS ON MOPEDS.
   (A)   Every moped sold in this municipality shall have permanently affixed
to it a certification label which shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name of manufacturer;
      (2)   Month and year of manufacture;
      (3)   Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR);
      (4)   Gross axle weight rating for front and rear axles (GAWR);
      (5)   Vehicle identification number;
      (6)   Classification type; and
      (7)   Statement of conformance to federal standards as required by
federal law.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-45) (Prior Code, § 345.30) (Ord. passed 10-7-2025)
§ 72.031 CHILD PASSENGER SAFETY DEVICE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every driver who transports a child under the age of nine years in a
passenger automobile, van or pickup truck other than one operated for hire,
shall, while such motor vehicle is in motion and operated on a street or
highway of this municipality, provide for the protection of such child by
properly placing, maintaining and securing such child in a child passenger
safety device system meeting applicable federal motor vehicle safety standards;
provided, that if such child is under the age of eight years, and at least four
feet nine inches tall, a vehicle seat belt shall be sufficient to meet the
requirements of this section.
(Prior Code, § 345.31)
   (B)   If all seat belts in a vehicle are being used at the time of
examination by a law officer and the vehicle contains more passengers than the
total number of seat belts or other safety devices as installed in compliance
with federal motor vehicle safety standards, the driver may not be considered
in violation of this section.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $10 nor
more than $20. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Ord. passed 10-7-2025)
§ 72.032 CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
   Every person operating a vehicle without having displayed thereon a current
and valid certificate of inspection and approval or for failure to provide such
certificate upon demand of an authorized person shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished by a fine of not more than
$100; provided, that any person who obtains an inspection and a current and
valid certificate of inspection and who, within five days of the issuance of a
citation for a violation of the provisions of this section, provides a receipt
of inspection to and makes the vehicle so operated available for examination by
the Nitro Police Department, shall not be guilty of a violation of the
provisions of this section; provided, however, that the misdemeanor penalty
shall be imposed if the certificate of inspection has not been valid for period
exceeding three months prior to the date of the issuance of a citation.
(W. Va. Code 17C-16-9) (Prior Code, § 345.32) (Ord. passed 10-7-2025)
§ 72.033 ALTERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES; BUMPER HEIGHT LIMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate upon a public street or highway any motor
vehicle registered or required to be registered in this state if it has been
modified by alteration of its height from the ground to the extent that its
bumpers, measured to any point on the lower edge of the main horizontal bumper
bar, exclusive of any bumper guards, do not fall within the limits specified
herein for its gross vehicle weight rating category. The front and rear bumper
height of motor vehicles whose gross vehicle weight rating is 10,000 pounds or
less shall be no less than six inches and no more than 31 inches. In the
absence of bumpers, and in cases where bumper heights have been altered or
modified, height measurements shall be made to the bottom of the frame rail. If
a motor vehicle has a bumper, the bumper must be at least three inches in
vertical width, centered on the center line of the motor vehicle and not less
than the width of the wheel track distance. The provisions of this division (A)
do not apply to motor vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of
10,000 pounds. For the purpose of this division (A), the term GROSS VEHICLE
WEIGHT RATINGS means the manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight ratings
established for that vehicle.
   (B)   The maximum distance between the vehicle body to the vehicle frame
shall not exceed three inches. The distance from the vehicle body to the
vehicle frame shall be measured from the vehicle body mount seat to the vehicle
frame mount seat: provided, that the maximum distance limitation shall not
prohibit a body lift kit up to three inches to be added to the manufacturer’s
original spacer between the body and the frame. No vehicle shall be modified to
cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with the ground, expose
the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels to come in contact
with the body under normal operation. No part of the original suspension system
may be disconnected to defeat the safe operation of the suspension system.
Modification of the front end suspension by the use of lift blocks is expressly
prohibited.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this section prevents the installation of heavy
duty equipment, including shock absorbers and overload springs.
   (D)   Nothing contained in this section prohibits the operation on a public
street or highway of a motor vehicle with normal wear to the suspension system
if such normal wear does not adversely affect the control of the vehicle.
   (E)   This section does not apply to specially designed or modified motor
vehicles when operated off the public streets and highways in races and similar
events. Such motor vehicles may be lawfully towed on the streets and highways
of this municipality.
   (F)   Modifications to motor vehicles, not prohibited herein, shall be made
subject to inspection as provided in division (H) below.
   (G)   Nothing contained in this section shall subject a vehicle modified
solely by the installation of tires not larger than two sizes beyond the
maximum specified by the manufacturer to inspection as provided in division (H)
below.
   (H)   Any motor vehicle which has been altered from the manufacturer’s
specification with respect to bumper height for that vehicle make and model but
within the allowable limits of division (A) above or any motor vehicle which
has been altered from the manufacturer’s specification for that vehicle make
and model with respect to the distance from the vehicle body to vehicle frame
but within the allowable limits of division (B) above, may be operated upon a
public street or highway in this municipality, subject to inspection under W.
Va. Code 17C-15-48; provided, that any motor vehicle which has been altered
from the manufacturer’s specification by lowering the bumper height for that
vehicle make and model within the allowable limits of division (A) above shall
be exempt from the inspection requirements hereunder and may be operated upon a
public street or highway in this municipality subject to provisions of W. Va.
Code Article 17C-16. Each municipal law enforcement agency must record on
accident report forms whether a modified vehicle was involved in the accident.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-48) (Prior Code, § 345.33) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.034 SUN SCREENING DEVICES.
   (A)   No person may operate a motor vehicle that is registered or required
to be registered in the state on any public highway, road or street that has a
sun screening device on the windshield, the front side wings and side windows
adjacent to the right and left of the driver and windows adjacent to the rear
of the driver that do not meet the requirements of this section; provided, that
law enforcement K-9 and other emergency vehicles that are designed to haul
animals, unmarked law enforcement vehicles primarily used for covert or
undercover enforcement and automobiles that have sun screening devices
installed at the factory by the manufacturer are exempt from this requirement.
No unmarked law enforcement vehicle, herein exempted, may engage in routine
traffic stops.
   (B)   A sun screening device when used in conjunction with the windshield
must be nonreflective and may not be red, yellow or amber in color. A sun
screening device may be used only along the top of the windshield and may not
extend downward beyond the ASI line or more than five inches from the top of
the windshield, whichever is closer to the top of the windshield.
   (C)   A sun screening device, when used in conjunction with the automotive
safety glazing materials of the side wings or side windows located at the
immediate right and left of the driver, shall be a nonreflective type with
reflectivity of not more than 20% and have a light transmission of not less
than 35%. The side windows behind the driver and the rear most windows may have
a sun screening device that is designed to be used on automotive safety glazing
materials that has a light transmission of not less than 35% and a reflectivity
of not more than 20%. If a sun screening device is used on glazing behind the
driver, one right and one left outside rear view mirror is required.
   (D)   Each manufacturer shall:
      (1)   Certify to the Division of Public Safety and Division of Motor
Vehicles that a sun screening device used by it is in compliance with the
reflectivity and transmittance requirements of this section;
      (2)   Provide a label not to exceed one and one-half square inches in
size, with a means for the permanent and legible installations between the sun
screening material and each glazing surface to which it is applied that
contains the manufacturer’s name and its percentage of light transmission; and
      (3)   Include instructions with the product or material for proper
installation, including the affixing of the label specified in this section.
The labeling or marking must be placed in the left lower corner of each glazing
surface when facing the vehicle from the outside.
   (E)   No person shall:
      (1)   Offer for sale or for use any sun screening product or material for
motor vehicle use not in compliance with this section; or
      (2)   Install any sun screening product or material on vehicles intended
for use on public roads without permanently affixing the label specified in
this section.
   (F)   The provisions of this section do not apply to a motor vehicle
registered in this state in the name of a person, or the person’s legal
guardian, who has an affidavit signed by a physician or an optometrist licensed
to practice in this state that states that the person has a physical condition
that makes it necessary to equip the motor vehicle with sun screening material
which would be of a light transmittance or luminous reflectance in violation of
this section. The affidavit must be in the possession of the person so
afflicted, or the person’s legal guardian, at all times while being transported
in the motor vehicle.
   (G)   The light transmittance requirement of this section does not apply to
windows behind the driver on trucks, buses, trailers, mobile homes and
multipurpose passenger vehicles.
   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BUS. A motor vehicle with motive power, except a trailer, designed for
carrying more than ten persons.
      LIGHT TRANSMISSION. The ratio of the amount of total light to pass
through a product or material to the amount of the total light falling on the
product or material.
      LUMINOUS REFLECTANTS. The ratio of the amount of total light that is
reflected outward by the product or material to the amount of the total light
falling on the product or materials.
      MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the manufacturing or assembling of
sun screening products or materials designed to be used in conjunction with
vehicle glazing materials for the purpose of reducing the effects of the sun.
      MOTOR HOMES. Vehicular units designed to provide temporary living
quarters built into and an integral part of or permanently attached to a self-
propelled motor vehicle chassis.
      MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. A motor vehicle with motive power, except
a trailer, designed to carry ten persons or less which is constructed either on
a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road operation.
      NONREFLECTIVE. A product or material designed to absorb light rather than
to reflect it.
      PASSENGER CAR. A motor vehicle with motive power, except a multipurpose
passenger vehicle, motorcycle or trailer, designed for carrying ten persons or
less.
      SUN SCREENING DEVICE. Film material or device that is designed to be used
in conjunction with motor vehicle safety glazing materials for reducing the
effects of the sun.
      TRUCK. A motor vehicle with motive power, except a trailer, designed
primarily for the transportation of property or special purpose equipment.
   (I)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-36a) (Prior Code, § 345.34) (Ord. passed 11-4-2025)
Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.035 OPERATION OF VEHICLES WITH SAFETY BELTS.
   (A)   A person shall not operate a passenger vehicle on a public street or
highway unless the person, any passenger in the back seat under 18 years of age
and any passenger in the front seat of such passenger vehicle is restrained by
a safety belt meeting applicable federal motor vehicle safety standards. For
the purposes of this section, PASSENGER VEHICLE means a motor vehicle which is
designed for transporting 15 passengers or less, including the driver, except
that such term does not include a motorcycle, a trailer or any motor vehicle
which is not required on the date of the enactment of this section under a
federal motor vehicle safety standard to be equipped with a belt system. The
provisions of this section shall apply to all passenger vehicles manufactured
after January 1, 1967, and being 1968 models and newer.
   (B)   The required use of safety belts as provided herein does not apply to
a duly appointed or contracted rural mail carrier of the United States Postal
Service who is actually making mail deliveries or to a passenger or operator
with a physically disabling condition whose physical disability would prevent
appropriate restraint in such safety belt if the condition is duly certified by
a physician who shall state the nature of the disability as well as the reason
such restraint is inappropriate.
   (C)   A violation of this section is not admissible as evidence of
negligence or contributory negligence or comparative negligence in any civil
action or proceeding for damages, and shall not be admissible in mitigation of
damages; provided, that the court may, upon motion of the defendant, conduct an
in camera hearing to determine whether an injured party’s failure to wear a
safety belt was a proximate cause of the injuries complained of. Upon such a
finding by the court, the court may then, in a jury trial, by special
interrogatory to the jury, determine that the injured party failed to wear a
safety belt, and that the failure to wear the safety belt constituted a failure
to mitigate damages. The trier of fact may reduce the injured party’s recovery
for medical damages by an amount not to exceed 5% thereof. In the event the
plaintiff stipulates to the reduction of 5% of medical damages, the court shall
make the calculations and the issue of mitigation of damages for failure to
wear a safety belt shall not be presented to the jury. In all cases, the actual
computation of the dollar amount reduction shall be determined by the court.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, no
points may be entered on any driver’s record maintained by the Division of
Motor Vehicles as a result of a violation of this section.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to abrogate or
alter the provisions of §
72.031 relating to the mandatory use of child passenger safety devices.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-49)
   (F)   No dealer in new or used automobiles shall sell, lease, transfer or
trade, at retail, any passenger automobile which is manufactured after January
1, 1965, unless such vehicle is equipped with safety seat belts for the front
seat, which seat belts shall meet the standards set and approved by the Society
of Automotive Engineers, Inc.
   (G)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be fined
$25.
(Prior Code, § 345.35) (Ord. passed 11-4-2025)
PEDESTRIANS
§ 72.050 COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals at
intersections as provided in §§
71.17 and
71.18, but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and
shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100.
Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-10-1(a)) (Prior Code, § 371.01) (Ord. passed 11-4-2025)
§ 72.051 RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALK.
   (A)   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave
a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle
which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. This provision
shall not apply under the conditions stated in §
72.052(B).
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100.
Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-10-2) (Prior Code, § 371.02) (Ord. passed 11-4-2025)
§ 72.052 CROSSING ROADWAY OUTSIDE CROSSWALK.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100.
Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 17C-10-3) (Prior Code, § 371.03) (Ord. passed 11-4-2025)
§ 72.053 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter every driver of
a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon
any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and
shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(W. Va. Code 17C-10-4) (Prior Code, § 371.04)
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2025)
§ 72.054 MOVING UPON RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
(W. Va. Code 17C-10-5) (Prior Code, § 371.05)
§ 72.055 WALKING ALONG STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; SOLICITING RIDES.
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon
an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a street or highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of
the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction.
   (C)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
(W. Va. Code 17C-10-6) (Prior Code, § 371.06)
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $50;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $100; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $250. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2025) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.056 PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to persons
engaged in maintenance or construction work on a street or highway whenever he
or she is notified of their presence by an official traffic control device or
flag person.
(W. Va. Code 17C-10-8) (Prior Code, § 371.07)
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2025)
§ 72.057 PROTECTION OF BLIND PEDESTRIANS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a pedestrian who is blind or who
has a disability and who knows, or in the exercise of reasonable care should
know, that such pedestrian is blind because such pedestrian is carrying a cane
predominantly white or metallic in color with or without a red tip, or is using
a service animal or otherwise, shall exercise care commensurate with the
situation to avoid injuring such pedestrian or the service animal.
(W. Va. Code 5-15-5) (Prior Code, § 371.08)
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2025)
COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
§ 72.070 OVERSIZE OR OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES.
   (A)   Permit requirement.
      (1)   No person shall operate or move a vehicle or combination of
vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified
in W. Va. Code Article 17C-17 upon any street within the municipality, except
pursuant to special written permit issued by the Commissioner of Highways, or
upon any local truck route. Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle
or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection
by any police officer.
      (2)   No holder of a permit issued by the Commissioner of Highways shall
be required to obtain any local permit or license or pay any local fee or
charge for movement on any state route within the municipality; however, it
shall be unlawful to operate any such vehicle or combination of vehicles upon
any roadway within the municipality which is not a state route, except as
provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   Local permit and conditions.
      (1)   Upon application and for good cause, the Police Chief may issue a
local permit authorizing an applicant to move an oversize or overweight vehicle
or combination of vehicles upon local streets.
      (2)   No permittee shall be required to obtain a special permit from the
Commissioner of Highways for the movement of the vehicle or combination of
vehicles on streets or highways under local jurisdiction; however, the approval
of the Commissioner of Highways shall be required for movement upon state
routes as provided in division (A) above.
      (3)   The Police Chief may grant a permit for a single or round trip, or
for such period of time, not to exceed one year, as the Police Chief in his or
her discretion deems advisable, or for the duration of any construction
project. The Police Chief may limit or prescribe terms or conditions of
operation for such vehicle or combination of vehicles by designating the route,
hours, speed or such other restrictions as may be necessary for the
preservation of the public peace, property, health and safety. The Police Chief
may require the posting of bond or other security necessary to compensate for
any damage to a roadway or road structure.
      (4)   For each such permit, the Police Chief shall charge $5, and for
each hour of time or any part thereof spent by each police officer in
supervising the movement of such vehicle, the applicant shall pay the sum of
$10.
      (5)   Violation of any of the limitations, terms or conditions of the
permit granted by the Police Chief shall be cause for immediate revocation or
suspension of such permit, and denial of request for any future permit.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 347.01) (Ord. passed 12-2-2025)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.071 PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES.
   (A)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any street or highway
with any load carried thereon extending beyond the line of the fenders of the
left side of such vehicle nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the right side thereof.
   (B)   A motor home, travel trailer or truck camper may exceed the maximum
width prescribed in this section, if the excess width is attributable to an
appurtenance that does not exceed more than six inches beyond the body of the
vehicle.
(W. Va. Code 17C-17-3) (Prior Code, § 347.02)
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2025) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.072 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH.
   (A)   A vehicle, including any load thereon, shall not exceed a height of 13
feet six inches, but the owner or owners of such vehicles shall be responsible
for damage to any bridge or highway structure and to the municipality for any
damage to traffic control devices or other highway structures where such
bridges, devices or structures have a vehicle clearance of less than 13 feet
six inches.
   (B)   A motor vehicle, including any load thereon, shall not exceed a length
of 40 feet extreme overall dimension, inclusive of front and rear bumpers:
provided, that a motor home and a school bus may not exceed a length of 45
feet, exclusive of front and rear bumpers.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, a combination of vehicles coupled
together shall not consist of more than two units, and no such combination of
vehicles, including any load thereon, shall have an overall length, inclusive
of front and rear bumpers, in excess of 55 feet, except as provided in W. Va.
Code 17C-17-11b, and except as otherwise provided in respect to the use of a
pole trailer as authorized in W. Va. Code 17C-17-5; provided, that the
limitation that a combination of vehicles coupled together shall not consist of
more than two units shall not apply to a combination of vehicles coupled
together by a saddle mount device used to transport motor vehicles in a drive-
away service when no more than three saddle mounts are used; provided, however,
that equipment used in such combination meets the requirements of the safety
regulations of the United States Department of Transportation and shall not
exceed an overall length of more than 65 feet.
   (D)   The length limitations for truck tractor-semitrailer combinations and
truck tractor- semitrailer-trailer combinations operating on the national
system of interstate and defense highways and those classes of qualifying
federal-aid primary system highways so designated by the United States
Secretary of Transportation, and those highways providing reasonable access to
and from terminals, facilities for food, fuel, repairs and rest, and points of
loading and unloading for household goods carriers from such highways, and
further, as to other highways so designated by the state’s Commissioner of
Highways, shall be as follows: the maximum length of a semitrailer unit
operating in a truck tractor-semitrailer combination shall not exceed 48 feet
in length, except where semi-trailers have an axle spacing of not more than 37
feet between the rear axle of the truck tractor and the front axle of the
semitrailer, such semitrailer shall be allowed to be not more than 53 feet in
length and the maximum length of any semitrailer or trailer operating in a
truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer combination shall not exceed 28.5 feet in
length and in no event shall any combinations exceed three units, including the
truck tractor; provided, that nothing herein contained shall impose an overall
length limitation as to commercial motor vehicles operating in truck tractor-
semitrailer or truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer combinations.
(W. Va. Code 17C-17-4)
   (E)   Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) of
this section, the state Highways Commissioner may designate, upon his or her
own motion or upon the petition of an interested party, a combination vehicle
length not to exceed 70 feet, and such designations shall be applicable within
the city.
   (F)   The total outside width, exclusive of safety equipment authorized by
the United States Department of Transportation, of any vehicle or the load
thereon shall not exceed 96 inches, except as otherwise provided in W. Va. Code
Article 17C-17; provided, that any vehicle with a total outside width of 102
inches, exclusive of safety equipment authorized by the United States
Department of Transportation, may be operated on any street or highway
designated by the United States Department of Transportation or the
Commissioner of the Department of Highways or on any street or highway having a
minimum lane width of ten feet.
   (G)   Motor homes, travel trailers, truck campers, motor buses and trackless
trolley coaches with a total outside width of 102 inches, excluding safety
equipment authorized by the United States Department of Transportation, may
operate on any street or highway.
(W. Va. Code 17C-17-2)
   (H)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 347.03) (Ord. passed 12-2-2025)
§ 72.073 LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING.
   (A)   No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be operated on any street
or highway unless such vehicle or combination of vehicles is so constructed or
loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or
otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose
of securing traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway
in cleaning or maintaining such roadway.
   (B)   No person shall operate on any street or highway any vehicle or
combination of vehicles with any load unless such load and any covering thereon
is securely fastened so as to prevent such covering or load from becoming
loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the street or
highway.
(W. Va. Code 17C-17-6) (Prior Code, § 347.04)
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2025)  Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.074 TOWING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   When one vehicle is towing another, the drawbar or other connection
shall be of sufficient strength to pull all weight towed thereby and such
drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one vehicle to the
other except the connection between any two vehicles transporting poles, pipe,
machinery or other objects of structural nature which cannot readily be
dismembered.
   (B)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists of a
chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a white
flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.
(W. Va. Code 17C-17-7) (Prior Code, § 347.05)
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2025)
LICENSING GENERALLY
§ 72.085 REGISTRATION, CERTIFICATE OF TITLE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move and no owner shall knowingly permit to
be driven or moved upon any street or highway any vehicle of a type required to
be registered under W. Va. Code Chapter 17A which is not registered or for
which a certificate of title has not been issued or applied for or for which
the appropriate fee has not been paid when and as required, except as otherwise
permitted by the provisions therein; provided, that in the event of the sale of
a vehicle by a person other than a registered dealer, the person purchasing the
same may, for a period of not more than ten days, operate such vehicle under
the registration of its previous owner and display the registration thereof;
provided further, that he or she shall have and display on the demand of any
proper officer the consent in writing of such previous owner so to use such
registration.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 351.01) (W. Va. Code 17A-3-1) (Ord. passed 12-2-2025) Penalty,
see §
72.999
§ 72.086 REGISTRATION CARD.
   (A)   Every owner, upon receipt of a registration card, shall write his or
her signature thereon with pen and ink in the space provided.
   (B)   Every such registration card shall at all times be carried in the
vehicle to which it refers or shall be carried by the person driving or in
control of such vehicle who shall display the same upon demand of a police
officer or any officer or employee of the Department of Motor Vehicles.
(W. Va. Code 17A-3-13) (Prior Code, § 351.02)
§ 72.087 DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION PLATES.
   (A)   Registration plates issued for vehicles required to be registered
shall be attached to the rear thereof, except that on truck tractors and road
tractors designed and constructed to pull trailers or semi-trailers, the
registration plate shall be mounted to the front.
   (B)   Every registration plate shall at all times be securely fastened in a
horizontal position to the vehicle for which it is issued so as to prevent the
plate from swinging and at a height of not less than 12 inches from the ground,
measuring from the bottom of such plate, in a place and position to be clearly
visible and shall be maintained free from foreign materials and in a condition
to be clearly legible.
(W. Va. Code 17A-3-15) (Prior Code, § 351.03)
§ 72.088 OPERATION OF VEHICLE WITHOUT EVIDENCE OF REGISTRATION; USE OF
TEMPORARY FACSIMILE.
   (A)   No person shall operate or park, nor shall an owner knowingly permit
to be operated or parked, upon any street or highway any vehicle required to be
registered unless there is attached thereto and displayed thereon or is in the
possession of the operator when and as required by this traffic code, a valid
registration card and registration plate or plates issued therefor by the
Department of Motor Vehicles for the current registration year, except as
otherwise expressly permitted in W. Va. Code Chapter 17-A.
   (B)   In the event that the registration plate or plates originally issued
are lost, destroyed or stolen, a temporary facsimile of the plate or plates,
showing the number of the same, may be attached to the vehicle by the owner for
a period of not more than 15 days, or until a new plate or plates are issued by
the Department, whichever is earlier: provided, that no such facsimile shall be
used and no such vehicle shall be driven upon the streets or highways of this
municipality until the owner has notified in writing the Department of Public
Safety of the loss of such registration plate or plates.
(W. Va. Code 17A-9-2) (Prior Code, § 351.04) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.089 IMPROPER USE OF REGISTRATION CARD, PLATE OR PERMIT.
   No person shall lend to another any certificate of title, registration card,
registration plate, special plate or permit issued to him or her if the person
desiring to borrow the same would not be entitled to the use thereof, nor shall
any person knowingly permit the use of any of the same by one not entitled
thereto, nor shall any person display upon a vehicle any registration card,
registration plates or permit not issued for such vehicle or not otherwise
lawfully used thereon under this traffic code.
(W. Va. Code 17A-9-3) (Prior Code, § 351.05) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.090 DRIVER OR MOTORCYCLE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, except those hereinafter expressly exempted, shall drive
any motor vehicle upon a street or highway in this municipality or upon any
subdivision street, as used in W. Va. Code 8A-1-1 et seq., when the use of such
subdivision street is generally used by the public unless the person has a
valid driver’s license under the provisions of the state code for the type or
class of vehicle being driven. Any person licensed to operate a motor vehicle
as provided in the state code may exercise the privilege thereby granted as
provided in the state code and, except as otherwise provided by law, shall not
be required to obtain any other license to exercise such privilege by any
county, municipality or local board or body having authority to adopt local
police regulations.
   (B)   No person, except those hereinafter expressly exempted, shall drive
any motorcycle upon a street or highway in this municipality or upon any
subdivision street, as used in W. Va. Code Article 8-24, when the use of such
subdivision street is generally used by the public unless the person has a
valid motorcycle license or a valid license which has been endorsed under W.
Va. Code 17B-2-7b for motorcycle operation or has a valid motorcycle
instruction permit.
(W. Va. Code 17B-2-1) (Prior Code, § 351.06) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.091 PERSONS EXEMPT FROM LICENSE.
   The following persons are exempt from the license required under §
72.090:
   (A)   Any person while operating a motor vehicle in the armed services of
the United States while in the performance of his or her official duties;
   (B)   A nonresident who is at least 16 years of age and who has in his or
her immediate possession a valid driver’s license issued to the person in the
person’s home state or country unless the Commissioner determines the person’s
home state or country does not extend the same privileges to a resident of this
state, may operate a motor vehicle in this state only as a noncommercial driver
for a period not to exceed 90 days in any one calendar year;
   (C)   A nonresident who is at least 16 years of age, who has in the person’s
immediate possession a valid driver’s license issued to the person in the
person’s home state or country and who is employed in this state, or owns,
maintains or operates a place or places of business in this state, or engages
in any trade, profession or occupation in this state, in addition to the
driving privileges extended under division (B) above, unless the Commissioner
determines the person’s home state or country does not extend the same
privileges to a resident of this state, may operate a motor vehicle in this
state only as a noncommercial driver in traveling to and from the person’s
place or places of employment, place or places of business or place or places
at which the person engages in the trade, profession or occupation and in the
discharge of the duties of the person’s employment, business, trade, profession
or occupation if the duties are such that, if performed by a resident of the
state over the age of 18 years of age, the resident would not be required under
the provisions of W. Va. Code Chapter 17 to obtain a Class A, B, C or D
driver’s license. However, this division (C) shall not exempt any person who is
required to obtain a West Virginia driver’s license in accordance with the
provisions of W. Va. Code 17B-2-1a;
   (D)   A nonresident who is at least 18 years of age and who has in his or
her immediate possession a valid commercial driver’s license issued to the
person in his or her home state or country and which meets the requirements of
the Federal Commercial Motor Vehicle Act of 1986, Title XII of Pub. Law No. 99-
570, and unless the Commissioner determines the person’s home state or country
does not extend the same privilege to a resident of this state may operate a
motor vehicle in this state either as a commercial driver subject to the age
limits applicable to commercial driver in this state, or as a noncommercial
driver subject to the limitations imposed on nonresident drivers in divisions
(B) and (C) above; and
   (E)   Any person who is a student, properly enrolled and registered in an
accredited school, college or university in this state, who is at least 16
years of age and who has in his or her immediate possession a valid driver’s
license issued to the person in the person’s home state, notwithstanding the
limitations of division (B) and (C) above, may operate motor vehicle in this
state only as noncommercial driver; provided, that the state of which the
person is a resident shall extend the same privileges to residents of this
state. This exemption shall be canceled immediately when the student is
graduated from school, college or university or is expelled or ceases to be a
student.
(W. Va. Code 17B-2-2) (Prior Code, § 351.07)
§ 72.092 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensee shall have his or her driver’s license in such person’s
immediate possession at all times when operating a motor vehicle and shall
display the same, upon demand of a magistrate, municipal judge, circuit court
judge, peace officer or an employee of the Division of Motor Vehicles; however,
no person charged with violating this section shall be convicted if such person
produces in court or the office of the arresting officer a driver’s license
theretofore issued to such person and valid at the time of such person’s
arrest.
(W. Va. Code 17B-2-9) (Prior Code, § 351.08)
§ 72.093 CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall commit any one of the following acts:
   (A)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed or have in his or her
possession any fictitious or fraudulently altered driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or nonoperator’s identification;
   (B)   Lend his or her driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
nonoperator’s identification to any other person or knowingly permit the use
thereof by another;
   (C)   Display or represent as one’s own any driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or nonoperator’s identification not issued to him or her;
   (D)   Use a false or fictitious name in any application for a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or nonoperator’s identification or knowingly make a
false statement or knowingly conceal a material fact or otherwise commit a
fraud in any such application;
   (E)   Permit any unlawful use of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or nonoperator’s identification issued to him or her; or
   (F)   Do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this
traffic code or W. Va. Code Chapter 17.
(W. Va. Code 17B-4-1) (Prior Code, § 351.09) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.094 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any public street or highway of
this city at a time when his or her privilege so to do has been lawfully
suspended or revoked.
(W. Va. Code 17B-4-3) (Prior Code, § 351.10) (Ord. 09-07, passed 7-21-2009)
Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.095 OWNER OR OPERATOR ALLOWING ANOTHER TO DRIVE.
   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him
or her or under his or her control to be driven upon any street or highway by
any person who is not authorized hereunder or in violation of any of the
provisions of this traffic code.
(W. Va. Code 17B-4-4) (Prior Code, § 351.11) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.096 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.
   (A)   On and after August 1, 2009, a fee is hereby imposed upon any person
whose driver’s license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle in this state is
reinstated after having been suspended by the city’s Municipal Court for any of
the following:
      (1)   Failure to timely pay costs, fines, forfeitures or penalties
imposed by the municipal court; or
      (2)   Default on a payment plan for costs, fines, forfeitures or
penalties imposed by the municipal court; provided, that on and after November
1, 2009, the fee herein imposed shall be known as an administrative fee.
   (B)   If the suspension of the driver’s license is for a period of time not
exceeding one year, the fee hereby imposed is $25.
   (C)   If the suspension of the driver’s license is for a period of time
exceeding one year, the fee hereby imposed is $50.
   (D)   The administrative fee imposed by this section shall be paid to the
city before the city files with the state’s Division of Motor Vehicles the
Verification of Satisfaction form that will facilitate reinstatement of the
person’s drivers license or privilege to drive by the state’s Division of Motor
Vehicles.
   (E)   All fees received by the city under the authority of this section
shall be used by the city to defer the costs related to the suspension and
reinstatement of licenses to operate motor vehicles in this state.
(Ord. 09-10, passed 10-20-2009)
COMMERCIAL DRIVERS
§ 72.110 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Includes:
      (1)   Any substance containing any form of alcohol, including, but not
limited to, ethanol, methanol, propanol and isopropanol;
      (2)   Beer, ale, port or stout and other similar fermented beverages
(including sake or similar products) of any name or description containing 0.5%
or more of alcohol by volume, brewed or produced from malt, wholly or in part,
or from any substitute therefor;
      (3)   Distilled spirits or that substance known as ethyl alcohol, ethanol
or spirits of wine in any form (including all dilutions and mixtures thereof
from whatever source or by whatever process produced); or
      (4)   Wine of not less than 0.5% of alcohol by volume.
   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. Includes:
      (1)   The number of grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood;
      (2)   The number of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath; or
      (3)   The number of grams of alcohol per 67 milliliters of urine.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER INSTRUCTION PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to W. Va.
Code 17E-1-9(e).
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER LICENSE. A license issued in accordance with the
requirements of W. Va. Code Article 17E-1 to an individual which authorizes the
individual to drive a class of commercial motor vehicle.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle designed or used to transport
passengers or property:
      (1)   If the vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating as determined by
federal regulation;
      (2)   If the vehicle is designed to transport 16 or more passengers,
including the driver; or
      (3)   If the vehicle is transporting hazardous materials and is required
to be placarded in accordance with 49 C.F.R. part 172, sub-part F.
   CONVICTION. The final judgment in a judicial or administrative proceeding or
a verdict or finding of guilty, a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, an
implied admission of guilty or a forfeiture of bond or collateral upon a charge
of a disqualifying offense, as a result of proceedings upon any violation of
the requirement of this subchapter.
   DISQUALIFICATION. A prohibition against driving a commercial motor vehicle.
   DRIVE. To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle in any
place open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic. For
purposes of §
72.999(E), DRIVE includes operation or physical control of a motor vehicle
anywhere in this municipality.
   DRIVER. Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a
commercial motor vehicle, in any place open to the general public for purposes
of vehicular traffic, or who is required to hold a commercial driver license.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued by a state to an individual which
authorizes the individual to drive a motor vehicle of a specific class.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed by an employer to drive a commercial
motor vehicle, including independent contractors. An employee who is employed
by himself or herself as a commercial motor vehicle driver must comply with
both the requirements of this subchapter pertaining to employees and employers.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, including the United States, a state or a political
subdivision of a state, who owns or leases a commercial motor vehicle, or
assigns a person to drive a commercial motor vehicle.
   FARM VEHICLE. Includes a motor vehicle or combination vehicle registered to
the farm owner or entity operating the farm and used exclusively in the
transportation of agricultural or horticultural products, livestock, poultry
and dairy products from the farm or orchard on which they are raised or
produced to markets, processing plants, packing houses, canneries, railway
shipping points and cold storage plants and in the transportation of
agricultural or horticultural supplies and machinery to such farms or orchards
to be used thereon.
   FARMER. Includes owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or person in control of the
premises used substantially for agricultural or horticultural pursuits, who is
at least 18 years of age with two years licensed driving experience.
   FARMER VEHICLE DRIVER. The person employed and designated by the farmer to
drive a farm vehicle as long as driving is not his or her sole or principal
function on the farm, who is at least 18 years of age with two years licensed
driving experience.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires but
not operated upon rails.
   OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. A temporary prohibition against driving a commercial
motor vehicle as a result of a determination by a federal agency or the Public
Service Commission, pursuant to W. Va. Code Chapter 24A, that:
      (1)   The continued use of a commercial motor vehicle may result in
death, serious injury or severe personal injury; or
      (2)   The continued actions by the driver of a commercial motor vehicle
poses an imminent hazard to public safety.
   VIOLATION OF AN OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. Includes:
      (1)   The operation of a commercial motor vehicle during the period the
driver was placed out of service; or
      (2)   The operation of a commercial motor vehicle by a driver after the
vehicle was placed out of service and before the required repairs are made.
(W. Va. Code 17E-1-3) (Prior Code, § 353.01)
§ 72.111 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DRIVER’S LICENSES.
   No person who drives a commercial motor vehicle shall have more than one
driver’s license at one time except during the ten-day period beginning on the
date the person is issued a driver’s license.
(W. Va. Code 17E-1-4) (Prior Code, § 353.02) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.112 EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Each employer shall require the applicant to provide the information
specified in W. Va. Code 17E-1-5.
   (B)   No employer shall knowingly allow, permit or authorize a driver to
drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period:
      (1)   In which the driver has a driver’s license suspended, revoked or
canceled by a state; has lost the privilege to drive a commercial motor vehicle
in a state, or has been disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle;
or
      (2)   In which the driver has more than one driver’s license at one time
except during the ten-day period beginning on the date the employee is issued a
driver’s license.
(W. Va. Code 17E-1-6) (Prior Code, § 353.03)
§ 72.113 COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except when driving under a commercial driver’s instruction permit
accompanied by the holder of a commercial driver’s license valid for the
vehicle being driven, no person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle unless
the person holds a commercial driver’s license and applicable endorsements
valid for the vehicle they are driving.
   (B)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle while their driving
privilege is suspended, revoked, canceled, expired, subject to a
disqualification, or in violation of an out-of-service order.
   (C)   Drivers of a commercial motor vehicle must have a commercial driver’s
license in their possession at all times while driving.
(W. Va. Code 17E-1-7) (Prior Code, § 353.04) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.114 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Farmers.
      (1)   Bona fide farmers or farm vehicle drivers, as defined, operating a
vehicle otherwise covered by the commercial driver’s license requirements may
be exempted from the provisions of this subchapter only if the vehicle used is:
         (a)   Driven by a farmer or farm vehicle driver;
         (b)   Used only to transport either agricultural products, farm
machinery or farm supplies to or from a farm;
         (c)   Not used in the operation of a common or contract motor carrier;
and
         (d)   Used within 150 miles of the qualifying farm.
      (2)   Farmers who wish to be exempted from the commercial driver’s
license requirements must apply to the Division of Motor Vehicles for a
certificate of exemption.
   (B)   Military personnel. Military personnel, including the national guard
and reserve, will be exempt from the provision of this subchapter, only:
      (1)   When in uniform;
      (2)   Operating equipment owned by the United States Department of
Defense, except during declared emergencies or disaster situations;
      (3)   On duty; and
      (4)   In possession of a valid classified military driver’s license for
the class of vehicle being driven.
   (C)   Firefighting and rescue equipment. Operators of vehicles authorized to
hold an authorized emergency vehicle permit for use of red signal lights only
are exempt from the provisions of this article while the authorized emergency
vehicle permit is in force. Vehicles in this class include, but are not limited
to, firefighters and rescue equipment:
      (1)   Owned and operated by state, county and municipal fire departments;
      (2)   Owned and operated by state, county and municipal civil defense
organizations;
      (3)   Owned and operated by a manufacturer engaged in a type of business
that requires firefighter equipment to protect the safety of their plants and
its employees; and
      (4)   Owned and operated by volunteer fire departments.
   (D)   Operators of off-road construction and mining equipment. Operators of
equipment which, by its design, appearance and function, is not intended for
use on a public road, including, without limitation, motorscrapers, backhoes,
motorgraders, compactors, excavators, tractors, trenches and bulldozers, will
be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter; provided, that the exemption
recognized by this division (D) shall not be construed to permit the operation
of such equipment on any public road except such operation as may be required
for a crossing of such road; provided, however, that no such equipment may be
operated on a public road for a distance exceeding 500 feet from the place
where such equipment entered upon the public road.
   (E)   Exempt vehicles. The Commercial Motor Vehicles Safety Act of 1986,
being Title XII of Pub. Law No. 99-570, exempts vehicles used exclusively for
personal use such as recreation vehicles and rental trucks used only to
transport the driver’s personal or household property.
(W. Va. Code 17E-1-8) (Prior Code, § 353.05)
§ 72.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates §
72.031 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
      (2)   A violation of §
72.031 shall not be deemed by virtue of such violation to constitute evidence
of negligence or contributory negligence or comparative negligence in any civil
action or proceeding for damages.
      (3)   If all seat belts in a vehicle are being used at the time of
examination by a law officer and the vehicle contains more passengers than the
total number of seat belts or other safety devices as installed in compliance
with federal motor vehicle safety standards, the driver shall not be considered
as violating §
72.031.
(W. Va. Code 17C-15-46) (Prior Code, § 345.31)
   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of §
72.094 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a
term not to exceed state law, or both; provided, that on and after the first
day of August, 2009, whoever violates any provision of §
72.094 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law, and shall pay such
court costs as directed by the Municipal Court.
(Prior Code, § 351.99)
   (D)   Unless another penalty is provided in §§
72.110 to 72.115, whoever violates any provision of §§
72.110 to 72.115 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law, or
imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law, or both except that for the
second violation of §
72.113, the offender shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or
imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law, or both. For the third or any
subsequent conviction for violation of §
72.113, the offender shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law, or
imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law, or both.
(W. Va. Code 17E-1-25) (Prior Code, § 353.99)
   (E)   (1)   In addition to any other penalties provided by the state code or
these codified ordinances, any person who drives, operates or is in physical
control of a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol concentration in
his or her blood, breath or urine of 0.04% or more, by weight, shall be
imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law, and shall be fined an amount not
to exceed state law. A person convicted of a second or any subsequent offense
under the provisions of this division (A) shall be imprisoned for a term not to
exceed state law, and the court may, in its discretion, impose a fine not
exceed state law.
      (2)   A person who violates the provisions of division (A) above shall be
treated in the same manner set forth in W. Va. Code 17C-19-3, as if he or she
had been arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol or of any
controlled substance.
      (3)   In addition to any other penalties provided by the state code or
these codified ordinances, a person who drives, operates or is in physical
control of a commercial motor vehicle having any measurable alcohol in such
person’s system or who refuses to take a preliminary breath test to determine
such person’s blood alcohol content as provided by W. Va. Code 17E-1-15 must be
placed out of service for 24 hours by the arresting law enforcement officer.
(W. Va. Code 17E-1-14) (Prior Code, § 353.06)
(Ord. 09-07, passed 7-21-2009)
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
73.01   Compliance; code application to bicycles
   
73.02   Obedience to traffic rules; exceptions
   
73.03   Riding upon seats; number of persons
   
73.04   Attaching bicycle or sled to vehicle
   
73.05   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
73.06   Carrying articles
   
73.07   Lights and reflector on bicycle; signal device; brakes
   
73.08   Reckless operation; control, course and speed
   
73.09   Bicycles on sidewalks
   
73.10   Bicycle helmets for children
All-Terrain Vehicles
   
73.25   Definitions
   
73.26   Prohibition of operation and use of all-terrain vehicles
   
73.27   Exceptions
   
73.28   Exemptions
   
73.29   Authorizing or permitting a minor to violate any provision of this
subchapter
   
73.30   Liability
Motorized Carts
   
73.45   Definitions
   
73.46   Registration
   
73.47   Operation regulations
   
73.48   Hazardous activities and special rules
   
73.49   Liability
Motorized Bicycles
   
73.60   Definitions
   
73.61   Registration
   
73.62   Operation regulations
   
73.63   Hazardous activities and special rules
   
73.64   Liability
 
   
73.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate bicycle operation, see W. Va. Code 17C-2-8(a)(8)
BICYCLES
§ 73.01 COMPLIANCE; CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES.
   (A)   No person shall do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act
required in this subchapter.
   (B)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this traffic code.
   (C)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any street or highway or upon any path set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(W. Va. Code 17C-11-1) (Prior Code, § 373.01) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.02 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC RULES; EXCEPTIONS.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this traffic code, except as to special regulations in this
subchapter and except as to those provisions of this traffic code which by
their nature can have no application.
(W. Va. Code 17C-11-2) (Prior Code, § 373.02)
§ 73.03 RIDING UPON SEATS; NUMBER OF PERSONS.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
(W. Va. Code 17C-11-3) (Prior Code, § 373.03) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 ATTACHING BICYCLE OR SLED TO VEHICLE.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, skateboard, roller skates, sled
or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon
a roadway.
(W. Va. Code 17C-11-4) (Prior Code, § 373.04) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing
a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
   (C)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
(W. Va. Code 17C-11-5) (Prior Code, § 373.05)
§ 73.06 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(W. Va. Code 17C-11-6) (Prior Code, § 373.06) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 LIGHTS AND REFLECTOR ON BICYCLE; SIGNAL DEVICE; BRAKES.
   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
by the Department of Motor Vehicles which shall be visible from all distances
from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible
from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red
reflector.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person
use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(W. Va. Code 17C-11-7) (Prior Code, § 373.07) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08 RECKLESS OPERATION; CONTROL, COURSE AND SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle:
   (A)   Without due regard for the safety and rights of pedestrians and
drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, and so as to endanger the life,
limb or property of any person while in the lawful use of the streets or
sidewalks or any other public or private property;
   (B)   Without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such bicycle;
   (C)   In a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is
necessary for safe operation in compliance with law;
   (D)   Without both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give
the required hand and arm signals, or as provided in §
73.06; or
   (E)   At a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions
then existing.
(Prior Code, § 373.08) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.09 BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   Riders of bicycles, when dismounted, may lead their bicycles along any
sidewalk in single file, and bicycles may be allowed to stand on any sidewalk,
provided that they are securely placed against a building or other fixed
structure and cause no obstruction to the free passage of pedestrians along
such sidewalk. No person shall ride any bicycle upon any sidewalk in the city.
(Prior Code, § 373.09) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.10 BICYCLE HELMETS FOR CHILDREN.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BICYCLE. A human-powered vehicle with wheels designed to transport, by
the action of pedaling, one or more persons seated on one or more saddle seats
on its frame. Such term also includes a human-powered vehicle, and any
attachment to such vehicle designed to transport by pedaling when the vehicle
is used on a public roadway, public bicycle path or other public right-of-way,
but does not include a tricycle.
      OPERATOR. A person who travels on a bicycle seated on a saddle seat from
which that person is intended to and can pedal the bicycle.
(W. Va. Code 17C-11A-3)
      OTHER PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any right-of-way, other than a public roadway
or public bicycle path, that is under the jurisdiction and control of this
state or the municipality and is designed for use and used by vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
      PASSENGER. Any person who travels on a bicycle in any manner except as an
operator.
      PROTECTIVE BICYCLE HELMET. A piece of headgear which meets or exceeds the
impact standards for protective bicycle helmets set by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) or the Snell Memorial Foundation’s standards for
protective headgear or American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) for
use in bicycling.
      PUBLIC BICYCLE PATH. A right-of-way under the jurisdiction and control of
this state or the municipality for use primarily by bicycles and pedestrians.
      PUBLIC ROADWAY. A right-of-way under the jurisdiction and control of this
state or the municipality for use primarily by motor vehicles.
      TRICYCLE. A three-wheeled human-powered vehicle designed for use as a toy
by a single child under the age of six years, the seat of which is no more than
two feet from ground level.
   (B)   Requirements for helmet use.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person under 15 years of age to operate or
be a passenger on a bicycle or any attachment to a bicycle used on a public
roadway, public bicycle path or other public right-of-way unless, at all times
when the person is so engaged, he or she wears a protective bicycle helmet of
good fit, fastened securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of a person under
15 years of age to knowingly permit such person to operate or be a passenger on
a bicycle or on any attachment to a bicycle used on a public roadway, public
bicycle path or other public right-of-way unless, at all times when the person
is so engaged, he or she wears a protective bicycle helmet of good fit,
fastened securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet.
(W. Va. Code 17C-11A-4)
   (C)   Sale of bicycle helmets. Any helmet sold or offered for sale for use
by operators and passengers of bicycles shall be conspicuously labeled in
accordance with the standard described in division (A) above, which shall
constitute the manufacturer’s certification that the helmet conforms to the
applicable safety standards.
(W. Va. Code 17C-11A-5)
   (D)   Civil actions. A violation of division (B) above is not admissible as
evidence of negligence or contributory negligence or comparative negligence in
any civil action or proceeding for damages, and shall not be admissible in
mitigation of damages.
(W. Va. Code 17C-11A-6)
(Prior Code, § 373.10) Penalty, see §
73.99
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
§ 73.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV). Any motor vehicle designed for off-highway use,
having a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator, and
handlebars for steering control, or as otherwise defined in W. Va. Code 17A-1-
1, or any successor substitute thereto.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails.
(Ord. 03-04, passed 10-7-2003)
§ 73.26 PROHIBITION OF OPERATION AND USE OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
   The riding, operation or other use of all-terrain vehicles for
transportation or recreational purposes within or upon the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parking lots and other realty owned, leased or property controlled
by the city or any of its boards, authorities or commissions is prohibited.
(Ord. 03-04, passed 10-7-2003) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.27 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, it shall not be an
offense for any person to lawfully ride or operate any such all-terrain vehicle
upon any governmentally-owned realty not owned or controlled by the city or any
of its boards, authorities or commissions located within the corporate limits
of the city.
   (B)   Notwithstanding an other provision of this code, it shall not be an
offense for any person licensed to operate a motor vehicle within the state, to
ride, operate or otherwise use an all-terrain vehicle upon a designated parade
route, when such person is a duly registered and recognized participant in any
such permitted parade, provided that such all-terrain vehicle riding or
operation occurs in conjunction with said parade.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, it shall not be an
offense for any person licensed to operate a motor vehicle within the state, to
ride, operate or otherwise use an all-terrain vehicle on the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parking lots and other realty-owned, leased or controlled property
by the city or any of its boards, authorities or commissions for purposes of
snow removal, if such vehicle is affixed or attached with implements or
equipment specifically designed for that purpose, and to be used on such
vehicles.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, it shall not be an
offense for any person licensed to operate a motor vehicle within the state, to
ride, operate or otherwise use an all-terrain vehicle on the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parking lots and other realty-owned, leased or controlled property
by the city or any of its boards, authorities or commissions during a period of
emergency when the emergency has been so declared by the Mayor, and when such
riding, operating or other use of any such ATV is in conjunction with response
to such an emergency.
(Ord. 03-04, passed 10-7-2003) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.28 EXEMPTIONS.
   The federal government, the state and its political subdivisions are exempt
from the prohibitions contained herein, when any such all-terrain vehicle is
used for government purposes.
(Ord. 03-04, passed 10-7-2003)
§ 73.29 AUTHORIZING OR PERMITTING A MINOR TO VIOLATE ANY PROVISION OF THIS
SUBCHAPTER.
   (A)   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a minor to violate any
provision within this section.
   (B)   Any such violation or knowingly permitting any such minor to violate
the provisions of this section shall constitute a criminal violation hereof and
shall subject such person to the criminal penalties set forth in this section.
   (C)   The citing of any person pursuant to this section shall not be reason
to prohibit the police officer from also citing the driver of said all-terrain
vehicle.
(Ord. 03-04, passed 10-7-2003) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.30 LIABILITY.
   Nothing contained within this subchapter is intended, nor shall be
construed, so as to create or form the basis for any civil or administrative
liability whatsoever on the part of the city or any of its officers, officials,
employees or agents for any injury or damage resulting to any person as a
consequence of any action or inaction on the part of the city related, in any
manner, to the enforcement or non-enforcement of this subchapter by the city’s
officers, officials, employees or agents.
(Ord. 03-04, passed 10-7-2003)
MOTORIZED CARTS
§ 73.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVER. The person operating and having physical control over the motorized
cart.
   MOTORIZED CART. An electric or gasoline-powered carts, commonly referred as
a golf cart or utility vehicle (but excluding vehicles commonly referred to as
four-wheelers and similar type of vehicles). They are designed for low speed
operation. These are the only carts authorized for use under this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 10-2-2018)
§ 73.46 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   General. The owner of a motorized cart prior to operating the cart
over the streets within the city and in those areas accessible by the public
shall register the cart with the city and obtain a registration permit.
      (1)   The registration is valid for one calendar year with an annual
renewal of the registration due in January.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any business
or person who is licensed to sell motorized carts within the city to register
the cart prior to selling the motorized cart unless the seller will use the
motorized cart over authorized streets for personal business.
   (B)   Required equipment for motorized cart registration permits.
      (1)   A motorized cart shall be equipped with the following minimum
equipment to be eligible for a registration permit to operate after dusk:
         (a)   Operational headlamps;
         (b)   Operational tail lamps; and
         (c)   Operational parking brake.
      (2)   A motorized cart shall be equipped with the following minimum
equipment to be eligible for a registration permit to operate during day time
only:
         (a)   Operational parking brake;
         (b)   No operational headlamps; and
         (c)   No operational tail lamps.
   (C)   Application. Every application for a permit shall be made on a form
supplied by the city and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Model, make, name and cart ID number;
      (3)   Date of birth of applicant;
      (4)   Proof of liability insurance; and
      (5)   Other such information which the city may require.
   (D)   Permit required. No person shall operate a motorized cart:
      (1)   Which is not permitted by the city as provided herein. The permit
is to be placed on the front cover driver side;
      (2)   Who is under the age of 16 years of age; and
      (3)   Without proof of liability insurance.
   (E)   Revoking of permit. A permit will be revoked if it is found that:
      (1)   The operator is under the age of 16 years old;
      (2)   The operator failed to abide by the requirements of this
subchapter;
      (3)   The operator failed to abide by traffic laws in the use of a
motorized cart on city streets;
      (4)   The operator failed to grant right-of-way to pedestrians and
bicyclists;
      (5)   The permit holder allowed someone under 16 years old to operate the
motorized cart; and
      (6)   The permit holder is determined to not be capable of safely
operating the motorized cart on the roadway or otherwise is a threat to the
safety of others.
   (F)   Fee. There shall be no fee required for the registration of motorized
carts in the city.
   (G)   Transfer. Upon transfer of the cart to another person who shall
operate the cart over the streets of the city, the registration must be
transferred to the new owner within ten business days of the change of
ownership. If the registration is not transferred within ten business days, a
$15 penalty will be applied and the cart shall be considered an unregistered
cart after the ten business day period.
   (H)   Gasoline carts.
      (1)   Every motorized cart powered by gasoline shall at all times be
equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and meet the following
specifications:
         (a)   The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the
flange of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and exhaust pipes
or include any and all parts specified by the manufacturer;
         (b)   The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened,
with brackets or hangers which are designed for the particular purpose of
fastening motorized cart exhaust system; and
         (c)   The engine and powered mechanism of every motorized cart shall
be so equipped, adjusted and tuned so that the exhaust equals the same amount
of a motorized cart in good working order.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized cart to operate
or permit the operation of such cart on which any device controlling or abating
atmospheric emissions, which is placed on a motorized cart by the manufacturer,
to render the device unserviceable by removal, alteration or which interfered
with its operation.
(Ord. passed 10-2-2018)
§ 73.47 OPERATION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Only persons who are at least 16 years old and who have been issued a
valid West Virginia driver’s license may operate a motorized cart on the
streets and those areas accessible by the public within the city.
   (B)   All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to
vehicular traffic when using the streets and those areas accessible by the
public within the city.
   (C)   Pedestrians have the right-of-way. All motorized carts shall yield to
pedestrians and bicycles.
   (D)   No motorized cart may be driven on any city street where the speed
limit is greater than 25 mph or any city street that the Mayor, Council or
Police Chief deem to be unsafe.
   (E)   Motorized carts only may be operated on authorized streets and areas
accessible by the public within the town only between sunrise and within two
hours after sunset.
   (F)   The driver and passengers must be properly seated at all times when
the motorized cart is in motion.
   (G)   The number of passengers for which the motorized cart is designed
shall not be exceeded.
(Ord. passed 10-2-2018)
§ 73.48 HAZARDOUS ACTIVITIES AND SPECIAL RULES.
   (A)   No individual or group shall operate a motorized cart in a hazardous
manner on the streets and those areas accessible by the public.
   (B)   Such hazardous activities, and the special rules pertaining to them,
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Racing of any form;
      (2)   Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by
the city;
      (3)   Loitering or parking on streets;
      (4)   Normal rules of the road shall apply;
      (5)   Pedestrians are to be given due consideration and right-of-way; and
      (6)   All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including
open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city, also
apply to motorized carts.
(Ord. passed 10-2-2018)
§ 73.49 LIABILITY.
   (A)   (1)   Each person using the streets of the city is liable for their
own actions.
      (2)   Minimum liability insurance coverage is required for operating a
motorized cart on the public streets and shall be the same as that which is
required to operate a motor vehicle on the roads of the state.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as an assumption of
liability by the city for any injuries to persons or property which may result
from the operation of a motorized cart by a permit holder or the failure by the
city to revoke said permit.
(Ord. passed 10-2-2018)
MOTORIZED BICYCLES
§ 73.60 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATOR. The person operating and having physical control over the
motorized bicycle.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE. A bicycle with two or three wheels, a seat or saddle,
fully operative pedals for human propulsion, and an electric or gas powered
motor and which can propel the bike with or without pedal assistance (but this
definition excludes two- or three-wheeled vehicles).
   PROTECTIVE HELMET. A piece of headgear which meets or exceeds the impact
standards for protective bicycle helmets set by the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) or the Snell Memorial Foundation’s standards for and materials
(ASTM) for use in bicycling.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2019)
§ 73.61 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   General. The owner of a motorized bicycle prior to operating the
bicycle over the streets and other public areas within the city shall register
the motorized bicycle with the city and obtain a registration permit.
      (1)   The registration is valid for one calendar year with an annual
renewal of the registration due in January.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any business
or person licensed to sell motorized bicycles within the city to register the
motorized bicycle prior to selling the motorized bicycle unless the seller will
use the motorized bicycle over authorized streets; provided, that any business
or person that leases one or more motorized bicycles for operation within the
city shall register all such motorized bicycles.
   (B)   Required equipment for motorized bicycle registration permits.
      (1)   A motorized bicycle shall be equipped with the following minimum
equipment to be eligible for a registration permit to operate:
         (a)   At least one operational headlamp which emits a white light
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front of the bicycle; and
         (b)   An operational tail lamp on the back of the bicycle emitting a
red light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the rear of the
bicycle.
      (2)   A motorized bicycle shall have operational and effective hand or
pedal brakes.
   (C)   Application. Every application for a permit to operate a motorized
bicycle shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Model, make, name and motorized bicycle ID number;
      (3)   Date of birth of applicant;
      (4)   Proof of liability insurance; and
      (5)   Other such information which the city may require.
   (D)   Permit required. No person shall operate a motorized bicycle:
      (1)   Which is not permitted by the city as provided herein. The permit
is to be placed on the handlebar of the motorized bicycle;
      (2)   Who is under the age of 16 years of age; and
      (3)   Without proof of liability insurance.
   (E)   Revoking of permit. A permit will be revoked if it is found that:
      (1)   The operator is under the age of 16 years old;
      (2)   The operator failed to abide by the requirements of this
subchapter;
      (3)   The operator failed to abide by traffic laws in the use of a
motorized bicycle on city streets;
      (4)   The operator failed to grant right-of-way to pedestrians and
bicyclists;
      (5)   The permit holder allowed someone under 16 years old to operate the
motorized bicycle; and
      (6)   The permit holder is determined to not be capable of safely
operating the motorized bicycle on the roadway or otherwise is a threat to the
safety of others.
   (F)   Fee. There shall be no fee required for the registration of motorized
bicycles in the city.
   (G)   Transfer. Upon transfer of the motorized bicycle to another person who
shall operate the motorized bicycle over the streets of the city, the
registration must be transferred to the new owner within ten business days of
the change of ownership. If the registration is not transferred within ten
business days, a $15 penalty will be applied and the bicycle shall be
considered an unregistered bicycle.
   (H)   Gasoline bicycles.
      (1)   Every motorized bicycle powered by gasoline shall at all times be
equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and meet the following
specifications:
         (a)   The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the
flange of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and exhaust pipes
or include any and all parts specified by the manufacturer;
         (b)   The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened,
with brackets or hangers which are designed for the particular purpose of
fastening motorized bicycle exhaust system; and
         (c)   The engine and powered mechanism of every motorized bicycle
shall be so equipped, adjusted and tuned so that the exhaust equals the same
amount of a motorized bicycle in good working order.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized bicycle to
operate or permit the operation of such bicycle on which any device controlling
or abating atmospheric emissions, which is placed on a motorized bicycle by the
manufacturer, to render the device unserviceable by removal, alteration or
which interfered with its operation.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2019)
§ 73.62 OPERATION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Only persons who are at least 16 years old and who have been issued a
valid West Virginia driver’s license may operate a motorized bicycle on the
streets and those areas accessible by the public within the city.
   (B)   All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to
vehicular traffic when using the streets and those areas accessible by the
public within the city.
   (C)   Pedestrians have the right-of-way. All motorized bicycles shall obey
all speed limits and shall yield to pedestrians and bicycles.
   (D)   No motorized bicycle may be driven on any city street where the speed
limit is greater than 25 mph or any city street that the Mayor, Council or
Police Chief deem to be unsafe.
   (E)   Motorized bicycles only may be operated on authorized streets and
areas accessible by the public within the town only between sunrise and within
two hours after sunset.
   (F)   The driver and passenger must be properly seated at all times when the
motorized bicycle is in motion.
   (G)   The number of riders (including the operator) for which the motorized
bicycle is designed shall not be exceeded.
   (H)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon any sidewalk or upon
any designated multi-use path for pedestrians and bicycles, or any bicycle path
or trail or any walking path within the city.
   (I)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on any motorized bicycle
unless he or she is wearing securely fastened on his or her head by either a
neck or chin strap a protective helmet designed to deflect blows, resist
penetration and spread impact forces.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2019)
§ 73.63 HAZARDOUS ACTIVITIES AND SPECIAL RULES.
   (A)   No individual or group shall operate a motorized bicycle in a
hazardous manner on the streets and those areas accessible by the public.
   (B)   Such hazardous activities, and the special rules pertaining to them,
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Racing of any form;
      (2)   Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by
the city;
      (3)   Loitering or parking on streets;
      (4)   Normal rules of the road shall apply;
      (5)   Pedestrians are to be given due consideration and right-of-way; and
      (6)   All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including
open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city, also
apply to motorized bicycles.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2019)
§ 73.64 LIABILITY.
   (A)   Each operator using the streets of the city is liable for their own
actions. Minimum liability insurance coverage is required for operating a
motorized bicycle on the public streets and shall be the same as that which is
required to operate a motor vehicle on the roads of the state.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as an assumption of
liability by the city for any injuries to persons or property which may result
from the operation of a motorized bicycle by a permit holder or the failure by
the city to revoke said permit.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2019)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
73.01 to
73.10 shall be directed to appear before the Municipal Court and shall be fined
or, in the discretion of the Municipal Judge, the bicycle of such violator may
be impounded for a period not to exceed ten days; or both fine and impounding
in the discretion of the Municipal Judge.
(Prior Code, § 373.99)
   (C)   (1)   Any person who violates §
73.26 shall constitute the commission of a misdemeanor criminal offense, and
any officer of the city’s Police Department or any other officer of any other
police agency exercising proper jurisdiction within the corporate limits of the
city is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a citation and to charge any
such person who commits a violation of §
73.26. Any person convicted of a first offense established hereunder shall be
fined an amount not to exceed state law. Any person convicted of a second or
subsequent offense established hereunder shall be fined an amount not to exceed
state law.
      (2)   Any person who violates §
73.29 shall constitute the commission of a misdemeanor criminal offense, and
any officer of the city’s Police Department or any other officer of any other
police agency exercising proper jurisdiction within the corporate limits of the
city is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a citation and to charge any
such person who commits a violation of §
73.29. Any person convicted of a first offense established hereunder shall be
fined an amount not to exceed state law. Any person convicted of a second or
subsequent offense established hereunder shall be fined an amount not to exceed
state law.
   (D)   Any person who violates the terms of §§
73.45 through
73.49 shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Any violation of §§
73.45 through
73.49 shall be charged against the registered owner of the cart;
      (2)   All fines and penalties shall be levied against the registered
owner of the cart as follows:
         (a)   For the first offense, the fine shall not exceed state law;
         (b)   For the second offense, the fine shall not exceed state law;
         (c)   If a third offense is committed within one year of conviction
for a second offense, the minimum fines shall not exceed state law and the
registered owner’s golf cart registration shall be revoked. The registered
owner or family member cannot thereafter register a cart for use in the town
for a period of two years following conviction of a third offense.
   (E)   Any person who violates the terms of §§
73.60 through
73.64 shall be punished as follows.
      (1)   Any moving violation of §§
73.60 through
73.64 shall be charged against the operator of the motorized bicycle.
      (2)   All nonmoving violations shall be charged against the registered
owner of the motorized bicycle.
      (3)   Fines and penalties for both moving and nonmoving violations shall
be levied as follows:
         (a)   For the first offense, the fine shall not exceed state law;
         (b)   For the second offense, the fine shall not exceed state law; and
         (c)   If a third offense is committed within one year of conviction
for a second offense, the minimum fines shall not exceed state law and the
registered owner’s motorized bicycle registration shall be revoked. The
registered owner or family member cannot thereafter register a motorized
bicycle for use in the town for a period of two years following conviction of a
third offense.
(Ord. 03-04, passed 10-7-2003; Ord. passed 10-2-2018; Ord. passed 10-15-2019)
CHAPTER 74: RAILROADS
Section
   
74.01   Obstructing railroad crossings
   
74.02   Trespassing
   
74.03   Compliance with chapter required
   
74.04   Construction of crossings
   
74.05   Electric lights
   
74.06   Signal lights, gongs, gates and watchmen
   
74.07   Stop signs
   
74.08   Obstructions to view; standing locomotives or cars near crossings
   
74.09   Backing; freight trains
   
74.10   Speed of trains
   
74.11   Blowing whistle or ringing bell
   
74.12   Bumping posts at switches
   
74.13   Obstruction of track or interference with operation of train
   
74.14   Removal or melting of snow
 
   
74.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Stopping at grade crossing, see §§
71.35 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to eliminate grade crossings, see W. Va. Code 17-10-7
   Grant of right-of-way, see W. Va. Code 31-2-13
   Railroad companies, see W. Va. Code Article 31-2
§ 74.01 OBSTRUCTING RAILROAD CROSSINGS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CARRIER, RAILROAD or RAILROAD COMPANY. A common carrier by railroad.
      TRAIN or TRAINS. Engines, cars and any type of railroad equipment or
rolling stock, or any part thereof, capable of blocking any crossing of a
railroad track or tracks and any public street, road or highway.
   (B)   Blocking of crossing prohibited; time limit.
      (1)   No railroad company, except in an emergency, shall order, allow or
permit the operation of or operate its system so that a train blocks the
passage of vehicular traffic over the railroad crossing of any public street,
road or highway for a period longer than ten minutes. This division (B) does
not apply to an obstruction of any such street, road or highway caused by a
continuously moving train or caused by circumstances wholly beyond the control
of the railroad, but does apply to all other obstructions as aforesaid,
including, but not limited to, those caused by a stopped train or a train
engaged in switching, loading or unloading operations.
      (2)   Upon receiving notification from a law-enforcement officer, member
of a Fire Department, operator of an emergency medical vehicle or a member of
an emergency services provider that emergency circumstances require the
immediate clearing of a public highway railroad grade crossing, the members of
the train crew of the train, railroad car or equipment, or engine blocking such
crossing shall immediately notify the appropriate railroad dispatcher of the
pending emergency situation. Upon receipt of notice of such emergency
circumstances by the train crew or dispatcher, the railroad shall immediately
clear the crossing, consistent with the safe operation of the train.
   (C)   Responsibility of railroad company. The railroad company shall be
solely responsible for the acts of its agents and employees in violating any
provision of this section.
   (D)   Presumption. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a train is
operated by the carrier whose marks, numbers, signs and symbols of
identification appear on the engine or caboose of such train.
   (E)   Service of process. Process issuing for a violation of this section
may be served upon the engineer or conductor of the train causing a violation
of the provisions of this section or any other officer, agent or attorney-in-
fact of the railroad company authorized by law to receive service of summons or
other process issuing against such railroad company.
(W. Va. Code Art. 31-2A) (Prior Code, § 541.01) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.02 TRESPASSING.
   (A)   No person not a passenger or employee, shall be found trespassing upon
any railroad or traction car or train of any railroad, by jumping on or off any
car or train in motion, on its arrival at or departure from any station or
depot of such railroad, or on the passage of any such car or train over any
part of such railroad; nor shall any person drive any horse or any horse-drawn
or motor-driven vehicle across or upon any railroad track or bridge, except at
public or private crossings.
(W. Va. Code 61-3-43)
   (B)   No unauthorized person shall loiter, walk, ride, drive or otherwise
trespass upon any railway right-of-way or tracks, or upon the bridges or
elevated structures carrying tracks, unless there is a walkway provided for
pedestrians, which walkway or passageway must be separated from the tracks of a
railroad by a partition, or upon locomotives or cars operated on tracks of any
railroad company operating in the city.
(Prior Code, § 541.02) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 74.03 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER REQUIRED.
   Every railroad company now operating, or which may hereafter operate, within
the city limits shall conform to the regulations in this chapter in regard to
crossings and the operation of its railroad within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 541.03)
§ 74.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CROSSINGS.
   (A)   At every point where the tracks or switches of a railroad company
cross any unpaved public thoroughfare or street, it shall be the duty of the
railroad company to construct proper crossings and approaches thereto on such a
grade that it shall not exceed 2%, and under the direction and in accordance
with plans and surveys made by the City Engineer if so required by Council.
Each of the crossings shall be covered the full width of the street between
curb lines and for ten feet on each side of the tracks with crushed stone of
such strength and size (not to exceed stone that will pass through a two- inch
ring) as may be required by the City Engineer, to a depth of at least 12
inches, but the City Engineer may, if conditions warrant it, allow a less depth
of crushed stone down to six inches deep and a base of coarser stone.
   (B)   The stone filling shall continue to the entire distance on each side
of the railroad tracks to which the original grade of the street was disturbed
in arriving at the new grade for the crossing, in the event the street was
disturbed for a greater length than the ten feet on each side of the track. At
all points for one foot on the outside of each rail and the entire space
between the rails, the entire width of the railway between the curbs and the
ties shall be covered with substantial boards not less than two and one-half
inches thick and not less than six inches wide, except where a narrower board
is necessary to fill out some crack less than six inches wide; and in the event
that there is more than one track on each of such street crossings, then the
whole space between each set of tracks shall be constructed of boards in the
same manner herein provided for the space between the rails. In the event the
rails of the company run parallel with the street and along any part thereof,
the ties between the rails and the space for 18 inches on either side of any
rail shall be covered with boards of the size and construction prescribed for
crossings.
   (C)   All such board filling at crossings and along public streets occupied
by the railroad tracks shall be kept in good repair and condition, securely
spiked down at all times, and no rotten boards, loose ends or split and damaged
boards shall be permitted which in the judgment of the City Engineer might
cause an injury to any animal, vehicle or person traveling along or across the
tracks on the public street.
   (D)   Whenever any street is paved by the city up to a line parallel with
the property line of the railroad company’s right-of-way on both sides of any
railroad crossing, it shall be the duty of the railroad company forthwith to
proceed to pave this crossing the entire distance of its right-of-way with the
same materials and in the same manner that the rest of the street on either
side of the crossing is paved or with other materials to be approved by the
City Engineer.
   (E)    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to delay the completion
of such work for a longer time than 20 days after the completion of the paving
on both sides of the crossing, such paving to be done according to plans and
specifications and on grades to be approved by the City Engineer and Council.
Council may require any well recognized and reasonable special construction
guards or other devices, along the rails to provide a smooth passage thereover
for vehicles using the crossing. The railroad company shall also keep the
paving on the crossing in good repair and condition at all times.
(Prior Code, § 541.04) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.05 ELECTRIC LIGHTS.
   All persons operating railroads within or through the city are required to
place good and sufficient arc electric lights at any and all points where the
railway crosses any public street or thoroughfare, after ten days’ notice from
Council to do so, these lights to be the equal in candle power of the arc
lights usually used by the city to light its streets.
(Prior Code, § 541.05)
§ 74.06 SIGNAL LIGHTS, GONGS, GATES AND WATCHMEN.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person operating a railroad within the
city, whenever required by resolution of Council, and after 90 days’ written
notice of such requirement given to such person and a finding by Council that
the public safety so requires, to maintain and operate at any point in the city
where a public street crosses its road or tracks at grade an electric signal
light, gong, gates or other safety device, designated in such resolution,
properly constructed to give ample warning to travelers of the approach of
trains, locomotives and cars upon the railroad. Such person shall also, when
required, in like manner, keep at any such points a sober, careful and
experienced watchman, whose duty it shall be to keep the tracks clear of
horses, cattle, vehicles and pedestrians, and to issue proper warnings against
crossing the track during the approach of any train, locomotive or car.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any watchman so employed in looking after the
crossing to be absent therefrom during his or her hours of duty, or to be
asleep or not attentive to his or her duties at any such times. Such watchman
shall be kept on duty during such hours of the day or night as may be
prescribed by Council.
(Prior Code, § 541.06) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.07 STOP SIGNS.
   Wherever the tracks of any person operating a railroad cross a public street
at grade, it shall be the duty of any such person, if the street is paved, to
cause the word “STOP” to be clearly printed in white paint, in letters not less
than 30 inches high upon the surface thereof at each side of such tracks and a
white line four inches in width shall be painted underneath the word “stop”,
extending from curb to curb; and if such street is not paved, suitable signs
shall be erected at each side thereof, of such design and at such height as to
read easily, upon which shall be inscribed in letters at least ten inches high
the word “stop”. All such signs and lines provided by this section shall be
painted, erected and maintained in good readable condition by and at the
expense of the railroad company, under the supervision of the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 541.07)
§ 74.08 OBSTRUCTIONS TO VIEW; STANDING LOCOMOTIVES OR CARS NEAR CROSSINGS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person operating a railroad in the city
to keep its tracks and right-of-way clear of objects obstructing the clear view
of the tracks by travelers at grade crossings, and it shall be unlawful for any
such person to permit its locomotives, trains or cars to remain standing on its
tracks within 100 feet of any such crossing for a longer period than five
minutes.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee whose duty it shall
be to carry out any provisions of this section to fail to do so, or for any
other person to violate this section.
(Prior Code, § 541.08) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.09 BACKING; FREIGHT TRAINS.
   (A)   When shifting cars or pulling or backing any train in any yard which
necessitates crossing public streets, the bell of the engine shall be kept
constantly ringing whenever approaching any such street crossing, and if any
locomotive, car or caboose is backing within such limits, a person shall be
stationed on the end farthest from the engine, that is, on the end nearest the
street crossing it is approaching, to give signals and warn any person using
the crossing of his or her danger. After twilight, the man stationed on the
approaching end of a backing train, car or locomotive shall carry a lighted
lantern.
   (B)    No freight train shall be moved across any street in the city unless
it be equipped with an adequate number of experienced brakemen, who shall be
stationed so as to see the danger signals and hear the signals from the engine.
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any engine or train to “kick”
or otherwise propel any car across any public thoroughfare unless there be a
person stationed on the end of the car first approaching the crossing, and he
or she shall have the car fully under control so that he or she can promptly
stop same in the event of danger.
(Prior Code, § 541.09) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.10 SPEED OF TRAINS.
   Within the limits of the city, no person or the agent or employee of any
such person shall run any locomotive, engine, car or train of cars at a rate of
speed exceeding 15 mph, across any public street which has not been provided
with automatic gates and at which such gates are not operated, but where such
automatic gates are in operation, a speed not exceeding 20 mph may be attained
across any of such streets.
(Prior Code, § 541.10) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.11 BLOWING WHISTLE OR RINGING BELL.
   No engineer or firefighter or any person having charge of any locomotive
within the limits of the city shall blow the whistle or horn on the engine in
his or her charge, or ring unnecessarily the bell of any such engine, except so
far as may be required in giving such signals as are required by the laws of
the state for warning at railroad crossings, and when signals are given with
the whistle or bell that are required by such laws, they shall be only short
blasts of sufficient length to give the notice or warning required by law, and
no longer. The use of the whistle of any locomotive for the purpose of calling
in brakemen, calling for signals from train dispatcher or conductor, or
notifying the public or tradesmen of the approach or presence of such engine is
prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 541.11)
§ 74.12 BUMPING POSTS AT SWITCHES.
   All persons operating railroads within the city shall provide suitable
bumping posts at the end of each switch of sufficient strength to prevent the
derailment of any car which may approach the end of such switch with such
momentum that but for such post it would run off into the street or yard.
(Prior Code, § 541.12)
§ 74.13 OBSTRUCTION OF TRACK OR INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OF TRAIN.
   No person within the city shall place any obstruction upon or near the track
of any railway, or displace any switch or remove, disturb or injure anything
pertaining to the track, wires, poles, cars, engines or anything necessary for
the operation of any such railway or prevent or endanger the passage of any
locomotive, except that this section shall not be construed as covering hose or
other obstruction placed on or over the track in case of fire.
(Prior Code, § 541.13) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.14 REMOVAL OR MELTING OF SNOW.
   No person, in removing snow from the tracks of any railway in the city,
shall do so in such a manner as to obstruct the free passageway of any street
or roadway. And no person shall sprinkle salt or other decomposing substance
upon any railway tracks or rails in the city for the purpose of melting snow or
ice thereon or for any purpose, unless a permit is granted therefor by the
Mayor or the Director of Public Works.
(Prior Code, § 541.14) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any railroad company, carrier or railroad violating the
provisions of §
74.01(B)(1) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law; upon a second
conviction occurring at the same crossing within one year thereafter, shall be
fined an amount not to exceed state law; and upon a third or subsequent
conviction occurring at the same crossing within one year after the first
conviction, shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
      (2)   Any railroad company, carrier or railroad violating the provisions
of §
74.01(B)(2) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law; upon a second
conviction occurring at the same crossing within one year thereafter, shall be
fined an amount not to exceed state law; and upon a third or subsequent
conviction occurring at the same crossing within one year after the first
conviction, shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
(W. Va. Code 31-2A-6)
      (3)   Whoever violates §
74.02 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed state law, or both.
(Prior Code, § 541.99)
CHAPTER 75: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
75.01   Prohibition against parking on streets or highways
   
75.02   Police may remove illegally stopped vehicles
   
75.03   Prohibited stopping, standing or parking places
   
75.04   Vehicles parked on private property
   
75.05   Manner of angle and parallel parking
   
75.06   Handicapped parking
   
75.07   Abandoned vehicles
   
75.08   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
75.09   Truck loading zones
   
75.10   Bus stops and taxicab stands
   
75.11   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions
   
75.12   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking
   
75.13   Parking of trucks, tractors and trailers
   
75.14   Fire lanes on private property devoted to public use
   
75.15   Traffic control parking sign directives to be obeyed; authority of
Council
 
   
75.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Duty to stop engine, set brake on grade and remove key, see §
70.150
   Impounding of abandoned vehicles, see §
70.191
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate parallel and angle parking, see W. Va. Code 17C-13-4
   Authority to regulate the standing or parking of vehicles, see W. Va. Code
17C-2-8(a)(1)
§ 75.01 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Upon any street or highway outside of a business or residence
district, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, upon the paved or main- traveled part of the street or
highway when it is practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off such
part of the street or highway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the
street or highway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free
passage of other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be
available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon such highway or
street.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or main-traveled portion of a street or highway in
such a manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position.
(W. Va. Code 17C-13-1) (Prior Code, § 361.01) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.02 POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or
highway in violation of §
75.01, such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle or require the
driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position
off the paved or main-traveled part of such street or highway.
   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge
or causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(W. Va. Code 17C-13-2) (Prior Code, § 361.02)
§ 75.03 PROHIBITED STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions
of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   In a properly designated fire lane;
      (6)   On a crosswalk;
      (7)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (8)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (9)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
      (10)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (11)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of such entrance (when properly signposted);
      (12)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (13)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
      (14)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or
highway or within a street or highway tunnel;
      (15)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking,
or where the curbing or street is painted yellow or red, or at any place in
excess of the maximum time limited by signs;
      (16)   Within 20 feet of any mail receptacle served regularly by a
carrier using a motor vehicle for daily deliveries, if such parking interferes
with or causes delay in the carrier’s schedule;
      (17)   Upon any controlled-access highway;
      (18)   At any place on any street or highway where the safety and
convenience of the traveling public is thereby endangered;
      (19)   Over or across any lines or marks established by the municipality
to indicate parking spaces; or
      (20)   In front of a wheelchair accessible ramp or curb cut which is part
of a sidewalk designed for use by the general public when the ramp or curb cut
is properly marked with blue paint.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(W. Va. Code 17C-13-3) (Prior Code, § 361.03) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.04 VEHICLES PARKED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No driver of a vehicle shall stop, park or leave standing unattended any
vehicle on a private road or driveway or on private property without having
express or implied permission from the owner, tenant or lessee of such land.
The owner, tenant or lessee of such private road or driveway or private
property may move, or have moved, any vehicle stopped, parked or left standing
unattended on his or her private road, driveway or private property as above
prohibited without any liability for the cost of moving any vehicle, nor shall
he or she be liable to the owner of the vehicle for any damage done to such
vehicle in moving it, unless the owner, tenant or lessee of such private road
or driveway or private property was negligent in removing or authorizing the
removal of the vehicle. The owner of such vehicle shall be responsible to the
persons removing such vehicle for paying all removal costs. Any person who
removes any vehicle under the provisions of this section shall notify the State
Police of such action and, in addition, notify the Police Department.
(W. Va. Code 17C-14-13) (Prior Code, § 361.04) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.05 MANNER OF ANGLE AND PARALLEL PARKING.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway and with the curb-side wheels within 12 inches of the
edge of the street, except:
   (A)   Upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking,
vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such mark or
signs; and
   (B)   In places where and at hours when stopping for the loading or
unloading of merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used for the
transportation of merchandise or materials may back into the curb to take on or
discharge loads when the owner of such vehicle holds a permit granting him or
her such privilege, and such permit shall be either in the possession of the
driver or on the vehicle at the time such vehicle is backed against the curb to
take on or discharge a load, and it shall be unlawful for any such owner or
driver to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such special
permit.
(Prior Code, § 361.05) (Ord. 79-9, passed 9-18-1979) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.06 HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      A PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. A person who, as determined by a
licensed physician:
         (a)   Cannot walk 200 feet without stopping to rest;
         (b)   Cannot walk without the use of or assistance from a brace, cane,
crutch, prosthetic device, wheelchair, other assistive device or another
person;
         (c)   Is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that the
person’s force (respiratory) expiratory volume for one second, when measured by
spirometry, is less than one liter or the arterial oxygen tension is less than
60 mm/hg on room air at rest;
         (d)   Uses portable oxygen;
         (e)   Has a cardiac condition to such an extent that the person’s
functional limitations are classified in severity as Class III or Class IV
according to standards established by the American Heart Association; or
         (f)   Is severely limited in his or her ability to walk because of an
arthritic, neurological, orthopedic or other physical condition.
      COMMERCIAL FACILITY. A facility whose operations affect commerce and
which are intended for nonresidential use by a private entity.
      PLACE(S) OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. A facility or facilities operated by a
private entity whose operations affect commerce and fall within at least one of
the following categories:
         (a)   Inns, hotels, motels and other places of lodging;
         (b)   Restaurants, bars or other establishments serving food or drink;
         (c)   Motion picture houses, theaters, concert halls, stadiums or
other places of exhibition or entertainment;
         (d)   Auditoriums, convention centers, lecture halls or other places
of public gatherings;
         (e)   Bakeries, grocery stores, clothing stores, hardware stores,
shopping centers or other sales or rental establishments;
         (f)   Laundromats, dry cleaners, banks, barber and beauty shops,
travel agencies, shoe repair shops, funeral parlors, gas or service stations,
offices of accountants and attorneys, pharmacies, insurance offices, offices of
professional health care providers, hospitals or other service establishments;
         (g)   Terminals, depots or other stations used for public
transportation;
         (h)   Museums, libraries, galleries or other places of public display
or collection;
         (i)   Parks, zoos, amusement parks or other places of recreation;
         (j)   Public or private nursery, elementary, secondary, undergraduate
or post- graduate schools or other places of learning and day care centers,
senior citizen centers, homeless shelters, food banks, adoption agencies or
other social service establishments; and
         (k)   Gymnasiums, health spas, bowling alleys, golf courses or other
places of exercise or recreation.
      PUBLIC ENTITY. State or local government or any department, agency,
special purpose district or other instrumentality of a state or local
government.
      PUBLIC FACILITY. All or any part of any buildings, structures, sites,
complexes, roads, parking lots or other real or personal property, including
the site where the facility is located.
      REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD (PERMANENT OR TEMPORARY). A two- sided,
hanger style placard measuring three inches by nine and one half inches, with
all of the following on each side:
         (a)   The international symbol of access, measuring at least three
inches in height, centered on the placard, in white on a blue background for
permanent designations and in white on a red background for temporary
designations;
         (b)   An identification number measuring one inch in height;
         (c)   An expiration date in numbers measuring one inch in height; and
         (d)   The seal or other identifying symbol of the issuing authority.
      SPECIAL REGISTRATION PLATE. A registration plate that displays the
international symbol of access in a color that contrasts with the background,
in letters and numbers the same size as those on the plate, and which may be
used in lieu of a regular registration plate.
   (B)   A handicapped parking space should comply with the provisions of the
Americans with Disabilities Act Guidelines, contained in 28 C.F.R. part 36,
Appendix A, § 4.6. In particular, the parking space should be a minimum of
eight feet wide with an adjacent access aisle for vans having side mounted
handicap lifts. Access aisles should be marked using diagonal stripes or other
appropriate markings denoting that the space is a no-parking zone. Lines or
markings on the pavement or curbs for parking spaces and access aisles may be
in any color, although blue is the generally accepted color for handicapped
parking.
   (C)   A vehicle from any other state, United States territory or foreign
country displaying an officially issued special registration plate, placard or
decal bearing the international symbol of access, shall be recognized and
accepted as meeting the requirements of this section, regardless of where the
plate, placard or decal is mounted or displayed on the vehicle.
   (D)   Free stopping, standing or parking places marked with the
international symbol of access shall be designated in close proximity to all
public entities, including state, county and municipal buildings and
facilities, places of public accommodation and commercial facilities. These
parking places shall be reserved solely for persons with a mobility impairment
during the hours that those buildings are open for business.
   (E)   Any person whose vehicle properly displays a valid, unexpired special
registration plate or removable windshield placard may park the vehicle for
unlimited periods of time in parking zones unrestricted as to length of parking
time permitted; provided, that this privilege does not mean that the vehicle
may park in any zone where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited or which
creates parking zones for special types of vehicles or which prohibits parking
during heavy traffic periods during specified rush hours or where parking would
clearly present a traffic hazard. The privileges provided for in this division
(E) apply only during those times when the vehicle is being used for the
transportation of a person with a mobility impairment. Any person who knowingly
exercises, or attempts to exercise, these privileges at a time when the vehicle
is not being used for the transportation of a person with a mobility
impairment, in addition to any other penalty he or she may otherwise incur,
shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
   (F)   Any person whose vehicle does not display a valid, special
registration plate or removable windshield placard may not stop, stand or park
a motor vehicle in an area designated, zoned or marked for handicapped parking
with signs or instructions displaying the international symbol of access,
either by itself or with explanatory text. Such signs may be mounted on a post
or a wall in front of the handicapped parking space and instructions may appear
on the ground or pavement, but use of both methods is preferred. Handicapped
parking spaces for vans having an eight-foot adjacent access aisle should be
designated as “van accessible” but may be used by any vehicle displaying a
valid special registration plate or removable windshield placard. These spaces
are intended solely for persons with a mobility impairment, as defined in this
section; provided, that any person in the act of transporting a person with a
mobility impairment may stop, stand or park a motor vehicle not displaying a
special registration plate or removable windshield placard in the area
designated for handicapped parking by the international symbol of access for
the limited purposes of loading or unloading a passenger with a mobility
impairment; provided, however, that the vehicle shall be promptly moved after
the completion of this limited purpose.
   (G)   Signs erected in the fixture that designate areas as “handicapped
parking” or that display the international symbol of access shall also include
the words “(not to exceed state law) fine”.
   (H)   No person may stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in an area
designated or marked off as an access aisle adjacent to a van-accessible
parking space or regular handicapped parking space.
   (I)   Parking enforcement personnel who otherwise enforce parking violations
are hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of this section.
   (J)   A grace period is hereby established for individuals who, on the date
of adoption of this code section, hold special registration plates or removable
windshield placard bearing no expiration date. Said grace period shall expire
on the date as designated by the state’s Commissioner of Motor Vehicles, after
which time any undated registration plate or windshield placard is invalid and
subject to confiscation by any police officer of the municipality.
   (K)   To the extent any provision of any ordinance of the municipality is
contrary to the provisions of this section, the provisions of this section
shall take precedence and shall apply.
(W. Va. Code 17C-13-6) (Prior Code, § 361.06) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.07 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, or major part thereof, which
is inoperative and which has been abandoned on public property for any period
of time over five days, other than in an enclosed building or in a licensed
salvage yard or at the business establishment of a demolisher; or any motor
vehicle, or major part thereof, which has remained on private property without
consent of the owner or person in control of the property for any period of
time over five days; or any motor vehicle, or major part thereof, which is
unattended, discarded, deserted and unlicensed and is not in an enclosed
building, a licensed salvage yard or the actual possession of a demolisher;
provided, that a motor vehicle, or major part thereof, shall not be considered
an ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE if:
         (a)   The owner of the motor vehicle is storing the motor vehicle on
the owner’s property;
         (b)   The motor vehicle is being stored for the purpose of using its
parts on other motor vehicles owned by the owner;
         (c)   The owner owns other motor vehicles similar to the motor vehicle
being stored; and
         (d)   The owner is a business licensed to do business in the state and
not in the primary business of offering motor vehicles or parts thereof for
sale.
      ENCLOSED BUILDING. A structure surrounded by walls or one continuous wall
and having a roof enclosing the entire structure and includes a permanent
appendage thereto.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which is or was self-propelled, including, but
not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses and motorcycles.
      PERSON. A natural person, corporation, firm, partnership, association or
society and the plural as well as the singular.
(W. Va. Code 17-24A-1)
   (B)   Abandonment of motor vehicle prohibited. No person shall, within this
municipality, abandon a motor vehicle or major part thereof upon the right-of-
way of any public highway, upon any other public property or upon any private
property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property,
or upon property owned or controlled by that person, unless it be at a licensed
salvage yard or at the business establishment of a demolisher, or a business
licensed to do business in the state and not in the primary business of
offering motor vehicles or parts thereof for sale.
(W. Va. Code 17-24A-2)
(Prior Code, § 361.07) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.08 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park any vehicle upon any street within the municipality for
the principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale;
   (B)   Displaying advertising;
   (C)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs made
necessary by an emergency; and
   (D)   Relieving the crowded condition of any parking lot, used car lot,
automobile sales lot, repair garage, automobile sales agency or used car sales
agency.
(Prior Code, § 361.08) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.09 TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivering or pickup and
loading of materials in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
(Prior Code, § 361.09) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.10 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than a bus in a
bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (B)   The operator of a bus shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle upon
any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or
their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted as such, except
in case of an emergency.
   (C)   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop on a public street in
such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or
baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not
further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the
curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
   (D)   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon
any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated and posted
as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking provisions at
any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers.
(Prior Code, § 361.10) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.11 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations,
traffic signs or signals or a police officer.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 361.11) (Ord. 79-9, passed 9-18-1979) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.12 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this traffic code, and further testimony that
the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked was so parked by the defendant. A certified copy of
registration from the Department of Motor Vehicles shall be proof of such
ownership.
(Prior Code, § 361.12)
§ 75.13 PARKING OF TRUCKS, TRACTORS AND TRAILERS.
   (A)   No person, either as a driver or owner of such vehicle, shall cause to
be parked or permitted to be parked any tractor, tractor trailer or tank truck
on any street in the city zoned as a residential area, except for loading and
unloading.
   (B)   No person shall park any truck, trailer or other vehicle of a total
outside width, including any load thereon of more than 76 inches or a total
height, including any load thereon, of more than 78 inches on any street or
highway within the city for a period of time longer than two hours. Permission
may be granted by the Chief of Police in emergency or special situations.
   (C)   On narrow streets, the Chief of Police may declare no parking areas
when in his or her judgment such parking creates a hazard or unsafe conditions
in front of or adjacent to driveways.
(Prior Code, § 361.13) (Ord. 82-3A, passed 7-13-1982; Ord. 85-11, passed 10-22-
1985) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.14 FIRE LANES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY DEVOTED TO PUBLIC USE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Fire Chief, shall
establish fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use, where the
parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions may interfere with the ingress
and egress of Fire Department vehicles for the protection of persons and
property, such as at shopping centers, bowling lanes, theaters, hospitals,
churches and similar locations. The width and route of such lanes shall be
clearly indicated by official traffic control devices.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle in, or otherwise obstruct or cause to
be obstructed, any such fire lane.
(Prior Code, § 361.14) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.15 TRAFFIC CONTROL PARKING SIGN DIRECTIVES TO BE OBEYED; AUTHORITY OF
COUNCIL.
   (A)   At any place where an official traffic control sign is in place,
indicating that parking at such place is prohibited, or is prohibited during
certain hours of the day or days of the week or in excess of a certain period
of time, or is restricted to certain vehicles or certain uses, or is limited in
any other respect, no person shall stand or park a vehicle or permit a vehicle
to remain standing or parked at such place in violation of the prohibition or
limitation indicated by such sign.
   (B)   Council may designate streets and public places, or portions thereof,
within the city upon which or at which parking shall be prohibited, restricted
or limited in such manner and to such extent as may be considered necessary by
Council for the regulation of the use of such streets and public places in the
best interests of the public, and may direct the Chief of Police or other
appropriate city officer to place or cause to be placed traffic control signs
at such places to give notice of the prohibitions, restrictions or limitations
so imposed. Included within the meaning of this section, the following traffic
control signs, among others not specified herein, are the following:
      (1)   No parking at any time;
      (2)   No parking between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.;
      (3)   Two-hour parking;
      (4)   Parking prohibited except Sundays and holidays;
      (5)   No parking this side of street;
      (6)   No parking from here to corner;
      (7)   Bus stop;
      (8)   Safety zone;
      (9)   Physician parking only;
      (10)   Official cars only; and
      (11)   Other prohibitions, restrictions and limitations on parking as
determined by Council.
   (C)   In any case where, by state law, permission of the Department of
Highways or other state authority is required prior to erection of any such
traffic control sign, such permission shall be obtained prior to installation
of such sign.
(Prior Code, § 361.15) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Fines for vehicular parking violations shall be as follows.
Violation Fine
Violation                                    Fine
Blocking driveway                            $25
Blocking intersection                        $25
Double parking                               $20
Obstructing traffic                          $25
Overtime parking in marked places            $10
Parking in no parking zone                   $10
Parking on sidewalk                          $10
Parking within 15 feet of fire hydrant       $25
Parking within 20 feet of intersection       $25
Unlawful parking in alley                    $10
Unlawful parking in handicapped zones        $25
Unlawful parking in residential parking zone $25
 
(Prior Code, § 361.99)
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
75.06(F) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
      (2)   Any person, including a driver of a vehicle displaying a valid
removable windshield placard or special registration plate, who violates the
provisions of §
75.06(H) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
(Prior Code, § 361.06)
(Ord. 90-7, passed 10-16-1990; Ord. 99-03, passed 5-4-1999)
CHAPTER 76: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Residential parking
SCHEDULE I. RESIDENTIAL PARKING.
   (A)   Residential parking only is hereby established on the following
streets:
      (1)   Park Avenue from West 11th Street to West 15th Street;
      (2)   West 11th Street from Park Avenue to the Kanawha River;
      (3)   West 32th Street from Park Avenue to the Kanawha River;
      (4)   West 13th Street from Park Avenue to the Kanawha River;
      (5)   West 14th Street from Park Avenue to the Kanawha River; and
      (6)   West 15th Street from Park Avenue to the Kanawha River.
   (B)   “Residential Parking Only” signs will be erected and will be enforced
on the above- referenced streets 24 hours a day.
   (C)   Whoever violates the “Residential Parking Only” parking restriction
shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 361.16) (Ord. 99-03, passed 5-4-1999)
CHAPTER 77: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Two-way streets
SCHEDULE I. TWO-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   The street presently in the municipal boundaries of the city known as
23rd Street which is currently a one-way street, connecting Route 25 to 2nd
Avenue, shall hereafter be a two-way street and all street signs shall be
accordingly changed.
   (B)   All property owners abutting said street shall be notified of the
change.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 5-15-2007)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS AND FOWL
      
91.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
94.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
95.   FIRE PREVENTION
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS AND FOWL
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Cruelty to animals
   
90.03   Cruelty to dogs and cats
   
90.04   Nuisance conditions prohibited
   
90.05   Barking or howling dogs or cats
   
90.06   Hunting or molesting animals
   
90.07   Keeping of hogs and hog styes prohibited
   
90.08   Dangerous animals and reptiles prohibited
   
90.09   Keeping of domestic fowl and rabbits
   
90.10   Farm animals running at large, prohibited
   
90.11   Stables, pens and coops
   
90.12   City designated as bird sanctuary
   
90.13   Control of rabies and other diseases
   
90.14   Disposition of carcasses
   
90.15   Roaming at large
   
90.16   Designation of pounds; contracts with animal shelters
   
90.17   Impounding officers; destruction of rabid or vicious animals
   
90.18   Notice to owners of impounded animals
   
90.19   Impoundment not to bar prosecution
   
90.20   Prohibited interference with pound
   
90.21   Redemption of impounded dogs
   
90.22   Acquisition of equipment
   
90.23   Animal bites and observation of animal which has bitten another animal
or a person
   
90.24   Excrement
   
90.25   Muzzling dogs under proclamation by Mayor
   
90.26   Inducing dogs to fight or annoy persons
   
90.27   Seizing or enticing dog
   
90.28   Restraint of guard dogs and vicious/dangerous animals
   
90.29   Cooperation with other governmental bodies
   
90.30   License required
   
90.31   Interference with enforcement
   
90.32   Picking up animal waste
   
90.33   Unlawful restraint of a dog
   
90.34   Restriction on number of dogs
   
90.35   Restriction on number of dogs; special permit
   
90.36   Restriction on number of cats
   
90.37   Restriction on number of cats; special permit
   
90.38   Restriction on leaving an animal in a motor vehicle
   
90.39   Prohibiting leaving food outside for any animal during certain hours
   
90.40   Restriction on number of chickens
Domestic Animal Tax
   
90.50   Annual head tax imposed; dog tags
   
90.51   Certain dogs exempt from tax
   
90.52   Offenses concerning license tags
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to levy, see W. Va. Code 8-13-10
   Authority to prevent ill-treatment of animals, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(27)
   Authority to regulate the keeping of animals, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(26)
   Diseases among domestic animals, see W. Va. Code Art. 19-9
   Disposing of dead animals, see W. Va. Code 16-9-3
   Dogs generally, see W. Va. Code Art. 19-20
   Domestic animal tax, see W. Va. Code 8-13-10
   Hunting, see W. Va. Code Art. 20-2
   Vaccination of dogs, see W. Va. Code Art. 19-20A
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any live creature, both domestic and wild, except humans. ANIMAL
includes fowl, fish and reptiles.
   ANIMAL WARDEN. The person designated as such by the Mayor and Council.
   AT LARGE. Any animal or fowl when not upon property owned or lawfully
occupied by its keeper, or when upon the property of another without the
consent of the owner or lawful occupant of such property, shall be deemed to be
AT LARGE unless such animal or fowl is held on a leash or otherwise under the
effective control of a responsible person.
   CAT. Includes all members of the feline family, of either sex, unless
otherwise specified hereinafter.
   DOG. Includes female dogs as well as male dogs, and pups as well as adults.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Includes dogs, cats, domesticated sheep, horses, cattle,
goats, swine, fowl, ducks, geese, turkeys, confined domestic hares and rabbits,
pheasants, and other birds and animals raised and/or maintained in confinement.
   GUARD OR ATTACK DOG. A dog trained to attack on command or to protect
persons or property, and who will cease to attack upon command.
   KEEPER. Any person owning or having possession or custody of an animal or
fowl or any person keeping, harboring or caring for an animal or fowl shall be
deemed to be the keeper thereof; thus, the owner of an animal or fowl shall
continue to be a keeper thereof even though another person may be harboring or
caring for such animal or fowl and is likewise a KEEPER thereof.
   MUZZLE. A device constructed of strong, soft material or of metal, designed
to fasten over the mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from biting any
person or other animal.
   OWNER. Any person having temporary or permanent custody of, sheltering or
having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or having property rights
to, any animal covered by this subchapter. An animal shall be deemed to be
HARBORED if it is fed or sheltered for three or more consecutive days.
   VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal that attacks, bites or physically
injures human beings, domestic animals or livestock without adequate
provocation, or which, because of a natural disposition, temperament or
training, has a known propensity to attack, bite or physically injure human
beings, domestic animals or livestock. Any wild animal or any animal that
without provocation has bitten or attacked a human being or other animal shall
be prima facie presumed VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any live monkey, nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, fox,
leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal that can
normally be found in the wild state. The term WILD ANIMAL does not include:
domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals); domestic
cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays); farm animals; rodents; any
hybrid animal that is part wild; and captive-bred species of common cage birds.
(Prior Code, § 505.005) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-21-2004; Ord. 06-02, passed 6-27-
2006)
§ 90.02 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall cruelly mistreat, abandon or withhold proper
sustenance, including food, water, shelter or medical treatment necessary to
sustain normal health and fitness or to end suffering or abandon any animal to
die, or use, train or possess any domesticated animal for the purpose of
seizing, detaining or maltreating any other domesticated animal.
   (B)   No person, other than a licensed veterinarian or a person acting under
the direction or with the approval of a licensed veterinarian, shall knowingly
and willfully administer or cause to be administered to any animal
participating in any contest any controlled substance or any other drug for the
purpose of altering or otherwise affecting such animal’s performance.
   (C)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall forfeit his
or her interest in any such animal and all interest in such animal shall vest
in the humane society or county pound of the county in which the conviction was
rendered, and such person shall, in addition to any fine imposed, be liable for
any costs incurred or to be incurred by the humane society or county pound as a
result.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE has the same
meaning ascribed to it by W. Va. Code 60A-1-101(d).
   (E)   The provisions of this section do not apply to lawful acts of hunting,
fishing, trapping or animal training or farm livestock, poultry, gaming fowl or
wildlife kept in private or licensed game farms if kept and maintained
according to usual and accepted standards of livestock, poultry, gaming fowl or
wildlife or game farm production and management, nor to humane use of animals
or activities regulated under and in conformity with the provisions of 7 U.S.C.
§§ 2131 et seq. and the regulations promulgated thereunder, as both such
statutes and regulations are in effect on the effective date of this section.
(W. Va. Code 61-8-19) (Prior Code, § 505.01) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 CRUELTY TO DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   No person shall cruelly, or needlessly beat, torture, torment,
mutilate, kill or willfully deprive necessary sustenance, to any dog or cat,
irrespective of whether any such dog or cat is his or her own or that of
another person.
   (B)   No person shall impound or confine any dog or cat in any place
unprotected from the elements or fail to supply the same with a sufficient
quantity of food and water, or abandon to die any maimed, sick or diseased dog
or cat or be engaged in or employed at dogfighting, or pitting one dog or cat
to fight against another dog or cat or any similar cruelty to any dog or cat,
or receive money for the admission of any person, or use, train or possess a
dog or cat for the purpose of seizing, detaining or maltreating any other dog
or cat.
(W. Va. Code 61-8-19a) (Prior Code, § 505.02) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the municipality so as
to create noxious, or offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which are a
menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public.
(Prior Code, § 505.03) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS OR CATS.
   No person shall keep or harbor any dog or cat within the municipality which,
by frequent and habitual barking, howling, squalling, crying or yelping,
creates unreasonably loud and disturbing noises of such a character, intensity
and duration as to disturb the peace, quiet and good order of the municipality.
Any person who shall allow any dog or cat habitually to remain, be lodged or
fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure, which he or she occupies
or owns, shall be considered as harboring such dog or cat.
(Prior Code, § 505.04) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 HUNTING OR MOLESTING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall hunt, kill or attempt to kill any animal or fowl by
the use of firearms, bow and arrow, air rifle or any other means within the
corporate limits of the municipality.
   (B)   No person shall pursue or molest in any manner, any animal, bird or
fowl within the corporate limits of the city, except that any legally
constituted enforcement officer or other person designated by the Chief of
Police may hunt, pursue, catch and kill in an humane manner any nuisance
animals.
(Prior Code, § 505.05) (Ord. 83-18, passed 12-6-1983) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 KEEPING OF HOGS AND HOG STYES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No owner, occupant or person in charge of any lot or premises within
the city shall breed, raise, keep or maintain or permit to be bred, raised,
kept or maintained thereon, any hog, pig or swine.
   (B)   No owner, occupant or person in charge of any lot or premises within
the city shall keep, maintain, or permit to be kept or maintained thereon, any
hog sty, hog pen or other structure or enclosure of like kind used for the
purpose of keeping, herding and feeding hogs.
(Prior Code, § 505.06) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 DANGEROUS ANIMALS AND REPTILES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep or harbor within the city any panther, wildcat or
bobcat, bear or other wild animal of a species normally dangerous to human
beings, or any skunk from which the perineal glands have not been removed, or
any venomous reptile or any snake of a constrictor species, except pursuant to
authority of a city license or permit which may be issued under the provisions
of this code or other city ordinance or by special action of Council.
(Prior Code, § 505.07) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 KEEPING OF DOMESTIC FOWL AND RABBITS.
   (A)   No person shall keep any kind of domestic fowl or pigeons or any breed
of rabbits within the city except upon compliance with the following
conditions.
      (1)   No such fowl, pigeon or rabbit shall be kept except confined upon
the premises of the owner.
      (2)   No such fowl, pigeon or rabbit shall be kept closer than 25 feet to
any structure owned by another and used for human habitation, occupation or
assembly.
      (3)   The housing in which any such fowl, pigeon or rabbit is kept shall
be dry, well ventilated and exposed to sunlight, clean and free from noxious
odors at all times, cleaned and sprayed as often as necessary to keep the
housing and such fowl, pigeon or rabbit free of lice, mites, vermin or other
parasites; and the droppings from the same shall be removed and disposed of in
a sanitary manner daily.
      (4)   Any such fowl, pigeon or rabbit shall be maintained by the owner
thereof at all times so as to prevent noxious odors; so as to avoid the spread
of lice, mites or any other vermin to the premises of others; and so as not to
interfere with the proper enjoyment of adjoining property by the occupant
thereof.
      (5)   The animal warden or his or her representative shall make
inspection of the premises where any such fowl, pigeon or rabbit are maintained
upon written complaint of any responsible person or at the direction of the
Mayor.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall apply to pigeons, fowl or rabbits
confined in coops in stores or to fowl, pigeons or rabbits brought on the
premises for a brief period not exceeding 48 hours for dressing or consumption,
nor shall the provisions hereof apply to pets maintained by any person; and in
no case shall any person maintain more than two such mature pets.
(Prior Code, § 505.08) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 FARM ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE, PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall allow any horse, mule, jack, hog, goat, cow, jennet,
ox, sheep or other cattle or barn-yard animal or for any fowl or poultry to be
at large in the city, and any such animal, fowl or poultry found in violation
of this section shall be subject to impoundment as provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   All such animals, fowl and poultry shall be restricted to the premises
of their owners or persons in charge, and no owner or person in charge of any
such animal, fowl or poultry shall permit it to run at large in violation of
division (A) above or shall permit it to be upon the premises of another
without the consent of such other person; provided that nothing in this section
shall be construed to permit any person to keep, harbor or maintain within the
town any pig, hog, shoat or other animal within the category of swine.
   (C)   If livestock injures a person or destroy the property of another
person while negligently trespassing, the owner of the livestock shall be given
an oral or written warning for the first offense. For a second offense within
six months of the first, the owner is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100. For a
third or subsequent offense within six months of the second or subsequent
offense, the owner is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500. Court costs as determined
by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(Prior Code, § 505.09) (Ord. passed 11-4-2025)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 STABLES, PENS AND COOPS.
   Each stable, pen, coop and other enclosure or place where any animal or fowl
is kept shall be so located and of such construction as to have sufficient
sanitary drainage to keep it dry at all times; and it shall be the duty of each
person owning, harboring or keeping any animal or fowl to maintain such
enclosure or other place where such animal or fowl is kept in a clean and
sanitary condition at all times, free of any unwholesome or offensive
substance, liquid or odor and so as not to constitute a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 505.10)
§ 90.12 CITY DESIGNATED AS BIRD SANCTUARY.
   (A)   The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is
hereby designated as a bird sanctuary and provides protection to state and
federally protected bird species.
   (B)   No person shall trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest state
or federally protected bird species or their nests; provided that if such
species are found to constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property, the
city shall seek assistance from the appropriate state and/or federal wildlife
agencies to resolve such nuisance bird situations in such a manner as is deemed
advisable by such authorities under the supervision of the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 505.11) (Ord. 07-01, passed 3-20-2007) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.13 CONTROL OF RABIES AND OTHER DISEASES.
   (A)   All owned dogs and cats must be vaccinated against rabies by six
months of age. After the initial vaccination produces a three-year immunity,
follow-up boosters are required.
   (B)   A licensed veterinarian or qualified person must administer the
vaccine. Records shall be maintained, and the owner shall be provided and shall
retain a tag demonstrating a rabies vaccination has been administered.
   (C)   Each owner or person in charge of any animal known to have or
suspected of having rabies or any other communicable disease, or known to have
been bitten by another animal having or suspected of having any such disease
shall forthwith take such animal to a veterinarian for confinement and
observation or securely confine such animal on his or her own premises, and in
either case, notify the Health Officer of the county wherein his or her
premises is located without delay, and he or she shall then obey the directives
given him or her by the County Health Officer. Animals so confined shall be
destroyed in a humane manner upon the finding of a veterinarian that they have
rabies or some other incurable communicable disease, and no animal shall be
released from such confinement until found by a veterinarian to be free of
rabies and other communicable disease.
   (D)   Rabid animals found at large within the city shall be shot and killed
forthwith by the Animal Warden or by any police officer.
   (E)   Any person having knowledge of an animal known to have or suspected of
having rabies or any other communicable disease shall forthwith notify the
Animal Warden or Chief of Police. If the owner or person in charge of such
animal can be found without undue delay, he or she shall be notified by the
Animal Warden or Chief of Police to comply with the provisions of division(C)
above forthwith; otherwise, such animal shall be destroyed by shooting.
   (F)   If the animal is not confined and quarantined as directed in division
(C) above, the humane officer, dog warden or sheriff may cause the animal to be
placed in the custody and care of a licensed veterinarian for that purpose at
the owner’s expense.
   (G)   The penalty for any violation of this section is a fine of $50. Court
costs as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(Prior Code, § 505.12) (Ord. passed 11-4-2025)
§ 90.14 DISPOSITION OF CARCASSES.
   (A)   When an animal or fowl dies within the city, its owner or the person
in charge thereof, upon knowledge of its death, whether death occurred on his
or her own premises or elsewhere, shall without delay bury the carcass of such
animal or fowl or otherwise dispose thereof in a lawful and sanitary manner so
that such carcass shall not become a public nuisance, and failure to do so
shall constitute an offense.
   (B)   When the owner or occupant of any premises in the city ascertains that
the carcass of an animal or fowl is upon his or her premises, he or she shall
forthwith notify the owner or person in charge of such animal or fowl, if known
to him or her, and if such owner or person in charge be unknown, he or she
shall without delay bury or otherwise dispose of such carcass in a lawful and
sanitary manner so that such carcass shall not become a public nuisance, and
failure to do so shall constitute an offense.
   (C)   Animal and fowl carcasses found upon the streets or sidewalks or in
other public places shall be taken up under the direction of a city officer
designated by the Mayor and shall be buried or otherwise disposed of in a
lawful and sanitary manner so that such carcass shall not become a public
nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 505.13)
§ 90.15 ROAMING AT LARGE.
   (A)   Dogs roaming at large. The owner of a dog or person harboring or
keeping a dog shall not allow such dog to roam at large in the city. The owner
of a dog or person harboring or keeping a dog shall confine such dog at the
owner’s premises or the premises of such person harboring or keeping such dog.
No person shall take any dog onto the street, sidewalks or public places of the
city unless the dog shall be upon a leash or under effective control. Any dog
found roaming at large in violation of this section shall be seized by the
humane officer and forthwith impounded.
   (B)   Cats roaming at large. No owner or keeper of any cat shall permit it
to roam at large within the city at any time, except on the property owned or
occupied by the owner of such cat. Any cat found roaming at large in violation
of this section shall be seized by the animal warden and forthwith impounded.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100. If
a dog or cat is impounded, the owner is responsible for paying any impoundment
expenses resulting therefrom, which may include boarding fees. Court costs as
determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(Ord. 06-02, passed 6-27-2006; Ord. passed 11-4-2025)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 DESIGNATION OF POUNDS; CONTRACTS WITH ANIMAL SHELTERS.
   Council or the Mayor, with the approval of Council, may designate any
suitable place within Kanawha or Putnam Counties, either or both, as a place
for impoundment of animals or fowl which are subject to impoundment by the
city; including, but not limited to the Kanawha-Charleston Humane Society
Animal Shelters; and may contract with the owner, manager or operator of any
such pound for the care and subsistence of animals and fowl impounded pursuant
to the provisions of this subchapter and for their redemption, or other
disposition when not redeemed by their owners or other persons entitled to
their custody, in any manner not inconsistent with state law, this code or
other ordinance of this city. Each contract entered into pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall be approved as to form and legality by the
City Attorney and shall be maintained on file in the office of the City
Recorder so long as it remains in effect.
(Prior Code, § 505.15)
§ 90.17 IMPOUNDING OFFICERS; DESTRUCTION OF RABID OR VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   It shall be the primary responsibility of the Animal Warden and an
incidental duty of police officers when the Animal Warden is not readily
available upon call, to take up and impound any animal or fowl found running at
large contrary to any provision of this subchapter or which is otherwise
subject to impoundment, in a pound designated for such purpose by the city;
provided, that if an animal found at large in violation of this subchapter is
rabid, vicious or otherwise constitutes a danger to human life or limb the
officer whose duty it is to impound such animal may destroy such animal by
shooting, if it cannot safely be captured and made secure.
(Prior Code, § 505.16)
§ 90.18 NOTICE TO OWNERS OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   If the owner or person in charge of any animal or fowl impounded under
the provisions of this subchapter is known to the impounding officer, the
impounding officer shall promptly notify him or her of such impoundment, so as
to inform him or her of:
      (1)   The animal or fowl impounded, and a description thereof;
      (2)   The date of impoundment;
      (3)   The place of impoundment;
      (4)   The reason for impoundment;
      (5)   The procedure for redemption of his or her animal or fowl;
      (6)   The costs for redemption; and
      (7)   The consequences of failure to redeem the impounded animal or fowl
prior to the time for other authorized disposition.
   (B)   If the owner or person in charge of any animal or fowl impounded under
the provisions of this subchapter is unknown to the impounding officer and
cannot be ascertained by reasonable effort within 24 hours, the impounding
officer shall promptly post upon the bulletin board of the City Police
Headquarters a notice containing all the information required by divisions (A)
(1) through (A)(7) above.
   (C)   Any dog seized and impounded as provided in §
90.17 shall be detained for a period of five days after notice of seizure has
been given, and if not redeemed by the owner, or by the person harboring such
dog within the period applicable, shall be disposed of in such manner and by
such person as the pound authorities shall designate.
(Prior Code, § 505.17) (Ord. 81-4, passed 6-2-1981)
§ 90.19 IMPOUNDMENT NOT TO BAR PROSECUTION.
   Neither the impoundment of an animal or fowl nor the sale thereof nor the
payment of any redemption fee shall serve to bar prosecution of any person for
the violation of any provisions of this subchapter which may have resulted in
such impoundment.
(Prior Code, § 505.18)
§ 90.20 PROHIBITED INTERFERENCE WITH POUND.
   No person, without proper authority, shall release or cause to be released,
any animal or fowl impounded pursuant to this subchapter, or to in any way
interfere with the operation or maintenance of the place of impoundment
designated by the city or molest or injure any animal or fowl therein
impounded.
(Prior Code, § 505.19) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.21 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS.
   (A)   The owner of a dog bearing a tag as provided in §§
90.50 to
90.52, which has been seized or impounded as provided in §
90.17, shall be entitled to redeem the dog by paying to the City Collector
pursuant to a statement furnished such owner by the Animal Warden in charge of
the dog a redemption fee as established by the animal shelter.
   (B)   Whenever more than one dog belonging to the same owner is impounded on
the same day, a single offense shall be deemed to have occurred. Otherwise,
each dog belonging to the same owner which has been impounded on separate days
shall be deemed to constitute separate offenses. The Animal Warden shall
maintain records of offenses committed by dog owners, and such records shall be
available for public inspection during regular office hours. In addition to the
above redemption fee, a boarding fee for each dog impounded shall be charged by
the Animal Warden for each day, or a fraction thereof, that the dog has been
impounded.
   (C)   The owner of, or persons harboring, a dog not bearing a tag which has
been seized or impounded shall be entitled to redeem the dog upon establishing
title thereto to the satisfaction of the Animal Warden in charge of the dog, by
securing a license for the dog (if such dog be not licensed), and by paying to
the City Collector pursuant to a statement furnished such owner or person by
the humane officer in charge of the dog a redemption fee for each day that the
dog has been impounded.
(Prior Code, § 505.20) (Ord. 81-4, passed 6-2-1981)
§ 90.22 ACQUISITION OF EQUIPMENT.
   The Mayor, subject to the approval of Council, shall require such equipment
as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 505.21) (Ord. 81-4, passed 6-2-1981)
§ 90.23 OBSERVATION OF DOG WHICH HAS BITTEN A PERSON.
   (A)   Every person owning or harboring an animal in the city, whether
licensed or unlicensed, which shall bite any person or other domestic animal
shall forthwith place the dog, at the owner’s expense, in the custody and care
of a licensed veterinarian for observation for a period of ten days, and comply
with the provisions of §
90.13(A).
   (B)   A humane officer shall seize the animal and shall secure the services
of the West Virginia Department of Health to test such animal for rabies with
any costs incurred to be paid by the owner.
   (C)   No animal shall be released until appropriate veterinarian texts show
the absence of rabies.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 505.22) (Ord. 81-4, passed 6-2-1981; Ord. passed 11-4-2025)
§ 90.24 EXCREMENT.
   Neither the owner of a dog or any person having charge of a dog, whether
such dog is on a leash or not, shall allow such dog in their charge to deposit
animal excrement or other animal wastes upon any public or private property or
otherwise damage any public or private property.
(Prior Code, § 505.23) (Ord. 81-4, passed 6-2-1981)
§ 90.25 MUZZLING DOGS UNDER PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR.
   Whenever it is made to appear to the Mayor that there are good reasons for
believing that any dog within the city is mad, he or she may issue a
proclamation requiring that all dogs shall, for a period to be defined in the
proclamation, wear good, substantial muzzles, securely put on, so as to prevent
them from biting or snapping, and any dog at large, during the period defined
by the Mayor, without such muzzle, shall be taken by the Animal Warden and
impounded as provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 505.24)
§ 90.26 INDUCING DOGS TO FIGHT OR ANNOY PERSONS.
   No person shall entice, induce, urge or cause any dog to engage in or
prolong a fight in the city, and no person shall induce or cause any dog to run
after, bark at, frighten or bite any person or animal lawfully passing along or
standing in or on any street or highway in the city.
(Prior Code, § 505.25) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.27 SEIZING OR ENTICING DOG.
   Except for persons duly authorized herein, no person shall entice any
properly licensed dog into any enclosure for the purpose of taking off its
collar, harness or tag, or, for such purpose, decoy or entice any dog out of
the enclosure or house of its owner or possessor, or seize or molest any dog
which is held or led by any person or bring any dog into the city for the
purpose of impounding and killing.
(Prior Code, § 505.26) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.28 RESTRAINT OF GUARD DOGS AND VICIOUS/DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Guard dogs.
      (1)   Every owner of a guard or attack dog shall keep such dog confirmed
in a building, compartment or other enclosure. Any such enclosure shall be
completely surrounded by a fence at least six feet in height and shall be
topped with an anti-climbing device constructed of angle metal braces with at
least three strands of equally separated barbed wire stretched between them.
      (2)   All anti-climbing devices shall extend inward at an angle of not
less than 45 degrees nor more than 90 degrees when measured from the
perpendicular.
      (3)   The areas of confinement shall all have gates and entrances thereto
securely closed and locked, and all fences properly maintained and escape
proof.
      (4)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs owned or
controlled by government law enforcement agencies.
   (B)   Vicious animals.
      UNCONFINED. As the term is used in this section, if such dog is not
securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or
structure upon the premises of the person described in division (a) below. Such
pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or
structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be imbedded in the
ground no less than two feet.
         (a)   No person owning or harboring or having the care of a vicious
dog shall suffer or permit such animal to go UNCONFINED on the premises of such
person.
         (b)   No person owning or harboring or having the care of a vicious
dog shall suffer or permit such animal to go beyond the premises of such person
unless such dog is securely leashed and muzzled, except that a vicious dog
shall not be required to be muzzled when shown either in a sanctioned American
Kennel Club show or upon prior approval of the City Manager.
      VICIOUS DOG. As the term is used in this section, includes:
         (a)   Any dog with a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, to
cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic
animals;
         (b)   Any dog which attacks a human being or a domestic animal on two
or more occasions without provocation; or
         (c)   Any PIT BULL TERRIER which is defined as any Staffordshire Bull
Terrier breed of dog or any mixed breed of dog which contains as an element of
its breeding the breed of Staffordshire Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire
Terrier as to be identifiable as partially of the breed of Staffordshire Bull
Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier by a qualified veterinarian duly
licensed as such by the state.
   (C)   The humane officer can remove a dog into the custody of a licensed
veterinarian at the owner’s expense if it is not properly confined. After
violation, the owner of the dog shall provide proper proof of confinement.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Ord. 04-03, passed 4-21-2004; Ord. 06-02, passed 6-27-2006; Ord. passed 11-4-
2025)
§ 90.29 COOPERATION WITH OTHER GOVERNMENTAL BODIES.
   In carrying out the intent and provisions of this subchapter, the city is
expressly authorized to enter into agreements with other municipalities and the
County Court of Kanawha and Putnam Counties for the purchase of necessary
equipment and supplies, employment of necessary personnel, operation and
maintenance of a dog pound, and all other matters relating to the provisions of
this subchapter to share the costs thereof with other municipalities and the
County Court of Kanawha and Putnam Counties on a joint and mutual basis.
(Prior Code, § 505.28) (Ord. 81-4, passed 6-2-1981)
§ 90.30 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Every person owning, maintaining or harboring a dog in the city shall comply
with all requirements for acquiring a dog license from the appropriate county,
whether it be Kanawha or Putnam County.
(Ord. 06-02, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.31 INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with any person authorized
or empowered to perform any duty under this subchapter, nor shall any person
attach a license tag to any dog to which it was not issued, or remove a license
lag from the collar of any dog without the consent of its owner.
   (B)   Except for persons duly authorized herein, no person shall entice any
properly licensed dog into any enclosure for the purpose of taking off its
collar or tag, or, for such purpose, decoy or entice any dog out of the
enclosure or house of its owner or possessor, or seize or molest any dog which
is held by any person, or bring any dog into the city for the purpose of
impounding and killing the same.
(Ord. 06-02, passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.32 PICKING UP ANIMAL WASTE.
   Neither the owner of a dog or any person having charge of a dog, whether
such dog is on a leash or not, shall allow such a dog in their charge to
deposit animal excrement or other animal wastes upon any public or private
property or otherwise damage any public or private property.
(Ord. 06-02, passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.33 UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT OF A DOG.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY. The City of Nitro, West Virginia.
      COLLAR. Any collar constructed of nylon, leather or similar material,
specifically designed to be used for a dog.
      OWNER. A person who owns or has custody or control of a dog.
      PROPERLY FITTED. With respect to a collar, a collar that measures the
circumference of a dog’s neck plus at least one inch.
      RESTRAINT. A chain, rope, tether, leash, cable or other device that
attaches a dog to a stationary object or trolley system.
   (B)   Unlawful restraint of dog.
      (1)   An owner of any dog or dogs maintained within the city may not
leave that dog or dogs outside and unattended by use of a restraint that
unreasonably limits the dog’s movement for a period of time longer than three
hours in any 24-hour time frame.
      (2)   All dogs shall be provided and enclosed shelter during extreme
weather conditions, including conditions in which:
         (a)   The actual or effective outdoor temperature is below 32°F;
         (b)   The actual or effective outdoor temperature is above 90°F; or
         (c)   A thunderstorm or tornado warning has been issued for the
jurisdiction by the National Weather Service.
   (C)   Movement too limited. In this section, a restraint unreasonably limits
a dog’s movement if the restraint:
      (1)   Uses a collar that is pinch-type, prong-type or choke-type or that
is not properly fitted to the dog;
      (2)   Is a length shorter than the greater of:
         (a)   Five times the length of the dog, as measured from the tip of
the dog’s nose to the base of the dog’s tail; or
         (b)   Ten feet.
      (3)   Is in an unsafe condition; or
      (4)   Causes injury to the dog.
   (D)   Exceptions. Division (B) above does not apply to:
      (1)   A dog restrained to a running line, pulley or trolley system and
that is not restrained to the running line, pulley or trolley system by means
of a pinch-type, prong-type, choke-type or improperly fitted collar;
      (2)   A dog restrained in compliance with the requirements of a camping
or recreational area as defined by a federal, state or local authority or
jurisdiction;
      (3)   A dog restrained for a reasonable period, not to exceed three hours
in a 24-hour period, and no longer than is necessary for the owner to complete
a temporary task that requires the dog to be restrained;
      (4)   A dog restrained while the owner is engaged in, or actively
training for, an activity that is conducted pursuant to a valid license issued
by this state if the activity for which the license is issued is associated
with the use or presence of a dog; or
      (5)   A dog restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly
related to the business of cultivating agricultural products, if the restraint
is reasonably necessary for the safety of the dog.
(Ord. 08-, passed - -) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.34 RESTRICTION ON NUMBER OF DOGS.
   (A)   No person shall keep or harbor more than three dogs on any lot,
premises, dwelling, building, structure, boat or living accommodation unless:
      (1)   Properly licensed as a commercial kennel or dog breeder in
compliance with the zoning ordinance;
      (2)   A female dog residing at the lot, premises, dwelling, building,
structure, boat or living accommodation gives birth to a litter of puppies;
provided, that all of the puppies shall be either sold or given to persons not
living at the lot, premises, dwelling, building, structure, boat or living
accommodation within 90 days after the puppies are born;
      (3)   Approved for a special permit under the provisions of §
90.35; or
      (4)   Previously granted a variance for the keeping of more than three
dogs from the Board of Zoning Appeals. The variance shall remain in effect
until such time as the property is no longer in compliance with the conditions
set forth in said variance.
   (B)   Any person keeping or harboring more than three dogs on any lot,
premises, dwelling, building, structure, boat or living accommodation when this
section is enacted shall not be in violation of this section; provided, that
the person can affirmatively demonstrate through use of written witness
statements from unrelated persons, veterinarian bills and other documentation
that all of the dogs were actually in residence on the premises, dwelling,
building, structure, boat or living accommodation when this section was
amended.
(Ord. 12-7, passed 10-16-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.35 RESTRICTION ON NUMBER OF DOGS; SPECIAL PERMIT.
   (A)   A person may keep or harbor more than three dogs on any lot, premises,
dwelling, building, structure, boat or living accommodation if a special permit
is obtained; provided, that the intent of the special permit application is to
allow responsible pet owners to keep or harbor more than three dogs if adequate
conditions exist in which the animals will not cause damage, hazard or
nuisance, or be a detriment to any persons or property.
   (B)   Any person desiring to keep or harbor more then three dogs shall
submit a written application for a special permit with a humane officer. The
special permit application shall include a copy of a site plan of the subject
property showing all structures, fences and open space.
   (C)   A humane officer may grant a special permit if the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The subject property is larger than 3,600 square feet, unless the
dogs are kept predominately indoors;
      (2)   The dogs must be kept indoors, or in a secure area with a fence of
sufficient height and durability to prohibit the dog(s) from escaping, or in a
secure area effectively controlled by electronic device; and
      (3)   Adequate shelter as defined by the humane association be provided
for each dog.
   (D)   Applicants shall not be eligible for a special permit if they are
known in the neighborhood or community for causing disruptions related to dogs.
   (E)   Special permits are nontransferable. A change in the number or type of
dogs, or changes in the residence or ownership of the dogs, shall require a new
special permit.
   (F)   The fee for a special permit shall be $50.
   (G)   A previously approved special permit may be rejected or revoked at any
time if the humane officer determines the issuance of a special permit has
caused damage, hazard, nuisance, dangerous conditions, or is a detriment to any
person or property.
   (H)   Any person aggrieved by the denial or granting of a special permit
shall have the right to appeal to the City Council.
(Ord. 12-7, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 90.36 RESTRICTION ON NUMBER OF CATS.
   (A)   No person shall keep or harbor more than three cats in any premises,
dwelling, building, structure, boat or living accommodation unless:
      (1)   A female cat residing at the lot, premises, dwelling, building,
structure, boat or living accommodation gives birth to a litter of kittens;
provided, that all of the kittens shall be either sold or given to persons not
living at the lot, premises, dwelling, building, structure, boat or living
accommodation within 90 days after the kittens are born;
      (2)   Approved for a special permit under the provisions of §
90.37; or
      (3)   Previously granted a variance for the keeping of more than three
cats from the Board of Zoning Appeals. The variance shall remain in effect
until such time as the property is no longer in compliance with the conditions
set forth in said variance.
   (B)   All cats shall be maintained within a premises, dwelling, building,
structure, boat or living accommodation, and shall not be permitted to roam
freely or trespass on another’s property.
   (C)   Any person keeping or harboring more than three cats in any premises,
dwelling, building, structure, boat or living accommodation when this section
was enacted shall not be in violation of this section; provided, that the
person can affirmatively demonstrate through use of written witness statements
from unrelated persons, veterinarian bills and other documentation that all of
the cats were actually in residence on the premises, dwelling, building,
structure, boat or living accommodation when this section was enacted.
(Ord. 12-7, passed 10-16-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.37 RESTRICTION ON NUMBER OF CATS; SPECIAL PERMIT.
   (A)   A person may keep or harbor more than three cats on any lot, premises,
dwelling, building, structure, boat or living accommodation if a special permit
is obtained; provided, that the intent of the special permit application is to
allow responsible pet owners to keep or harbor more than three cats if adequate
conditions exist in which the animals will not cause damage, hazard, nuisance
or be a detriment to any persons or property.
   (B)   Any person desiring to keep or harbor more then three cats shall
submit a written application for a special permit to the humane officer. The
special permit application shall include a diagram of the interior of the
structure wherein the cats will be housed, the layout and nature of the cages
or other devices to be used for maintaining control of the cats, a description
of how the structure will be heated, air conditioned and ventilated, and a
demonstration that the applicant possesses the means and ability to properly
care for the cats.
   (C)   A humane officer may grant a special permit if the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   There is sufficient space, means of ventilation, heating and air
conditioning within the structure wherein the cats will be housed to provide
for the proper care of the cats; and
      (2)   All of the cats shall be kept indoors at all times and not
permitted to roam freely outside the structure where housed;
      (3)   The applicant demonstrates the means and ability to properly care
for the cats; and
      (4)   The shelter provided for each cat at a minimum satisfies the
requirements established by the humane association.
   (D)   Applicants shall not be eligible for a special permit if they are
known in the neighborhood or community for causing disruptions related to cats.
   (E)   Special permits are nontransferable. A change in the number of cats,
or changes in the residence or ownership of the cats shall require a new
special permit.
   (F)   The fee for a special permit shall be $50.
   (G)   A previously approved special permit may be rejected or revoked at any
time if the humane officer determines the issuance of a special permit has
caused damage, hazard, nuisance, dangerous conditions, or is a detriment to any
person or property.
   (H)   Any person aggrieved by the denial or granting of a special permit
shall have the right to appeal to the City Council.
(Ord. 12-7, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 90.38 RESTRICTION ON LEAVING AN ANIMAL IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful to leave an animal confined in a motor vehicle
unattended for more than five minutes during extreme weather conditions;
provided, that extreme weather conditions means when the temperature outside
the motor vehicle is less than 30°F or more than 80°F.
(Ord. 12-7, passed 10-16-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.39 PROHIBITING LEAVING FOOD OUTSIDE FOR ANY ANIMAL DURING CERTAIN HOURS.
   No person shall leave or permit to be left out-of-doors food for any animal
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of any one day and 6:00 a.m. of the following
day, unless the area where the food is left is not accessible to non-
domesticated mammalian animals or predators.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2020) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.40 RESTRICTION ON NUMBER OF CHICKENS.
   (A)   No person shall keep or harbor more than six chickens on any premises
within the city; provided, that no person shall harbor or keep any roosters
within the city.
   (B)   All chickens shall be maintained within a coop that is enclosed within
a fence of sufficient height to prevent a chicken from flying out of the
enclosure.
   (C)   No chickens shall be permitted to roam freely or trespass on another’s
property.
   (D)   Any person keeping or harboring more than six chickens in any
premises, structure, or living accommodation when this section was enacted
shall not be in violation of this section; provided, that the person can
affirmatively demonstrate through use of written witness statements from
unrelated persons, veterinarian bills and other documentation that all of the
chickens were actually in residence in the premises, structure, or living
accommodation when this section was enacted.
   (E)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100;
upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined not more
than $200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Ord. passed 6-11-2024)
DOMESTIC ANIMAL TAX
§ 90.50 ANNUAL HEAD TAX IMPOSED; DOG TAGS.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed upon each person keeping within the city a dog
above the age of six months an annual head tax on each dog so kept by him or
her in the amount of $3 for each dog, whether male or female.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of each person who keeps within the city a dog
above the age of six months to report each such dog to the Assessor of the
county wherein any such dog is kept by him or her within the city at the time
the annual assessment of personal property is made; provided, that when any
person within the city acquires a dog above the age of six months, or when a
dog kept by him or her within the city attains the age of six months, such
person shall then report such dog to the Assessor of the county wherein such
dog is kept by him or her within the city.
   (C)   Each person reporting a dog to the County Assessor pursuant to
division (B) above shall pay to the Assessor the amount of the head tax
prescribed in division (A) above for each dog he or she is required to report,
and he or she shall then attach to the collar of each such dog the proper
registration tag furnished to him or her by the Assessor, and retain within his
or her possession the certificate of registration furnished to him or her by
the Assessor for each such dog.
   (D)   The annual head tax on dogs imposed by division (A) above is for a
fiscal year rather than a calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 719.01) (Ord. 81-6, passed 7-21-1981)
§ 90.51 CERTAIN DOGS EXEMPT FROM TAX.
   (A)   The head tax imposed by §
90.50 shall not apply to dogs in a licensed kennel or veterinary hospital.
   (B)   All seeing-eye dogs are exempted from the head tax imposed by §
90.50(A), but their owners or custodians shall annually apply for and be issued
dog license tags upon display of proper rabies vaccination or inoculation or
vaccination certificate as provided in §
90.50.
(Prior Code, § 719.02)
§ 90.52 OFFENSES CONCERNING LICENSE TAGS.
   No person shall attach a license tag to any dog to which it was not issued,
or remove a license tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of its
owner.
(Prior Code, § 719.03) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
90.01 to
90.39 for which no other penalty is provided shall be fined an amount not to
exceed state law for the first offense, an amount not to exceed state law for
the second offense and an amount not to exceed state law for each subsequent
offense.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates §
90.02(A) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a
term not to exceed state law, or both, for a first offense. Any person
convicted of a second violation of §
90.02(A) shall be imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law or fined an
amount not to exceed state law, or both. The incarceration set forth in this
division (B)(2)(a) shall be mandatory unless the provisions of (B)(2)(b) below
are complied with.
         (b)   Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, no
person who has been convicted of a second or subsequent violation of the
provisions of §
90.02(A) may be granted probation until the defendant has undergone a complete
psychiatric or psychological evaluation and the court has reviewed such
evaluation. Unless the defendant is determined by the court to be indigent, he
or she shall be responsible for the cost of said evaluation.
         (c)   In addition to any other penalty which can be imposed for a
violation of §
90.02, a court may, as a condition of probation, prohibit any person so
convicted from possessing or owning any animal or type of animal during the
period of probation.
      (3)   Whoever violates §
90.02(A) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
(W. Va. Code 61-8-19)
      (4)   Whoever violates §
90.03 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed state law, or both. In addition, the Humane Officer may remove
the dog or cat involved and place it in the pound and such dog or cat shall not
be returned to the owner or perpetrator of the act of cruelty, but shall be put
up for adoption to a desirable home or given into the care of a humane society
or upon the recommendation of a licensed veterinarian shall be humanely
destroyed.
(W. Va. Code 61-8-19a) (Prior Code, § 505.99)
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates the provisions of §
90.28 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed state law, or both. In addition, any vicious dog which attacks a
human being or another domestic animal may be ordered destroyed when in the
court’s judgment, such vicious dog represents a continuing threat of serious
harm to human beings or domestic animals. In addition, any person found guilty
of violating §
90.28 shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, veterinary expenses for
identification or certification of the breed of the animal or boarding the
veterinary expenses necessitated by the seizure of any dog for the protection
of the public, and such other expenses as may be required for the destruction
of any such dog.
      (2)   Whoever violates provisions of §
90.28 on a second occasion with the same dog shall be fined an amount not to
exceed state law or imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law, or both, and
shall be required to post bond with the city in the amount not to exceed state
law in consideration for being permitted to keep the dog, so long as the dog is
kept in conformance with the provisions of §§
90.01 to
90.39.
   (D)   (1)   The owner commits an offense if the owner knowingly violates §
90.33.
      (2)   A city police officer or animal control officer who has probable
cause to believe that an owner is violating §
90.33 shall provide the owner with a written statement of that fact. The
statement must be signed by the officer and plainly state the date on which and
the time at which the statement is provided to the owner.
      (3)   A person commits an offense if the person is provided a statement
described by the foregoing division (D)(2) above and fails to comply with §
90.33 within 24 hours of the time the owner is provided the statement.
      (4)   If a person fails to comply with §
90.33 with respect to more than one dog, the person’s conduct with respect to
each dog constitutes a separate offense.
      (5)   Upon being found guilty in the City Municipal Court:
         (a)   For the first offense, the owner shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed state law, and the owner shall be required to correct the
deficiency within 72 hours immediately succeeding the imposition of the
municipal court’s judgment;
         (b)   For each subsequent offense after the first offense, the owner
shall be punishable be a fine not to exceed state law, and the owner shall be
required to correct the deficiency within 72 hours immediately succeeding the
imposition of the Municipal Court’s judgment; and
         (c)   All fines levied and paid under the authority of division (D)(5)
(a) shall be used to defray the city’s expenses related to the humane treatment
of dogs.
      (6)   Section 90.33 does not prohibit a person from walking a dog with a
hand-held leash.
   (E)   Whoever violates any provision of §
90.39 for which no other penalty is provided shall be fined an amount not to
exceed state law for the first offense, an amount not to exceed state law for
the second offense and an amount not to exceed state law for each subsequent
offense.
(Ord. 08-, passed - -; Ord. 06-02, passed 6-27-2006; Ord. passed 10-6-2020)
CHAPTER 91: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
Nuisances
   
91.01   Subchapter is supplemental to other provisions
   
91.02   Where nuisances prohibited
   
91.03   Certain nuisances enumerated
   
91.04   Premises to be kept clear of stagnant water
   
91.05   Inspections, investigations and complaints
   
91.06   Right of entry; duty of occupants
   
91.07   Notice to cease and desist when activity constitutes nuisance
   
91.08   Notice to abate condition constituting nuisance; appeal
   
91.09   Recourse of city
   
91.10   Subchapter does not prohibit arrest
   
91.11   Procedures for the repair, closing or demolition of buildings unfit for
human habitation
   
91.12   Drug and gang houses, houses of prostitution and other disorderly
houses
Trash Accumulation and Disposal
   
91.25   Accumulation of rubbish
   
91.26   Disposal of rubbish
   
91.27   Rubbish storage facilities
   
91.28   Refrigerators
   
91.29   Disposal of garbage
   
91.30   Garbage facilities
   
91.31   Containers
   
91.32   Screening requirement; exceptions
   
91.33   Citation for violation
Garage Sales
   
91.45   Intent and purpose
   
91.46   Definitions
   
91.47   Hours of operation
   
91.48   Additional sales permitted
   
91.49   Pre-permit investigation
   
91.50   Display of sale property
   
91.51   Advertising signs
   
91.52   Property permitted to be sold
   
91.53   Permit required
   
91.54   Written statement required
   
91.55   Permit fee
   
91.56   Permit conditions
   
91.57   Public nuisance
   
91.58   Inspection, arrest authority of city police or other inspector
   
91.59   Parking
   
91.60   Revocation and refusal of permit
   
91.61   Exemptions
   
91.62   Violations
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(23)
NUISANCES
§ 91.01 SUBCHAPTER IS SUPPLEMENTAL TO OTHER PROVISIONS.
   Various nuisances are defined and prohibited in other subchapters of these
codified ordinances and it is the intent of Council in enacting this subchapter
to make it supplemental to those other subchapters in which nuisances are
defined and prohibited; and the provisions of this subchapter relating to the
abatement of nuisances shall be regarded as alternative methods and procedures
for the abatement of nuisances in those instances where other methods and
procedures for abatement are provided.
(Prior Code, § 1129.01)
§ 91.02 WHERE NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall cause, harbor, commit or maintain, or shall permit to be
caused, harbored, committed or maintained, any nuisance as defined by the
statute or common law of this state or as defined by this code or other
ordinance of the city at any place within the city, or at any place beyond the
city limits which is owned by the city or over which the city has a right-of-
way; or at any other place beyond the city limits, but within one mile thereof
and not in any other incorporated municipality, wherever the powers and
authority granted by this subchapter cannot be reasonably and efficiently
exercised by confining the exercise thereof within the corporate limits of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 1129.02) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 CERTAIN NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   The following acts when committed, or conditions when existing, within the
city or within the area surrounding the city and within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of Council as provided in §
91.02 are hereby defined and declared to be nuisances:
   (A)   An act done or committed or aided or assisted to be done or committed
by any person, or any substance, being or thing kept, maintained, placed or
found in or upon any public or private place, which is injurious or dangerous
to the public health or safety;
   (B)   All buildings, bridges or other structures of whatever character kept
or maintained or which are permitted by any person owning or having control
thereof to be kept or maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous, unhealthy,
injurious or annoying to the public;
   (C)   All trees and other appendages of or to realty kept or maintained or
which are permitted by any person owning or having control thereof to be kept
or maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous, unhealthy, injurious or
annoying to the public;
   (D)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water, and all foul or dirty water or
liquid when discharged through any drain, pipe or spout, or thrown into or upon
any street, public place or lot to the injury or annoyance of the public;
   (E)   All obstructions caused or permitted on any street or sidewalk to the
danger or annoyance of the public and all stones, rubbish, dirt, filth, slops,
vegetable matter or other article thrown or placed by any person on or in any
street, sidewalk or other public place, which in any way may cause any injury
or annoyance to the public;
   (F)   All sidewalks, gutters or curbstones permitted to remain in an unsafe
condition or out of repair;
   (G)   All stables, cattle yards, hog, sheep or cow pens or other places
where animals are kept or yards for poultry, permitted by the owner thereof or
the person responsible therefor to be in such condition as to become offensive,
annoying or injurious to the public;
   (H)   All houses, buildings, structures or enclosures used for special
storage of powder, dynamite or other explosive or highly flammable substances
or gases, except those maintained pursuant to permit issued by competent
authority;
   (I)   Any litter, trash, garbage or refuse or any abandoned unlicensed motor
vehicle or any part thereof, which is or may be offensive to the neighborhood
or citizens generally; and
   (J)   Any offensive or unwholesome substance or growth of grass, weeds or
brush upon any lot or parcel of ground. The nuisances described in this section
shall not be construed as exclusive, and any act of commission or omission and
any condition which constitutes a nuisance by statute or common law of the
state when committed, omitted or existing within the city or within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of Council as provided in §
91.02 is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 1129.03) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAR OF STAGNANT WATER.
   (A)   No person owning or in possession of any lot, house, building or
enclosure shall allow or suffer to exist in or upon such premises any stagnant
water, animal or vegetable matter or other substance liable to become putrid,
offensive, annoying or unhealthy.
   (B)   Persons owning or in possession of any real estate shall provide
proper and adequate drainage therefor so that no offensive, baneful or
disagreeable liquids shall flow or seep into any street. Any violation of this
section is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 1129.04) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 INSPECTIONS, INVESTIGATIONS AND COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief, the
Building Inspector and, if there be one, the City Health Officer, to cause
inspections to be made from time to time within the city and, when they deem it
in the interests of the city so to do, within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city as provided in §
91.02, to determine whether any condition exists or activity is being practiced
which constitutes a nuisance; and each such officer shall cause an
investigation to be made upon written complaint made by any responsible person.
In the absence of a City Health Officer, any public health officer having
jurisdiction within the city is hereby vested with the authority conferred by
this subchapter on a City Health Officer and he or she may exercise such
authority when authorized so to do by his or her own superiors.
   (B)   Each officer mentioned in division (A) above shall for the purposes of
this subchapter be designated as an enforcement officer.
(Prior Code, § 1129.05)
§ 91.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY; DUTY OF OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Enforcement officers shall have the right to enter upon private
premises for the purposes specified in §
91.05 upon proper identification and in compliance with all applicable
provisions of law.
   (B)   Unless it appears probable that advance warning would defeat the
purpose of such entry, occupants of premises to be entered shall be given
reasonable notice in advance, and in any case no owner or occupant shall
prevent such entry which is sought to be made in compliance with law.
(Prior Code, § 1129.06)
§ 91.07 NOTICE TO CEASE AND DESIST WHEN ACTIVITY CONSTITUTES NUISANCE.
   If at any time an enforcement officer shall find that an activity or
practice which constitutes a nuisance is occurring within the city or within
the area surrounding the city and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of
the city as provided in §
91.02, he or she shall promptly and by the most expeditious means notify the
violator to cease and desist forthwith.
(Prior Code, § 1129.07)
§ 91.08 NOTICE TO ABATE CONDITION CONSTITUTING NUISANCE; APPEAL.
   If at any time an enforcement officer shall find that a condition which
constitutes a nuisance exists within the city or within the area surrounding
the city and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as provided
in §
91.02, he or she shall give notice in writing to the owner, occupant or person
in charge of the premises upon which such condition exists, stating therein the
condition which constitutes a nuisance, and directing such addressee to remedy
the condition within the time stated in such notice, which shall be not more
than ten days; and no such owner, occupant or person in charge shall fail to
comply with the terms of such notice; provided, that any owner, occupant or
person in charge may, within two days from the service thereof, appeal to
Council, in which case the terms of such notice shall be stayed pending action
of Council, which shall be final; provided further, that if the enforcement
officer shall state in such notice that the condition which constitutes a
nuisance is such as to be an imminent hazard to the health, safety or welfare
of the public or any person within or near the premises upon which such
nuisance exists, then the addressee shall comply with the terms of such notice.
(Prior Code, § 1129.08)
§ 91.09 RECOURSE OF CITY.
   Upon the failure of any person to whom notice has been given pursuant to §
91.08 to comply with the terms of such notice, or with the terms imposed by
Council on appeal, as the case may be, the enforcement officer shall forthwith
direct the appropriate city officer to remedy the condition which is the
subject of such notice, and the expense incurred by the city in so doing shall
be charged to the addressee of such notice, as well as to the owner of the
premises which is the subject of such notice, jointly and severally, to be
collected as city taxes or in any other manner authorized by law for the
collection of money due the city. Abatement by the city of any condition which
constitutes a nuisance and reimbursement to the city of expenses incurred
thereby shall not bar prosecution for maintenance of a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 1129.09)
§ 91.10 SUBCHAPTER DOES NOT PROHIBIT ARREST.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit any police officer
from arresting any person for committing or maintaining a nuisance when such
arrest is made pursuant to law.
(Prior Code, § 1129.10)
§ 91.11 PROCEDURES FOR THE REPAIR, CLOSING OR DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS UNFIT FOR
HUMAN HABITATION.
   (A)   The city shall create an enforcement agency consisting of the Mayor,
the Municipal Engineer or Building Inspector and one member at large, to be
selected by and to serve at the will and pleasure of the Mayor. The ranking
Health Officer and Fire Chief shall serve as ex officio members of such
enforcement agency. It shall be the duty of the enforcement agency to cause
inspections to be made from time to time within the city to determine whether
any dwellings or other buildings are unfit for human habitation due to
dilapidation, defects increasing the hazard of fire, accidents or other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities or any other
conditions, whether the building is currently occupied or not. Any entrance
upon private premises for the purpose of making examinations to aid in the
enforcement of this section shall be made in such a manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to persons in possession; provided, that this
section shall not be construed as purporting to authorize an unreasonable
search and seizure prohibited by § 6, Article III of the State Constitution.
   (B)   The owner or owners of any dwelling or building under determination of
the State Fire Marshal, as provided in W. Va. Code 15A-11-5, as amended, or
under order of the city’s enforcement agency, shall pay for the costs of
repairing, altering or improving, or of vacating and closing, removing or
demolishing any dwelling or building. The city shall also have the right to
file a lien against the real property in question for an amount not to exceed
the assessed value of the property as recorded in the office of the County
Assessor, or to institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction
against the landowner or other responsible party for all costs incurred by the
city with respect to the property and for reasonable attorney fees and court
costs incurred in the prosecution of the action.
   (C)   Not less than ten days prior to instituting a civil action as provided
for in this section, the City Council shall send notice to the landowner by
certified mail, return receipt requested, advising the landowner of the City
Council’s intention to institute such action. The notice shall be sent to the
most recent address of the landowner of record in the office of the Assessor of
the county where the subject property is located. If, for any reason, the
notice is returned without evidence of proper receipt, then in such event, the
City Council shall cause a legal advertisement to be published once a week for
three successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county
wherein the subject property is located and shall post notice on the front door
or other conspicuous location on the subject property.
   (D)   In the event any landowner desires to contest any demand brought forth
pursuant to this section, the landowner may seek relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction. The landowner shall have the right to apply to the Circuit Court
for a temporary injunction restraining the enforcement agency pending final
disposition of the cause. In the event such application is made, a hearing
thereon shall be had within 20 days, or as soon thereafter as possible, and the
court shall enter such final order or decree as the law and justice may
require.
   (E)   All orders issued by the city’s enforcement agency shall be served in
accordance with the law of this state concerning the service of process in
civil actions, and shall, in addition thereto, be posted in a conspicuous place
on the premises affected by the complaint or order.
(Prior Code, § 1129.11) (Ord. 01-11, passed 9-18-2001)
§ 91.12 DRUG AND GANG HOUSES, HOUSES OF PROSTITUTION AND OTHER DISORDERLY
HOUSES.
   (A)   Any premises used for prostitution; illegal gambling; illegal
possession, storage or delivery of or trafficking in controlled substances, or
other illegal drug activity is hereby declared to be a public nuisance;
provided that no public nuisance or violation of this section shall be deemed
to exist unless:
      (1)   The property is used for two or more such offenses or incidents
within any 12- month period; and
      (2)   The offense for which the property is used is punishable by
imprisonment for a term not to exceed state law.
   (B)   Any person who owns, manages or controls any premises and who:
      (1)   Encourages or permits an illegal activity described in division (A)
above to occur or continue on such premises; or
      (2)   Fails to implement reasonable and warranted abatement measures
identified in the notice issued pursuant to division (C) below, or subsequently
agreed to, or other abatement measures which successfully abate the nuisance
within the 30-day period following the notice, or within any other agreed upon
period, shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed state law.
   (C)   The Chief of Police, Mayor or other authorized representative of the
city may bring an action to abate a public nuisance described by this section
in the City Municipal Court.
      (1)   The Chief of Police, Mayor or other authorized representative of
the city shall issue an order of abatement upon a finding of liability under
this section.
      (2)   The order of abatement shall require the defendant to take measures
reasonably calculated to prevent the recurrence of the illegal activity.
      (3)   The order of abatement may also authorize the issuance of search
warrants reasonably calculated to determine whether the nuisance has been
abated or whether the order has been obeyed.
   (D)   Each day that a violation of this section continues shall be
considered a separate and distinct offense.
      (1)   No person shall be found in violation of §
91.11(B)(2) unless the city proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the
abatement measures were reasonable and warranted, and that the defendant
knowingly failed to implement them.
      (2)   A person may be found in violation of §
91.11(B)(1) or (B)(2), regardless of whether an order of abatement is issued
under §
91.11(C), or in violation of §
91.11(B)(1), regardless of whether a notice has been given. A fine in
accordance with division (B) above may be assessed by the City Municipal Court.
      (3)   Upon a finding of liability under this subchapter, the defendant
shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
(Ord. 17-, passed 11-7-2017) Penalty, see §
91.99
TRASH ACCUMULATION AND DISPOSAL
§ 91.25 ACCUMULATION OF RUBBISH.
   All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure,
shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2020)
§ 91.26 DISPOSAL OF RUBBISH.
   (A)   Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean
and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers.
   (B)   Whenever rubbish, trash or other refuse shall be allowed to accumulate
upon any premises within the city in such quantities as to be a fire hazard or
detrimental to public health, the owner and person in charge of the premises
upon which such accumulation is found shall be jointly and severally
responsible for its removal and shall be required to remove or cause to be
removed such accumulation within 72 hours after receipt of written notice from
Code Enforcement Officer.
   (C)   If both the owner and the person in charge of such property fails
within the time indicated in the order or notice to comply with such notice,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall thereupon authorize and direct the Public
Works Department to remove such accumulations of refuse; and after the removal
of such refuse, the City Treasurer shall collect from the property owner the
amount of the expense to the city of such removal.
   (D)   The provisions of §
154.004 relating to collection of property maintenance fees shall be applicable
to the charges provided for under this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2020)
§ 91.27 RUBBISH STORAGE FACILITIES.
   The owner of every occupied premises shall supply approved covered
containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible for
the removal of rubbish.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2020)
§ 91.28 REFRIGERATORS.
   Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded,
abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the doors; provided,
that prior to being discarded or abandoned but while being retained at the
premises, any refrigerator or similar equipment not in operation shall be
stored with the doors removed and otherwise in accordance with the requirements
established in §
91.32.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2020)
§ 91.29 DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE.
   Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal
facility or approved garbage containers.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2020)
§ 91.30 GARBAGE FACILITIES.
   The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of the following: an approved
mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit; an approved incinerator
unit in the structure available to the occupants in each dwelling unit; or an
approved leakproof, covered, outside garbage container and on at least a weekly
basis deposit accumulated garbage into such containers for pick-up and disposal
by the city.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2020)
§ 91.31 CONTAINERS.
   The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall provide, and at
all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof containers provided with
close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the
premises for disposal.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2020)
§ 91.32 SCREENING REQUIREMENT; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The occupant of every dwelling shall store all materials, machinery
and equipment within a building or fully screened by way of a legal fence so as
not to be visible from the front of the residence, or from adjoining or
adjacent lands.
   (B)   The following are exceptions to the foregoing requirement:
      (1)   Laundry drying;
      (2)   Construction materials, machinery and equipment which is currently
being used on the premises;
      (3)   Landscaping and agricultural equipment and machinery which is
currently being used or intended for current use on the premises;
      (4)   House decorations or yard ornaments that are in current use; and
      (5)   Trash containers, provided they are maintained at the side or at
the rear of the dwelling.
   (C)   Fencing for the purposes of screening items that are stored outside a
structure shall be permitted and inspected for compliance with the zoning
ordinance.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2020)
§ 91.33 CITATION FOR VIOLATION.
   (A)   Upon passage of this section, the following procedures shall be
effective for the remainder of Calendar Year 2020, and calendar years
commencing on and after January 1, 2021 for enforcing violations of the
foregoing §§
91.25 to
91.32.
   (B)   When the Property Maintenance Inspector, upon finding the owner or
agent, including a lessee, having charge of a property has failed to maintain
the property as required by the foregoing §§
91.25 to
91.32, the Property Maintenance Inspector shall serve upon that owner or agent,
including a lessee, a citation for violation of this subchapter; provided, that
if the owner or agent, including a lessee, is not available or cannot be
located, the citation shall be served upon the property.
   (C)   The first citation of the calendar year shall be a warning citation
that requires the violation stated thereon to be corrected within five days of
issuance of the warning citation. Each citation issued in a calendar year
subsequent to the warning citation shall not require the issuance of an
additional warning citation.
   (D)   If the violation stated on the warning citation is not corrected
within the five days immediately succeeding issuance of that warning citation,
the Property Maintenance Inspector shall issue a citation that requires the
violation stated thereon to be corrected within the ten days immediately
succeeding the issuance of the citation.
   (E)   Issuance of a warning citation or a citation shall be prima facie
evidence of the violation indicated on the face of the respective citation. Any
person alleging he or she was improperly issued a citation may, within ten days
after service of the citation, file a petition for appeal of the citation or
payment thereof, along with the required bond, with the Municipal Court Clerk
in accordance with the following procedure.
      (1)   In order to properly and timely appeal a citation, the petition for
appeal shall be filed within ten days after service of the citation and the
alleged violator shall pay the required amount of the applicable fine in full
to the Municipal Court Clerk. The amount so paid shall be held by the Municipal
Court Clerk as bond pending an evidentiary hearing before and resolution of the
case by the municipal court. The Municipal Court Clerk shall issue to the
alleged violator a receipt showing the amount of bond paid.
      (2)   If any petition for appeal filed in accordance with this section is
not timely filed or is not accompanied with the required bond, the alleged
violator shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to appeal the
citation, and such petition shall be summarily denied as untimely filed.
      (3)   Nothing set forth above shall prevent the Municipal Court Judge
from finding, upon a proper showing, that an alleged violator suffers from
financial hardship, and, as a result waiving the requirement, that the bond be
posted as a prerequisite to filing the petition for appeal.
      (4)   Any petition filed with the Municipal Court Clerk shall be in
writing, on the form provided by the Municipal Court Clerk, and signed by the
alleged violator affirming that the contents of the petition are true and
accurate to the best knowledge of the alleged violator at the time of signing.
The petition for appeal shall state the facts and reasons in support of the
petition. Upon filing the petition for appeal with the Municipal Court Clerk,
the alleged violator shall serve a copy of the petition and receipt showing
proof of bond or waiver thereof upon the Property Maintenance Inspector who
shall receive the documents as a representative for the City Attorney.
      (5)   Upon filing a petition for appeal with the Municipal Court Clerk,
the Clerk, or his or her designee, shall place the case on the municipal court
docket, set the case for evidentiary hearing within 30 days from the date of
filing the petition, provide a notice of hearing to the alleged violator and
forward a copy to the Property Maintenance Inspector. Upon receipt of the
petition, the Property Maintenance Inspector shall cause a copy of the citation
at issue to be forwarded to the Municipal Court Clerk who shall file it as the
original complaint alleging the violation indicated therein.
      (6)   The Municipal Court shall treat the citation itself as the original
complaint before the Court, and shall treat it as prima facie evidence of the
violation alleged therein. At the close of all of the evidence, should the
Municipal Judge find against the alleged violator, the bond posted by the
alleged violator shall be applied as payment for the fine imposed for the
violation. In the event the Municipal Court Judge finds that a violator suffers
from financial hardship, the Municipal Judge may permit alternative sentencing.
Should the Court find in favor of the alleged violator, the bond shall be
refunded to the alleged violator by the Municipal Court Clerk.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2020)
GARAGE SALES
§ 91.45 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The intrusion of non-regulated garage sales is causing annoyance to
residents in residential areas and congestion of the streets in the residential
areas in the city.
   (B)   The provisions contained in this subchapter are intended to prohibit
the infringement of any businesses in any established residential areas by
regulating the term and frequency of garage sales, so as not to disturb or
disrupt the residential environment of the area.
   (C)   The provisions of this subchapter do not seek control of sales by
individuals selling a few of their household or personal items.
   (D)   The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained are enacted not
to prevent, but to regulate yard sales for the safety and welfare of the city’s
residents.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.46 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an
individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the normal course
of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which
was purchased for resale or obtained.
   SALE. All general sale, open to the public, conducted from or on a
residential premises in any residential zone, as defined by the zoning
ordinance, for the purposes of disposing of personal property including, but
not limited to, all sales entitled “garage”, “lawn”, “attic”, “porch”, “room”,
“back yard”, “patio”, “flea market” or “rummage”, “yard”, “estate” sale or any
similar phrase. This definition shall not include a situation where no more
than five specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such
sale specifically names those items to be sold.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.47 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Each permit shall be valid for only one calendar day. The sale can not begin
prior to sunrise, and must conclude by sunset the same day.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.48 ADDITIONAL SALES PERMITTED.
   If a yard sale is not held on the date for which the permit is issued or is
terminated during the first three hours of the sale because of inclement
weather conditions, and an affidavit by the permit holder to this effect is
submitted, the City Clerk may issue another permit to the applicant for a sale
to be conducted at the same location within 30 days from the date when the
first sale was to be held. No additional permittee is required. This provision
can be invoked only once per application.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.49 PRE-PERMIT INVESTIGATION.
   Before issuing a permit, the city may conduct an investigation as may
reasonably be necessary to determine if there is compliance with this
subchapter.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.50 DISPLAY OF SALE PROPERTY.
   Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the residence, in
a garage, carport and/or in a front, side or rear yard, but only in such areas;
however, a vehicle offered for sale may be displayed on a permanently
constructed driveway within such front or side yards.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.51 ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   (A)   Signs permitted. Only the following specified signs may be displayed
in relation to a permitted yard sale.
      (1)   Two signs permitted. Two signs of not more than four square feet
shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the residence where the
garage sale is being conducted.
      (2)   Directional signs. Two signs of not more than two square feet each
are permitted provided that the premises upon which the sale is conducted is
not on a major thoroughfare, and written permission to erect such signs is
received from the property owners upon whose property such signs are to be
placed.
   (B)   Time limitations. No sign or other form of advertisement, except
newspaper or other established media, shall be exhibited for more than two days
prior to the day such sale is to commence.
   (C)   Removal of signs. Signs shall be removed each day at the close of the
garage sale activities or by the end of daylight, whichever first occurs.
   (D)   Placement of signs. No signs shall be placed on or attached to any
utility poles, public right-of-way, public property, street signs or traffic
control sign.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.52 PROPERTY PERMITTED TO BE SOLD.
   No person shall sell or offer for sale, under authority granted by this
subchapter, property other than personal property subject to this subchapter.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.53 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No garage sale shall be conducted unless and until the individuals
desiring to conduct such sale shall obtain a permit therefor from the City
Clerk’s office.
   (B)   Members of more than one residence may join in obtaining a permit for
a sale to be conducted at the residence of one of them.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.54 WRITTEN STATEMENT REQUIRED.
   Prior to issuance of any yard sale permit, the individuals conducting such
sale shall file a written application to be provided by the City Clerk with the
City Clerk; at least five days in advance of the proposed sale, mailed
applications must be postmarked at least seven days in advance of the sale,
which application shall set forth the following information:
   (A)   The full name and address of applicant;
   (B)   The location at which the proposed sale is to be held;
   (C)   The date or dates upon which the sale shall be held;
   (D)   The date or dates of any other yard sales within the current calendar
year; and
   (E)   An affirmative statement that the property to be sold was owned by the
applicant as his or her own personal property and was neither acquired or
consigned for the purpose of resale.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.55 PERMIT FEE.
   There shall be an administrative processing fee of $2 for the issuance of
such permit. No other city tax, including the city business and occupation tax,
shall be levied on sales conducted in accordance with this subchapter.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.56 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   The permit shall set forth and restrict the time and location of such sale.
No more than four such permits may be issued to one residence and/or family
household during any calendar year. If members of more than one residence join
in requesting a permit, then such permit shall be considered as having been
issued for each and all of such residences. If any applicant owes the city any
fees, as defined in the municipal code, the permit will be denied until the fee
has been paid.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.57 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   The individual to whom such permit is issued and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the
premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such individual shall
permit any loud or boisterous conduct on such premises nor permit vehicles to
impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such
premises. All such individuals shall obey the reasonable orders of any member
of the Police or Fire Departments of the city, in order to maintain the public
health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.58 INSPECTION, ARREST AUTHORITY OF CITY POLICE OR OTHER INSPECTOR.
   A police officer or any other official designated by any city ordinance to
make inspections under the licensing or regulating ordinances or to enforce the
same shall have the right of entry to any premises showing evidence of a yard
sale for the purpose of enforcement or inspection and may close the premises
from such a sale or issue a citation to any individual who violates the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.59 PARKING.
   All parking of vehicles shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable
laws and ordinances. Further, the Police Department may enforce such temporary
controls to alleviate any special hazards and/or congestion created by the
sale.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.60 REVOCATION AND REFUSAL OF PERMIT.
   (A)   False information. Any permit issued under this subchapter may be
revoked or any application for issuance of a permit may be refused by the City
Clerk if the application submitted by the applicant or permit holder contains
any false, fraudulent or misleading statement.
   (B)   Conviction violation. If any individual is convicted of an offense
under this subchapter, the City Clerk is instructed to cancel any existing yard
sale permit held by the individual convicted and not to issue such individual
another sale permit for a period of two years from the time of conviction.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.61 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to or affect the
following:
   (A)   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction;
   (B)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials;
   (C)   Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations of the city or under the protection of the
nonconforming use section thereof or any other sale conducted by a
manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale would be conducted from properly
zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited in other ordinances; or
   (D)   Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, education, cultural or
government institution or organization when the proceeds from the sale are used
directly for the institution or organization’s charitable purposes and the
goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.62 VIOLATIONS.
   Every article sold and every day a sale is conducted in violation of this
subchapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The penalties for violating §
91.33 shall be assessed based upon the number of citations within any calendar
year: an amount not to exceed state law for the first citation; an amount not
to exceed state law for the second citation; an amount not to exceed state law
for the third citation, and an amount not to exceed state law for each citation
thereafter. All fines imposed by citations shall be due within ten days of
service of the citation.
   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
91.45 to
91.60 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law for each offense. A
minimum fine of an amount not to exceed state law shall be issued for a
violation of §
91.51.
(Prior Code, § 1129.99) (Ord. 06-03, passed 8-15-2006; Ord. passed 6-1-2020)
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
Noise Control
   
92.01   Declaration of policy
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Loud and unnecessary noises prohibited
   
92.04   Certain loud and disturbing noises enumerated
   
92.05   Measurement and control of noise
   
92.06   Application
   
92.07   Exceptions and special waivers
   
92.08   Penalties
   
92.09   Conflicts
Disorderly Conduct and Peace Disturbance
   
92.20   Disorderly conduct
   
92.21   Loitering on school property
   
92.22   Wearing masks, hoods or face coverings
   
92.23   Disturbing the peace
   
92.24   Riots, routs and unlawful assemblies
   
92.25   Breathing, inhaling or drinking certain intoxicating compounds
Controlled Substances
   
92.40   Possession of a controlled substance
   
92.41   Purporting to sell controlled substances
   
92.42   Hypodermic needles, syringes and similar devices
Administration and Law Enforcement
   
92.55   Refusal to aid officer
   
92.56   Obstructing or giving false information to an officer; fleeing
   
92.57   False fire alarm
   
92.58   False reports concerning bombs or other explosive devices
   
92.59   Impersonating an official or law enforcement officer
   
92.60   Attempts
   
92.61   Citation in lieu of arrest; failure to appear
   
92.62   Falsely reporting an emergency incident
   
92.63   False report
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Failure to comply with lawful order of police officer, see §
70.187
Statutory reference:
   Authority to maintain order, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(19), (44)
   Bribery and corrupt practices generally, see W. Va. Code Art. 61-5A
   Crimes against public justice, see W. Va. Code Art. 61-5
   Crimes against the peace, see W. Va. Code Art. 61-6
   Penalty limitation, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(57)
   Specific types of bribery, see W. Va. Code 3-1-1 et seq., 15-2-17 et seq.,
18-2A-9, 61-10-15 and 61-10-22
   Uniformed Controlled Substances Act, see W. Va. Code Ch. 60A
NOISE CONTROL
§ 92.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   The city, finding that excessive levels of sound are detrimental to the
physical, mental and social well being of the residents of the city as well as
to their comfort, living conditions, general welfare and safety, hereby
declares it to be necessary to provide for the greater and more effective
regulation of excessive sounds through the adoption of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 508.01) (Ord. 01-13, passed 9-25-2001)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on
a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The level so read is
designated dB(A) or dBA.
   CONSTRUCTION. Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair,
alteration, demolition or similar action.
   CONTINUOUS SOUND. A sound the intensity of which remains essentially
constant during a given period of time. CONTINUOUS SOUND shall be measured by
the slow response setting of a sound level meter.
   DAYTIME. Denotes the local time of day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:
00 p.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
Saturdays, Sundays and local legal holidays.
   DBA (DECIBEL-A-WEIGHTED). Sound pressure level as measured on the “A” scale
of a sound level meter manufactured in accordance with the specifications of
the American National Standards Institute, Inc. (ANSI), Type 2, ANSI-S.1,4
(1971), calibrated within two hours of being used for measurement. Unless
otherwise noted, measurements shall be made in the slow response mode of the
meter.
   DECIBEL (DB). A unit of sound pressure, equal to 20 times the logarithm to
the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference
pressure which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter).
   EMERGENCY. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action.
   EMERGENCY SIGNAL DEVICE. Any audible warning device, such as a gong, whistle
or siren or any air horn or any similar device.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an
emergency.
   IMPULSIVE SOUND. Sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with
an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of IMPULSIVE SOUND include
explosions, drop forge impacts and the discharge of firearms.
   MOBILE SOURCE. Any moving sound source on a public right-of-way.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined in the state’s Traffic Regulation Code or any
vehicles which are propelled or drawn by mechanical equipment, such as, but not
limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck- trailers, semitrailers, campers,
motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts, snowmobiles, mopeds, amphibious craft on
land, dune buggies, all-terrain vehicles or racing vehicles.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground,
but excluding a trailer.
   NIGHTTIME. Those hours excluded from the definition of “daytime”.
   NOISE. Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to
cause adverse psychological effect on humans.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which:
      (1)   Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals;
      (2)   Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities;
      (3)   Endangers or injures personal or real property; or
      (4)   Exceeds the applicable maximum permissible sound levels as they
appear in the table in §
92.05.
   NOISE SENSITIVE ZONE. Any area designated for the purpose of ensuring
exceptional quiet and shall include schools and churches while the same are in
use, any hospital and any nursing home; provided, that conspicuous signs are
displayed on the exterior realty of any such school, church, hospital, or
nursing home which clearly notify a member of the general public of its use.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm or any legal
successor, representative or agent of the foregoing.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, alley, sidewalk
or public space which has been dedicated for use by the general public and the
dedication of which has been accepted by the appropriate governmental entity.
   REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY. An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its
vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from
that owned by another person, but it does not include intra-building real
property division.
   SMALL POWER EQUIPMENT. Any motorized or engine powered device, including,
but not limited to, lawn mowers, lawn and garden tools, riding lawn tractors
and power saws, excluding other motor vehicles.
   SOUND. Vibratory disturbance (including an oscillation) in the pressure and/
or density of a liquid or gas or in the particular displacement of a solid or
liquid. Such disturbance takes place at a rate between approximately 20 and
20,000 hertz (cycles per second); and the physiological perception of such a
vibration or displacement.
   SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT. Any machine or device for the amplification of
the human voice, music or any other sound. SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT, as used
herein, shall not be construed as including a standard automobile radio when
used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning
devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on
other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.
   SOUND LEVEL. That which is measured with the “A” weighting network on a
sound level meter unless otherwise specified.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. The instrument, meeting the requirements of ANSI SI.4-
1971, Type II rating, used for making sound level measurements.
   SOUND PRESSURE. The instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and
the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by
sound energy.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. The intensity in decibels (dB) of a sound.
   STATUTORY SOURCE. Any sound source operating or occurring on any public or
private property, not including a public right-of-way.
   WEEKDAY. Any day Monday through Friday which is not a legal holiday.
   ZONING DISTRICT. Refers to the scheme of land use classification contained
in Chapter 152.
(Prior Code, § 508.02) (Ord. 01-13, passed 9-25-2001)
§ 92.03 LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued, any loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others,
within the city.
(Prior Code, § 508.03) (Ord. 01-13, passed 9-25-2001)
§ 92.04 CERTAIN LOUD AND DISTURBING NOISES ENUMERATED.
   The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in violation of §
92.03, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
   (A)   Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing
frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any
persons in the vicinity;
   (B)   Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;
   (C)   Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any
mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, snow
blower, small power equipment or similar device used outdoors in residential
areas between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day so as to
cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary;
   (D)   Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show
or sale;
   (E)   Engine repair and testing. It shall be unlawful for any person to
repair, rebuild or test any engine so as to create a noise disturbance;
   (F)   Brakes and exhaust. Compression release type engine braking systems
that produce a distinctive staccato sound system (Jake brakes), as well as
modified or defective exhaust systems such as straight stacks or gutted
mufflers, that emit more than 80 dBa as measured at 50 feet. The discharge into
the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion
engine, motor boat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device
which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;
   (G)   Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public
place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any
such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of
any such device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of
any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any
horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any
signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up;
   (H)   Loudspeakers/public address system.
      (1)   Using or operating for any noncommercial purpose any loudspeaker,
public address system or similar device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:
00 a.m. the following day, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise
disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise
sensitive zone.
      (2)   Using or operating for any commercial purpose any loudspeaker,
public address system or similar device such that the sound therefrom creates a
noise disturbance across a real property boundary or within a noise sensitive
zone; or between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. the following day on a
public right-of-way or public space.
   (I)   Radios, musical instruments and similar devices. Operating, playing or
permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum,
musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar device, which produces,
reproduces or amplifies sound:
      (1)   Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in
such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary
or within a noise sensitive zone (except for activities open to the public and
for which a permit has been issued by “appropriate authority” according to
criteria set forth in §§
93.45 to
93.58);
      (2)   In such a manner so as to create a noise disturbance at 50 feet
from such device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-
way or public space, or in a boat on public waters; or
      (3)   In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance to any person
other than the operator of the device, when operated by any passenger on a
common carrier.
   (J)   Yelling and shouting. Yelling, shouting, whistling, hooting or
generally creating a racket on public rights-of-way or public spaces between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. the following day so as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any business or residence,
or of any person in the vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 508.04) (Ord. 01-13, passed 9-25-2001; Ord. passed 1-21-2025)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 MEASUREMENT AND CONTROL OF NOISE.
   (A)   Noise prohibited. No person shall make, continue or cause to be made
or continued any noise in excess of the noise levels as set forth herein unless
such noise is reasonably necessary to the preservation of life, health, safety
or property.
   (B)   Measurement and control. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause
a sound from a stationary source which exceeds any sound level as set forth in
the applicable column in the following table titled “Maximum Permissible Sound
Levels” when measured at any point within any other property affected by the
sound. Measurement shall be made by a duly authorized individual who is
knowledgeable in the proper use of the measurement equipment. Measurement shall
be made in slow response, A- weighting, except in the case of impulsive sound
which shall be measured with an impulsive sound level meter, ANSI SI.4-1971.
Octave band measurements, where noted, shall be made with an octave band
analyzer.
 
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels from Stationary Sources
Zoning District Time of Day Continuous Sound (dBA) Impulsive Sound (dBA)
All residential All         60                     80
PRO
O-I
All business    All         65                     90
All industrial  All         70                     110
 
(Prior Code, § 508.05) (Ord. 01-13, passed 9-25-2001) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply in using any of the sound
equipment mentioned and described herein where such equipment is being used for
civil defense or in the event of a disaster or other emergency or is being used
by any governmental agency or at any public meeting.
(Prior Code, § 508.06) (Ord. 01-13, passed 9-25-2001)
§ 92.07 EXCEPTIONS AND SPECIAL WAIVERS.
   (A)   Exceptions. The following uses of an activity shall be exempt from
noise level regulations:
      (1)   Noise of safety signals and warning devices;
      (2)   Noises resulting from any authorized vehicle, when responding to an
emergency;
      (3)   Noises resulting from the provisions of municipal services;
      (4)   Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration
permitted by law and/or for which a waiver has been granted by the city;
      (5)   The unamplified human voice (except as specified in §
92.04(J));
      (6)   Parades and public gatherings for which a special waiver has been
issued; and
      (7)   Bells, chimes and carillons while being used in conjunction with
religious services, or for national celebrations or public holidays.
   (B)   Exemptions for time to comply. Upon good cause shown by the owner or
responsible party for any noise source, the Mayor shall have the power to grant
an exemption from the requirements of this subchapter in order to allow
sufficient time for installation of needed control equipment, facilities or
modifications to achieve compliance, not to exceed 30 days, provided that such
exemption may be renewed as necessary, but only if satisfactory progress toward
compliance is shown. A request for exemption shall be filed in writing with the
Mayor.
   (C)   Use exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from
noise level regulations:
      (1)   Lawn maintenance equipment when it is functional within
manufacturer’s specifications and with all mufflers and noise reducing
equipment in use and in properly operating condition between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.;
      (2)   Nonamplified crowd noises resulting from the activities such as
those planned by daycare centers, schools, governmental or community groups;
and
      (3)   Amplified announcements, electronically amplified announcements at
athletic or special events from 8:00 a.m. to 12:01 a.m.
   (D)   Special waivers.
      (1)   The Mayor shall have the authority, consistent with this
subchapter, to grant special waivers, provided, that no live bands shall be
allowed in single-family residence zoning districts.
      (2)   Any person seeking a special waiver pursuant to this subchapter
shall file a written application with the Mayor. The written application shall
contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or
activity for which the special waiver is sought into compliance with this
subchapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the
community or for another purpose.
      (3)   In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the Mayor
shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community and other persons of
not granting the special waiver against the adverse impact on the health,
safety and welfare of persons affected and the adverse impact of granting the
special waiver.
      (4)   Special waivers shall be granted by noise to the applicant and may
include all necessary conditions, including time limits on the permitted
activity. The special waiver shall not become effective until all conditions
are agreed to by the applicants. Noncompliance with any condition of the
special waiver shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to those
provisions of this subchapter regulating the source of sounds or activity for
which the special waiver was granted.
      (5)   The Mayor may issue guidelines defining the procedures to be
followed in applying for special waivers and the criteria in declaring whether
to grant a special waiver.
   (E)   Social gatherings and parties.
      (1)   Any person who is planning a social gathering or party at which it
is anticipated that the noise levels will exceed those set forth in §
92.05 may file a written application with the Mayor for a special waiver from
such noise levels.
      (2)   Any person seeking such a special waiver shall indicate in his or
her application to the Mayor the specific reason why he or she will not be able
to meet the established noise levels. The applicant shall also include a
written statement that he or she has personally contacted all residents of
properties within 400 feet of the property in question and none oppose the
special waiver being requested. For purposes of the preceding sentence, an
applicant will also be required to notify and receive permission from the
applicant’s landlord, if the property in question is a rental property.
      (3)   Should the applicant be granted a special waiver pursuant to this
section, it will be subject to the condition that any such special waiver will
expire at 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday evening and midnight on Friday
and Saturday evenings.
(Prior Code, § 508.07) (Ord. 01-13, passed 9-25-2001)
§ 92.08 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who violates §
92.03:
      (1)   Is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not more than $100;
      (2)   Upon a second conviction within one year thereafter, shall be fined
not more than $200; and
      (3)   Upon a third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not more than
$500.
   (B)   Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 508.08) (Ord. 01-13, passed 9-25-2001; Ord. passed 1-21-2025)
§ 92.09 CONFLICTS.
   In any case where a provision of this subchapter is found to be in conflict
with any provision of the municipal code existing on the effective date of this
subchapter, the provision which establishes the more stringent standard for the
promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail.
In any case where a provision of this subchapter is found to be in conflict
with any other provision of the municipal code existing on the effective date
of this subchapter which established a less stringent standard for the
promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people, the provision
of this subchapter shall prevail; and such other provisions are hereby declared
to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 508.09) (Ord. 01-13, passed 9-25-2001)
DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND PEACE DISTURBANCE
§ 92.20 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall, in a public place, a mobile home park, a public
parking area, a common area of an apartment building or dormitory, or a common
area of a privately owned commercial shopping center, mall or other group of
commercial retail establishments, disturb the peace of others by violent,
profane, indecent or boisterous conduct or language or by the making of
unreasonably loud noise that is intended to cause annoyance or alarm to another
person, and who persists in such conduct after being requested to desist by a
law enforcement officer acting in his or her lawful capacity.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MOBILE HOME. A moveable or portable unit, designed and constructed to be
towed on its own chassis (comprised of frame and wheels), and designed to be
connected to utilities for year-round occupancy. The term includes:
         (a)   Units containing parts that may be folded, collapsed or
telescoped when being towed and that may be expanded to provide additional
cubic capacity; and
         (b)   Units composed of two or more separately towable components
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of being separated again
into the components for repeated towing.
      MOBILE HOME PARK. A privately-owned residential housing area or
subdivision wherein the dwelling units are comprised mainly of mobile homes and
wherein the occupants of such dwelling units share common elements for purposes
of ingress and egress, parking, recreation and other like residential purposes.
      PUBLIC PARKING AREA. An area, whether publicly or privately owned or
maintained, open to the use of the public for parking motor vehicles.
(W. Va. Code 61-6-1b) (Prior Code, § 509.01)
§ 92.21 LOITERING ON SCHOOL PROPERTY.
   No person, not a student in regular attendance, shall loiter in or about any
school, school building or school grounds in violation of any posted rules or
regulations governing the use of any such school without written permission
from the principal.
(W. Va. Code 61-6-14a) (Prior Code, § 509.02) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.22 WEARING MASKS, HOODS OR FACE COVERINGS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person, whether in a
motor vehicle or otherwise, while wearing any mask, hood or device whereby any
portion of the face is so covered as to conceal the identity of the wearer,
shall:
      (1)   Come into or appear upon any walk, alley, street, road, highway or
other thoroughfare dedicated to public use;
      (2)   Come into or appear in any trading area, concourse, waiting room,
lobby or foyer open to, used by or frequented by the general public;
      (3)   Come into or appear upon or within any of the grounds or buildings
owned, leased, maintained or operated by the state or municipality;
      (4)   Ask, request or demand entrance or admission to the premises,
enclosure, dwelling or place of business of any other person within this
municipality; or
      (5)   Attend or participate in any meeting upon private property of
another unless written permission for such meeting has first been obtained from
the owner or occupant thereof.
   (B)   The provisions of this section do not apply to any person:
      (1)   Under 16 years of age;
      (2)   Wearing a traditional holiday costume;
      (3)   Engaged in a trade or employment where a mask, hood or device is
worn for the purpose of ensuring the physical safety of the wearer;
      (4)   Using a mask, hood or device in theatrical productions, including
use in mardi gras celebrations or similar masquerade balls;
      (5)   Wearing a mask, hood or device prescribed for civil defense drills,
exercises or emergencies; or
      (6)   Wearing a mask, hood or device for the sole purpose of protection
from the elements or while participating in a winter sport.
(W. Va. Code 61-6-22) (Prior Code, § 509.03)
§ 92.23 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   On any street, highway, public building, in or on a public or
private conveyance, or public place, engage in conduct having a direct tendency
to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such
conduct is directed;
      (2)   Willfully, or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, disrupt
any meeting of the governing body of any political subdivision of this state or
a division or agency thereof, or of any school, literary society or place of
religious worship, or any other meeting open to the public, if such disruption
prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of such meeting or has a direct
tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom,
individually, such disruption is directed;
      (3)   Engage in fighting, or threaten to harm persons or property
unlawfully;
      (4)   Make offensively coarse utterance, gesture or display, or
communicate unwarranted and grossly abusive language to any person, which by
its very utterance or usage inflicts injury or tends to incite an immediate
breach of the peace;
      (5)   Insult, taunt or challenge another under circumstances in which
such conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (6)   Hinder or prevent the movement of persons or vehicles on a public
street, road, highway right-of-way or to, from, within or upon public or
private property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, by any act
which serves no lawful and reasonable purpose;
      (7)   Create a condition which presents a risk of physical harm to
persons or property;
      (8)   Urinate or defecate in any public place or upon the property of any
other person, except this section shall not apply to the use of restrooms and/
or bathrooms;
      (9)   On any street or highway conduct himself or herself in a manner
annoying to persons passing by or occupants or residents of adjoining
buildings;
      (10)   Make, continue or cause to be made by the use of any horn, bell,
radio or loud speaker, or by the operation of any instrument or device, any
unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise of such a character,
intensity and duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of the community or to
be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, and no person shall
willfully conduct himself or herself in a noisy, boisterous or other disorderly
manner by either words or acts which disturb the good order and quiet of the
community. Nothing described herein shall be interpreted or construed to
prevent any constitutionally protected activity, including, but not necessarily
limited to, exercise of one’s constitutionally guaranteed rights of freedom of
speech or assembly. No person may be convicted under this section when his or
her sole intent for engaging in the activities for which he or she was arrested
was to exercise one or more of the rights guaranteed to him or her under the
Constitution of the United States or the State Constitution or to exercise any
other rights guaranteed to that person by law;
      (11)   Unlawfully attempt to commit an injury to the person of another or
unlawfully commit an act which places another in reasonable apprehension of
immediately receiving an injury; or
      (12)   Unlawfully and intentionally make physical contact of an insulting
or provoking nature with the person of another or unlawfully and intentionally
cause physical harm to another person.
   (B)   Nothing described herein shall be interpreted or construed to prevent
any constitutionally protected activity, including, but not necessarily limited
to, exercise of one’s constitutionally guaranteed rights of freedom of speech
or assembly. No person may be convicted under this section when his or her sole
intent for engaging in the activities for which he or she was arrested was to
exercise one or more of the rights guaranteed to him or her under the
Constitution of the United States or the State Constitution or to exercise any
other rights guaranteed to that person by law.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500; or
sentenced to jail for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both fined and sentenced
to jail. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 509.04) (Ord. passed 4-21-2015; Ord. passed 3-18-2025)  Penalty,
see §
92.99
§ 92.24 RIOTS, ROUTS AND UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   No person shall within the city engage in a riot or rout or take part
in any unlawful assembly.
   (B)   Riots, routs and unlawful assemblies shall be dispersed forthwith by
the city police and other law enforcement officers, and all persons present at
the scene of any riot, rout or unlawful assembly shall upon command of any law
enforcement officer to disperse, forthwith obey such command and peacefully
disengage themselves from such riot, rout or unlawful assembly and leave the
scene thereof, and persons who fail to obey such command shall be subject to
immediate arrest.
(Prior Code, § 509.05) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.25 BREATHING, INHALING OR DRINKING CERTAIN INTOXICATING COMPOUNDS.
   (A)   No person shall intentionally breathe, inhale or drink any compound,
liquid or chemical containing acetone, amylacetate, benzol or benzene, butyl
acetate, butyl alcohol, carbon tetrachloride, chloroform, cyclohexanone,
ethanol or ethyl alcohol, ethyl acetate, hexane, isopropanol or isopropyl
alcohol, isopropyl acetate, methyl “cellosolve” acetate, methyl ethyl ketone,
methyl isobutyl ketone, toluol or toluene, trichloroethylene, tricresyl
phosphate, xylol or xylene, or any other solvent, material substance, chemical,
or combination thereof, having the property of releasing toxic vapors. For the
purposes of this section, any condition so induced shall be deemed to be an
intoxicated condition.
   (B)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person who commits any act described herein pursuant to the
specific direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist
authorized to so direct or prescribe, including the inhalation of anesthesia
for medical or dental purposes; or
      (2)   To any alcoholic liquor or nonintoxicating beer as defined in W.
Va. Code 60-1-5.
(Ord. passed 4-21-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
§ 92.40 POSSESSION OF A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess a
controlled substance unless the substance was obtained directly from, or
pursuant to, a valid prescription or an order from a practitioner while acting
during his or her professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by
W.Va. Code Chapter 60-A. In conjunction with Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
W.Va. Code Chapter 60-A. Any person violating the provision of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $500 and or sentenced not more than 30 days in jail, or both fined and
sentence to jail. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the Uniform Controlled
Substance Act to the contrary, any first offense for possession of less than 15
grams of marijuana or synthetic cannabinoids as defined by W.Va. Code § 60A-1-
101(d)(32), shall be fined not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the
court shall be added to each conviction. The court can implement a short-term
probation and/or expungement.
(Prior Code, § 507.01) (Ord. 86-8, passed 4-1-1986; Ord. passed 4-15-2025)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.41 PURPORTING TO SELL CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   No person shall at any time sell any substances which the person purports to
be a controlled substance, as defined under Schedules I through V of Article
Two of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, W. Va. Code Chapter 60A, when in
actuality the substance sold contains no controlled substances. (Prior Code, §
507.02) (Ord. 86-8, passed 4-1-1986) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.42 HYPODERMIC NEEDLES, SYRINGES AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
   (A)   Sales regulated.
      (1)   No hypodermic needle, syringe or similar device, or disposable
hypodermic needle, syringe or similar device which may be used for subcutaneous
injection or for administering any drug or other substance into the human body,
shall be sold or dispensed to any person except by prescription, either written
or oral, as follows:
         (a)   Upon a written prescription of a practitioner licensed by law to
administer drugs;
         (b)   Upon an oral prescription of such practitioner which is reduced
promptly to writing and filed by the pharmacist; or
         (c)   By refilling any such written or oral prescription, if such
refilling is authorized by the prescriber, either in the original prescription
or by oral order which is reduced to writing and filed by the pharmacist. All
such pharmacists or legalized dispensers of such paraphernalia including, but
not limited to, the name of the purchaser (requiring adequate identification
thereof), the address of purchaser, date of sale, type of instrument sold and
number sold.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale of any
hypodermic syringe, needle or similar device, or disposable hypodermic needle,
syringe or similar device to hospitals, physicians, dentists, pharmacists,
industrial corporations and educational institutions or embalmers, or others
using such device in the legal course of their respective business or
profession; provided nevertheless, that such vendors or legalized dispensers
shall keep or cause to be kept accurate records for all such sales.
   (B)   Possession restricted. No person except a manufacturer of or
wholesaler, or retail dealer in surgical instruments, apothecary, physician,
dentist, hospital, veterinarian, nurse, industrial corporation, educational
institution, or intern shall at any time have or possess a hypodermic syringe
or needle or a disposable hypodermic syringe or needle or any instrument or
implement adapted for the use of habit forming drugs by subcutaneous injection
which is possessed for the purposes of administering habit forming drugs,
unless such possession be authorized by the prescription of a physician issued
in accordance with division (A) above.
   (C)   Destruction of discarded hypodermic syringes or needles. Every person
who in the course of his or her business or for whatever reason dispenses,
administers or uses hypodermic syringes or needles or disposable hypodermic
syringes or needles or other similar devices, and who discards any such
syringes or needles or other similar devices, whether used or not, shall cause
such syringes, needles or other similar devices to be destroyed prior to
discarding, whether used or not, by breaking them into at least two distinct
pieces or crushing them or otherwise rendering the syringes or needles
inoperable.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100.
Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(Prior Code, § 507.03) (Ord. 86-4, passed 4-1-1986; Ord. passed 3-18-2025)
Penalty, see §
92.99
ADMINISTRATION AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
§ 92.55 REFUSAL TO AID OFFICER.
   No person shall, when required by the Police Chief or any other officer,
refuse or neglect to assist him or her in the execution of his or her office in
a criminal case, in the preservation of the peace or in the apprehension or
securing of any person for a breach of the peace or in any case of escape or
rescue.
(W. Va. Code 61-5-14) (Prior Code, § 501.01) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.56 OBSTRUCTING OR GIVING FALSE INFORMATION TO AN OFFICER; FLEEING.
   (A)   No person shall by threats, menaces, acts or otherwise, forcibly or
illegally hinder or obstruct, or attempt to hinder or obstruct, any law
enforcement officer, probation officer or parole officer acting in his or her
official capacity.
   (B)   No person shall, with intent to impede or obstruct a law enforcement
officer in the conduct of an investigation of a felony offense, knowingly and
willfully make a materially false statement; provided, that the provisions of
this division (B) shall not apply to statements made by a spouse, parent,
stepparent, grandparent, sibling, half-sibling, child, stepchild or grandchild,
whether related by blood or marriage, of the person under investigation.
Statements made by the person under investigation may not be used as the basis
for prosecution under this division (B). For the purposes of this division (B),
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall not include watchman, state police or college
security personnel.
   (C)   No person shall intentionally flee or attempt to flee by any means
other than the use of a vehicle from any law enforcement officer, probation
officer or parole officer acting in his or her official capacity who is
attempting to make a lawful arrest of the person, and who knows or reasonably
believes that the officer is attempting to arrest him or her.
   (D)   No person shall intentionally flee or attempt to flee in a vehicle
from any law enforcement officer, probation officer or parole officer acting in
his or her official capacity, after the officer has given a clear visual or
audible signal directing the person to stop.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, VEHICLE includes any motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat, all-terrain vehicle or snowmobile, as those terms are
defined in W. Va. Code 17A-1-1, whether or not it is being operated on a public
highway at the time and whether or not it is licensed by the state.
   (F)   For purposes of this section, FLEE and FLEEING do not include any
person’s reasonable attempt to travel to a safe place, allowing the pursuing
law enforcement officer, probation officer or parole officer to maintain
appropriate surveillance, for the purpose of complying with the officer’s
direction to stop.
(W. Va. Code 61-5-17)
   (G)   No person shall refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order,
direction or signal of a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 501.02) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.57 FALSE FIRE ALARM.
   No person shall make, turn in or telephone, or by use of any means or method
of communication, aid or abet in the making or turning in of any alarm of fire
which he or she knows to be false at the time of making such alarm.
(W. Va. Code 15A-10-20) (Prior Code, § 501.03) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.58 FALSE REPORTS CONCERNING BOMBS OR OTHER EXPLOSIVE DEVICES.
   No person shall impart or convey or cause to be imparted or conveyed any
false information, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe such
information to be false, concerning the presence of any bomb or other explosive
device in, at, on, near, under or against any dwelling house, structure,
improvement, building, bridge, motor vehicle, vessel, boat, railroad car,
airplane or other place, or concerning an attempt or alleged attempt being made
or to be made to so place or explode any such bomb or other explosive device.
(W. Va. Code 61-6-17) (Prior Code, § 501.04) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.59 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICIAL OR LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall falsely represent himself or herself to be a law
enforcement officer or law enforcement official or be under the order or
direction of any such person. No person not a law enforcement officer or law
enforcement official shall wear the uniform prescribed for such persons, or the
badge or other insignia adopted for use by such persons with the intent to
deceive another person.
For purposes of this section, LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER and LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICIAL shall have the meanings set forth in W. Va. Code 30-29-1, except that
such terms shall not include members of the State Division of Public Safety and
shall not include individuals hired by non- public entities for the provision
of security services.
(W. Va. Code 61-1-9)
   (B)   No person shall falsely represent himself or herself to be an officer
or employee of the municipality, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the
duties, functions or powers of a municipal officer. No person not a member of
the Fire Department, for the purpose of such false representation, shall wear a
uniform or part thereof similar to the uniform worn by a member of the Fire
Department.
(Prior Code, § 501.05) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.60 ATTEMPTS.
   Every person who attempts to commit an offense, but fails to commit or is
prevented from committing it, shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
92.99(G) if the offense is punishable by confinement in jail.
(W. Va. Code 61-11-8) (Prior Code, § 501.06)
§ 92.61 CITATION IN LIEU OF ARREST; FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   (A)   A police officer may issue a citation instead of making an arrest for
the following offense: if there are reasonable grounds to believe that the
person being cited will appear to answer the charge.
      (1)   Any misdemeanor, not involving injury to the person, committed in a
police officer’s presence; provided, that the officer may arrest the person if
he or she has reasonable grounds to believe that the person is likely to cause
serious harm to himself, herself or others; or
      (2)   When any person is being detained for the purpose of investigating
whether such person has committed or attempted to commit shoplifting pursuant
to §
134.15.
   (B)   The citation shall provide that the defendant shall appear within a
designated time.
   (C)   If the defendant fails to appear in response to the citation or if
there are reasonable grounds to believe that he or she will not appear, a
complaint may be made and a warrant shall issue. When a physical arrest is made
and a citation is issued in relation to the same offense, the officer shall
mark on the citation, in the place specified for court appearance date, the
word “arrested” in lieu of the date of court appearance.
(W. Va. Code 62-1-5(a)) (Prior Code, § 501.07)
§ 92.62 FALSELY REPORTING AN EMERGENCY INCIDENT.
   A person is guilty of reporting a false emergency incident when knowing the
information reported, conveyed or circulated is false or baseless, he or she:
   (A)   Initiates or circulates a false report or warning of or impending
occurrence of a fire, explosion, crime, catastrophe, accident, illness or other
emergency under circumstances in which it is likely that public alarm or
inconvenience will result or that firefighting apparatus, ambulance apparatus,
one or more rescue vehicles or other emergency apparatus might be summoned;
   (B)   Reports, by word or action, to any official or quasi-official agency
or organization having the function of dealing with emergencies involving
danger to life or property, an alleged occurrence or impending occurrence of a
fire, explosion, crime, catastrophe, accident, illness or other emergency in
which it is likely that public alarm or inconvenience will result or that
firefighting apparatus, ambulance apparatus, one or more rescue vehicles or
other emergency apparatus might be summoned, which did not occur, does not in
fact exist;
   (C)   Reports to a law enforcement officer or agency the alleged occurrence
of any offense or incident which did not in fact occur or an allegedly
impending occurrence of an offense or incident which is not in fact about to
occur or false information relating to an actual offense or incident or to the
alleged implication of some person therein; or
   (D)   Without just cause, calls or summons by telephone, fire alarm system
or otherwise, any firefighting apparatus, ambulance apparatus, rescue vehicles
or other emergency vehicles.
(W. Va. Code 61-6-20) (Prior Code, § 501.08)
§ 92.63 FALSE REPORT.
   No person shall make or give a false report or false information to any
police or fire officer of the city.
(Prior Code, § 501.09) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
92.01 to
92.09 shall be punished in accordance with division (G) below if no specific
penalty is provided. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
      (2)   As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of a device,
instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of §§
92.01 to
92.09, which operation or maintenance causes discomfort, or annoyance to
reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort,
repose, health or peace of residents in the area, shall be deemed, and is
declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a
restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 508.99)
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates §
92.20 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
(W. Va. Code 61-6-1b)
      (2)   Whoever violates §
92.21 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed state law, or both, for a first offense. For a second or
subsequent offense, such person shall be fined an amount not to exceed state
law or imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law, or both.
(W. Va. Code 61-6-14a)
(Prior Code, § 509.99)
   (D)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
92.25 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term not to exceed state
law, or both fined and imprisoned.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
92.40 to
92.42 for which no other penalty is provided shall be fined an amount not to
exceed state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates §
92.41 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law. Subsequent violations
shall be punishable by a mandatory fine of an amount not to exceed state law.
(Prior Code, § 507.99)
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
92.55 to
92.63 for which no other penalty is provided shall be fined an amount not to
exceed state law or imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law, or both.
Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates §
92.55 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed state law, or both.
(W. Va. Code 61-5-14)
      (3)   Whoever violates §
92.56(B) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a
term not to exceed state law, or both.
      (4)   Whoever violates §
92.56(D) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law and shall be
imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law.
(W. Va. Code 61-5-17)
      (5)   Whoever violates §
92.58 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed state law, or both.
(W. Va. Code 61-6-17)
      (6)   Whoever violates §
92.59(A) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
(W. Va. Code 61-1-9)
(Prior Code, § 501.99)
   (G)   Notwithstanding any provision of §
92.55 to
92.63 to the contrary, any person violating the provisions of §
92.58 for a second offense or whose violation of §
92.58 results in another suffering serious bodily injury shall be guilty of a
felony and prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(W. Va. Code 61-6-17) (Prior Code, § 501.04)
(Ord. 86-4, passed 4-1-1986; Ord. 86-8, passed 4-1-1986; Ord. 01-13, passed 9-
25-2001; Ord. passed 4-21-2015)
CHAPTER 93: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Responsibility of Director of Public Works
   
93.02   Prohibited obstructing of streets and sidewalks
   
93.03   Duty of property owners or occupants to keep sidewalks clean; remedy
   
93.04   Duty of owners to repair or reconstruct sidewalks
   
93.05   Property owner to indemnify city against liability
   
93.06   Placing signs or markings on right-of-way
Excavations
   
93.20   Permit required
   
93.21   Application for permit
   
93.22   Prerequisites; cash deposit or bond
   
93.23   Manner of work; restoration of surface
   
93.24   Required safeguards; foot bridges; flag people
   
93.25   Bridges over excavations in roadways
   
93.26   Safeguards relating to sidewalk excavations
   
93.27   Disposition of dirt and the like from excavations
   
93.28   Railroads and public utilities
   
93.29   When state permit required
   
93.30   Nonliability of city
Demonstrations and Parades
   
93.45   Definitions
   
93.46   Findings of Council
   
93.47   Permit required; exceptions
   
93.48   Application for permit
   
93.49   Required signature on application
   
93.50   Granting or denial of permit
   
93.51   Conditions of permit
   
93.52   Authority to require posting of bond
   
93.53   Certain foreign flags and emblems prohibited
   
93.54   Weapons; vicious animals
   
93.55   Signs, pennants and stickers
   
93.56   Dispersal of riots and unlawful assemblies
   
93.57   Harassing paraders and demonstrators prohibited
   
93.58   Carnivals and circuses
 
   
93.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Street obstructions, see §§
71.01 to 71.04
Statutory reference:
   Action for damages occasioned by defective streets, and the like, see W. Va.
Code 17-10-17
   Authority to regulate, see W. Va. Code 17C-2-8(a)(3)
   Connection to state road system, see W. Va. Code 17-4-26 et seq.
   General power to regulate, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(1)
   Power to regulate street excavations, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(2)
   Special charges for street cleaning and the like, see W. Va. Code 8-13-13
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 RESPONSIBILITY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The Director of Public Works shall be in charge of all street cleaning,
street lighting, street maintenance and improvements and the maintenance of
fire hydrants within the city.
(Prior Code, § 905.01)
§ 93.02 PROHIBITED OBSTRUCTING OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   No person, whether or not doing business in the city, shall display or place
on any sidewalk right- of-way or street right-of-way in the city any
merchandise, goods, wares or other objects which obstruct the full and complete
use of such sidewalk or street right-of-way walkway by pedestrians or vehicles;
nor shall any person in any other manner willfully obstruct any street or
sidewalk in such manner as to prevent the free and uninterrupted use thereof by
the public.
(Prior Code, § 905.02) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNERS OR OCCUPANTS TO KEEP SIDEWALKS CLEAN; REMEDY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of all persons owning, using or occupying in any
manner or for any purpose whatsoever, any house, building or structure of any
kind, and of all persons having charge of churches and public buildings of
every description and of the owners of unoccupied houses, buildings or
structures of any kind and of the owners of vacant or unimproved lots, situated
along any paved street of the city, and of their agents, within 12 hours after
the fall of any snow, to remove and clear away such snow or cause it to be
removed or cleared away from sidewalks abutting such houses, buildings,
churches, public buildings, structures or lots, in such a manner as to leave
the sidewalk clean and free from snow and ice and in such manner as to not
obstruct the passage of water in the gutters. If such snow shall fall between
the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., then such snow and ice shall be removed
or cleared away before 6:00 p.m.
   (B)   Likewise, it shall be the duty of the persons as classified and
described in division (A) above to keep the sidewalks abutting their respective
described property free of mud and other such forms of nuisance, so that the
persons using the sidewalks may proceed thereover unobstructed and safely.
   (C)   Any person failing to remove or cause the removal of snow, ice, mud,
water and the like, in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99, and upon failure to remove or cause to be removed such snow, mud, ice,
water, and the like in accordance with the provisions hereof, the Director of
Public Works may, without notice, remove the same and report to Council the
cost and expense thereof. Such cost and expense may be assessed against the
person and property delinquent, which shall be in addition to the penalty
provided for herein.
(Prior Code, § 905.03)
§ 93.04 DUTY OF OWNERS TO REPAIR OR RECONSTRUCT SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be the duty of each person owning or in charge of any real property
to repair any sidewalks abutting upon the property owned by him or her or in
his or her charge, or to reconstruct it whenever it becomes in bad repair, or
whenever for any reason it is not in conformity with the rules, regulations and
specifications adopted or prescribed by Council. In any event he or she shall
do so within 30 days after receiving notice from Council or the Mayor requiring
him or her to repair or reconstruct such sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 905.04)
§ 93.05 PROPERTY OWNER TO INDEMNIFY CITY AGAINST LIABILITY.
   In the event that the city shall be sued and forced to defend against a
person injured by reason of a public sidewalk being out of repair, or by an
obstruction caused by the accumulation of ice and snow or other obstruction,
the property owner owning the property abutting the sidewalk area where the
injury occurred shall, in addition to any penalty which may be imposed upon or
adjudged against him or her, fully indemnify and save the city harmless from
all causes of action due to any wrongful failure to comply with any of the
provisions of §§
93.02 to
93.04.
(Prior Code, § 905.05)
§ 93.06 PLACING SIGNS OR MARKINGS ON RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   No person shall paint, mark, post, tack, nail or otherwise affix any sign,
advertisement, notice, picture, drawing, emblem, poster, printing or writing,
other than those placed and maintained in pursuance of law, to any stone, rock,
tree, fence, stump, post, pole, building or other structure which is in or upon
the right-of-way of any public road or highway, except that the state’s
Commissioner of Highways and the Public Works Department of the city may
provide for suitable road signs, danger signals and other signs of
informational nature. No such sign or other marking shall be suspended over the
right-of-way of any public road or highway; these prohibitions include, but are
not limited to, such devices which are intended to invite or draw attention of
the public to the candidacy of any person for any public office; and any such
device which exists in violation of the provisions of this section shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the person whose candidacy appears thereon
violated this section; provided, however that the installation and/or
maintenance of newspaper, postal or mailboxes shall not be prohibited or
affected by this section.
   (B)   Any person violating this section, whether as principal, agent or
employee, shall be punished as provided in §
93.99(B). Every such prohibited sign or other marking is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance. Upon receiving notice of any violation of this section, the
Department of Public Works shall cause the prohibited sign or other marking to
be removed within ten days and shall cause the appearance of the property on
which it was affixed to be restored, as near as may be practicable, to its
condition immediately before such violation occurred. The Department of Public
Works shall, in the name of the city, recover from the person who hereafter
violates this section, the amounts expended by the city in removing the sign or
other marking and in restoring the appearance of the property on which it was
affixed.
(Prior Code, § 905.06) (Ord. 86-10, passed 6-3-1986) Penalty, see §
93.99
EXCAVATIONS
§ 93.20 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall cut into or otherwise damage or excavate any street,
sidewalk or public place within the city for the purpose of connecting property
with water, sewer or gas lines thereunder, or for any other purpose, except
pursuant to a permit as provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 911.01) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.21 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person desiring to cut, open or otherwise excavate any street, sidewalk
or public place, whether paved or unpaved, in the city, for any purpose, shall
apply to the Director of Public Works for a permit so to do. The application
shall be in form as prescribed by the Director and shall contain such pertinent
information as may be required by him or her, including, but not limited to the
following: the purpose of the proposed excavation; the site at which the work
is to be done; the date work is to begin and the expected duration of the work;
and the name and address of the person for whose benefit the proposed work is
to be done and who shall be responsible for all required safeguards, the
diligent prosecution of the work, the restoration of the surface, the payment
of all expenses incurred and compliance with all requirements of this
subchapter, and the application shall be signed by such person or by someone
authorized by him or her, or by the plumber or other contractor employed by him
or her to do the work.
(Prior Code, § 911.02)
§ 93.22 PREREQUISITES; CASH DEPOSIT OR BOND.
   (A)   No excavation permit shall be granted unless it appears to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that the excavation is necessary
for the health, safety or welfare of the person upon whose behalf the
excavation is to be made, and the connection of property to a water, sewer or
gas main shall be deemed sufficient under this division (A).
   (B)   No excavation permit shall be granted until the applicant therefor, or
someone on his or her behalf, has made a cash deposit or given bond to the city
in such amount as may be deemed by the Director of Public Works sufficient to
cover the cost of safeguards, disposal of excavated dirt, and the like, and
restoration of the surface of the place of excavation to as good condition as
it was prior to the making of the excavation. Each such bond shall be payable
to the city, shall have corporate surety, shall be approved by the City
Attorney, and shall be conditioned that the work be diligently and skillfully
prosecuted (subject to unforseeable circumstances beyond control of the person
doing the work), that all necessary safeguards be maintained, that all
excavated materials not required for refill be disposed of as provided in this
subchapter, that the surface of the place of excavation and not less than ten
feet in all directions from the outer perimeter thereof be placed in as good
condition as it was immediately prior to the commencement of the work and to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, that all
requirements of this subchapter be complied with, and that any defective work
which appears within five years from the day of acceptance of restoration by
the Street Commissioner shall be subject to repair by the city at the expense
of the permit holder.
(Prior Code, § 911.03)
§ 93.23 MANNER OF WORK; RESTORATION OF SURFACE.
   Any person making an excavation shall do the work in a careful, workmanlike
manner, and shall diligently prosecute such work to completion without undue
delay. Materials used and methods employed in filling, tamping and closing
excavations and in restoring the surface shall comply with all requirements of
the Director of Public Works.
(Prior Code, § 911.04)
§ 93.24 REQUIRED SAFEGUARDS; FOOT BRIDGES; FLAG PEOPLE.
   All excavation sites shall be provided with all necessary safety devices to
protect persons and animals from falling into ditches or pits. Such devices
shall include, but not exclusively, warning signs, lamps and barricades, and,
where practicable, secure planking for pedestrians to cross upon, which shall
be well lighted the entire way between the period from sunset to sunrise. The
Director of Public Works may also, in the exercise of discretion, require that
the permit holder employ flag people and station them at each end of the site
of excavation to direct traffic.
(Prior Code, § 911.05)
§ 93.25 BRIDGES OVER EXCAVATIONS IN ROADWAYS.
   Between the hours of sunset and sunrise, upon bridges for maintaining
traffic over excavations, the roadway shall be indicated by a sufficient number
of green lights so as to clearly identify the course of the roadway and the
edges thereof; and the edges of the bridge itself shall be indicated by red
lights.
(Prior Code, § 911.06)
§ 93.26 SAFEGUARDS RELATING TO SIDEWALK EXCAVATIONS.
   All persons causing any excavations to be made for sidewalks shall have the
place of excavation properly graded and protected, and shall properly barricade
such place for the protection of the public. Whenever necessary, they shall, at
their own expense, properly erect masonry or steel construction or a sufficient
retaining wall to properly support the adjoining earth. Such retaining wall
shall be properly coped or provided with an iron railing to guarantee safety to
the public.
(Prior Code, § 911.07)
§ 93.27 DISPOSITION OF DIRT AND THE LIKE FROM EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   No person engaged in excavating or having charge or control of
excavation, or who may be engaged in or may have charge or control of conveying
material from excavations, shall deposit or permit to be deposited, in any
manner, upon the surface of a sidewalk or any paved street or other public
place, either by placing, spilling, dropping or tracking from wheels of
vehicles or from the feet of animals, any earth, clay, mud, sand, gravel or
other excavated material; and all such sidewalks, streets and public places
adjacent to excavations or traversed by vehicles either in the process of
conveying material from excavation, or in returning from the place of deposit
to place of excavation, shall be covered with planking so far as may be
required to prevent any mud, earth, clay or other material from the excavation
or from the place of deposit from reaching the surface of such roadway.
   (B)   The excavations referred to in this section include those made in
private property as well as public property.
(Prior Code, § 911.08) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.28 RAILROADS AND PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent Council
from entering into agreements with railroad and public utility companies which
may exclude therefrom, or grant them deviations from, the provisions of this
subchapter when, in the judgement of Council, it is in the public interest so
to do and the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city will be
adequately safeguarded.
(Prior Code, § 911.09)
§ 93.29 WHEN STATE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No permit shall be granted under this subchapter to excavate within any
street or right-of-way which is a part of the state highway system except upon
display to the Director of Public Works of a permit so to do issued by
competent authority of the state.
(Prior Code, § 911.10)
§ 93.30 NONLIABILITY OF CITY.
   No permit issued, inspection made or approval given by the Director of
Public Works, or his or her agents or employees, pursuant to this subchapter
shall be construed as imposing any liability whatever upon the city for injury
to any person or damage to any property which may occur by reason of any
wrongful or negligent act or omission during the progress of any work under
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 911.11)
DEMONSTRATIONS AND PARADES
§ 93.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEMONSTRATION. A group of three or more persons assembled together and
acting in concert to call attention of the public to their opposition to,
support of, or position with respect to any political, social or other
controversial subject; but nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to
apply to persons lawfully engaged in picketing in any orderly manner.
   PARADE. Any parade, march or other procession of six or more persons for the
purpose of calling attention of the public thereto.
(Prior Code, § 315.01)
§ 93.46 FINDINGS OF COUNCIL.
   Council finds that it is necessary for the good government and the peace,
safety, health and welfare of the city and the inhabitants thereof, as well as
to maintain law and order and to provide for the free and orderly flow of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic on the city streets and sidewalks and in the
public places in the city, to prohibit parades and demonstrations within the
city unless a city permit to use the city streets, sidewalks and public places
for such purposes has first been granted.
(Prior Code, § 315.02)
§ 93.47 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall sponsor, organize, direct, lead or participate in any parade
or demonstration upon any street or sidewalk or upon or in any public place
within the city unless a city permit has been granted to hold such parade or
demonstration; provided, that this subchapter shall not apply to parades,
processions or convoys of any component of the armed forces of the United
States or this state or to any governmental organization, or to any funeral
procession.
(Prior Code, § 315.03) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.48 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person desiring to sponsor, organize, direct or lead a parade or
demonstration upon any street or sidewalk or upon or in any public place within
the city shall file an application for a parade or demonstration permit with
the City Recorder, and in such application shall be set forth:
   (A)   The date and hour for the assembling of the participants in such
parade or demonstration and the expected duration thereof;
   (B)   The streets, sidewalks and public places over and upon which the
parade or demonstration is to take place;
   (C)   Whether the parade or demonstration is to be conducted on foot or with
animals or vehicles, or any combination thereof, and the number of persons,
vehicles and animals expected to participate;
   (D)   The purpose of the parade or demonstration;
   (E)   The names and addresses of the actual sponsors of such parade or
demonstration, and the organization or organizations, if any, of which the
expected participants are members;
   (F)   The name and address of the person who shall be in charge of such
parade or demonstration and who shall be responsible for the conduct thereof
and for compliance with all applicable provisions of law, this code and other
ordinances by participants in such parade or demonstration; and
   (G)   Such other information as Council may require.
(Prior Code, § 315.04)
§ 93.49 REQUIRED SIGNATURE ON APPLICATION.
   Each application for a parade or demonstration permit shall be signed and
sworn to by at least one person, who shall be the person named in the
application as the one who shall be in charge of such parade or demonstration
and who shall be responsible for the conduct thereof and for compliance with
all applicable provisions of law, this code and other ordinances by
participants in such parade or demonstration.
(Prior Code, § 315.05)
§ 93.50 GRANTING OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   Upon the filing of a completed and properly signed and sworn application for
a parade or demonstration permit, the City Recorder shall transmit copies
thereof promptly to all members of Council. Council, at its next meeting, shall
consider such application and take action thereon. If Council considers that
such parade or demonstration would not be detrimental to the good government or
the peace, safety, health or welfare of the city or the inhabitants thereof,
and would not constitute a threat to the maintenance of law and order or cause
unacceptable traffic conditions within the city, the permit applied for shall
be granted. If, however, Council, in the exercise of sound discretion and in
view of circumstances then existing, considers that the holding of such parade
or demonstration would be detrimental to the good government or the peace,
safety, health or welfare of the city or the inhabitants thereof, or would
constitute a threat to the maintenance of law and order or would cause
unacceptable traffic conditions within the city, the permit shall be denied.
(Prior Code, § 315.06)
§ 93.51 CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
   (A)   In granting a permit pursuant to this subchapter, Council may include
therein such prohibitions, conditions, restrictions and limitations as it may
consider appropriate, under the general police powers of the city, to safeguard
the good government and the peace, safety, health and welfare of the city and
the inhabitants thereof, as well as to maintain law and order and acceptable
traffic conditions within the city, and no person covered by the permit shall
violate or fail to comply with any such prohibition, condition, restriction or
limitation.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed to be a part of each
parade or demonstration permit, whether or not so stated in the permit.
(Prior Code, § 315.07) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.52 AUTHORITY TO REQUIRE POSTING OF BOND.
   Prior to the granting of a permit pursuant to this subchapter and as a
condition precedent for the granting of such permit, Council may require that
the person named in the application as the one to be responsible for the
conduct of the parade or demonstration shall give bond to the city, in such
amount and with such surety as Council may consider necessary, conditioned upon
the full satisfaction of all judgements and decrees which may result by reason
of any negligent or unlawful act or omission of any person participating in
such parade or demonstration and included within the permit; with the further
condition that he or she will save the city harmless from all claims and
demands whatever which may arise by reason of such parade or demonstration; and
with the further condition that he or she will pay the city for all extra
expenses incurred for clearing the streets, sidewalks and public places of
litter and waste matter resulting from such parade or demonstration and for the
cleaning and repair of public property which may be soiled or damaged by acts
of vandalism during the period of organizing and holding the parade or
demonstration, and within six hours thereafter, when such acts of vandalism are
reasonably attributable to the holding of such parade or demonstration.
(Prior Code, § 315.08)
§ 93.53 CERTAIN FOREIGN FLAGS AND EMBLEMS PROHIBITED.
   No person parading or demonstrating pursuant to a permit issued under the
provisions of this subchapter and no other person within view of any parade or
demonstration which is in progress pursuant to a permit issued under the
provisions of this subchapter shall carry or display the flag or emblem of any
foreign state, political party or other group which is engaged in hostilities
against the armed forces of the United States or any picture or representation
of any officer or leader of any such foreign state, political party or other
group which is engaged in hostilities against the armed forces of the United
States.
(Prior Code, § 315.09) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.54 WEAPONS; VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person parading or demonstrating pursuant to a permit issued under
the provisions of this subchapter shall carry any dangerous weapon; provided,
that Council may, in the exercise of sound discretion, include in such permit
such variations from this division (A) as it may consider appropriate for
members of color guards, drill teams, lodges and other persons by whom the
display of weapons upon the occasion of such parade or demonstration would not
arouse anxiety on the part of spectators or constitute a threat to the
maintenance of law and order and the preservation of the public peace.
   (B)   No person parading or demonstrating pursuant to a permit issued under
the provisions of this subchapter shall cause or suffer to be caused any
vicious or apparently vicious animal to participate in or accompany such parade
or demonstration; provided, that Council may in the exercise of sound
discretion, include in such permit such variations from this division (B) as it
may consider appropriate for circus parades and similar events.
(Prior Code, § 315.10) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.55 SIGNS, PENNANTS AND STICKERS.
   No person parading or demonstrating pursuant to a permit issued under the
provisions of this subchapter shall carry or display any sign, pennant, sticker
or other device which contains any scurrilous or obscene words, language or
illustrations calculated to arouse public hatred or anger or tending to incite
any breach of the public peace. No sign shall exceed a width of 24 inches or a
height of 36 inches.
(Prior Code, § 315.11) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.56 DISPERSAL OF RIOTS AND UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES.
   Parades and demonstrations held pursuant to a permit issued under the
provisions of this subchapter which become, or which reasonably appear to
present an imminent threat to becoming, a riot, rout or unlawful assembly shall
be dispersed forthwith by the city police or by any law enforcement officer who
may be present. Persons who are commanded to disperse by any law enforcement
officer shall promptly obey such command and peacefully disengage themselves
from such parade or demonstration and leave the scene thereof, and persons who
fail to obey such command shall be subject to immediate arrest. (Prior Code, §
315.12)
§ 93.57 HARASSING PARADERS AND DEMONSTRATORS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall hinder, molest, insult or harass any parader or demonstrator
lawfully parading or demonstrating pursuant to a permit issued under the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 315.13) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.58 CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES.
   No person shall exhibit within the city any carnival or circus for personal
gain or profit, except that this section shall not apply to any local
educational, literary, dramatic, musical, patriotic, American war veterans or
other benevolent, civic or other philanthropic society or organization not
conducted for the private profit of any of its members.
(Prior Code, § 713.01) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
93.06 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
(Prior Code, § 905.99)
CHAPTER 94: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Recreational Facilities
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Protection of park property
   
94.03   Firearms; fireworks; weapons; hunting
   
94.04   Other prohibited activities
   
94.05   Regulated activities
   
94.06   Facility usage
   
94.07   Hours of operation
   
94.08   Ridenour Lake boundaries
   
94.09   Admission charges to city swimming pool facilities; attendants
   
94.10   Feeding ducks and geese at Ridenour Park
 
   
94.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(37)
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Vehicles of a Fire Department or Police
Department, ambulances, emergency vehicles of municipalities or counties and
emergency vehicles.
   DIRECTOR. The Recreation Director.
   PARK. All properties and facilities controlled by or under the jurisdiction
of the city, including playgrounds or school facilities being used as part of
the city’s recreational program.
   PERSON. Includes individuals and corporations.
   POLICE. The law enforcement officers of the city.
   THE CITY. The City of Nitro and/or the designees thereof as appointed by,
and/or including, the Mayor or Council.
(Prior Code, § 927.01) (Ord. 84-1, passed 1-24-1984)
§ 94.02 PROTECTION OF PARK PROPERTY.
   (A)   Defacement, destruction, removal and the like. No person shall remove,
injure, deface, destroy or disturb any part of the park or any building, sign,
equipment or other property found therein, or shall any tree, flower, shrub or
other vegetation or fruit or seed thereof, or rock, or mineral therein, be
removed, injured, defaced, destroyed or disturbed.
   (B)   Defacement of surface. No person shall accelerate a motor vehicle
causing the rubber tires to spin, mark and deface any park roadway or parking
lot surface.
   (C)   Littering or dumping of rubbish or garbage. No person, without the
written consent of the city, shall leave behind or dump any material of any
kind in the park, except that refuse, ashes, garbage or other material from a
picnic or other permitted activity may be deposited in receptacles provided for
such purposes.
   (D)   Noxious or deleterious material. No person shall, within the park,
place or permit to be placed in any river, brook, stream, ditch or drain that
flows into or through park lands or in any lake in the park, any noxious or
deleterious material which may render park waters harmful or inimical to the
public health, or to animal, vegetation or aquatic life, or which may prevent,
limit or interfere with the use of such waters for domestic or agricultural
purposes or which may lessen to an unreasonable degree the use and enjoyment of
such waters for recreational or other park uses.
(Prior Code, § 927.02) (Ord. 84-1, passed 1-24-1984) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 FIREARMS; FIREWORKS; WEAPONS; HUNTING.
   (A)   Firearms. No person shall carry a firearm of any description, air or
gas gun, fireworks, explosives, slingshot or missile-throwing device into or
within the park or discharge the same therein; provided, that a police officer
or other qualified law enforcement officer may carry a firearm within the park
and that the discharge of fireworks may be authorized by the city in compliance
with the regulations of the State Fire Marshal’s office.
   (B)   Dangerous weapons. No person shall have or carry any switchblade,
hunting knife, dagger, metal knuckles or other dangerous weapon while in the
park, provided that a police officer or other qualified law enforcement officer
may carry a firearm or nightstick within the park. Exception: a hunting knife
may be carried at Ridenour Lake in conjunction with fishing.
   (C)   Bows and arrows. No person shall release an arrow from a bow, crossbow
or longbow within the park other than in areas designed by the Director as
archery ranges or at such other locations as may be designated in writing for
such purpose of the Director.
   (D)   Hunting. No person within the park shall hunt, pursue with dogs, hunt
with birds, trap or in any way molest any wild bird or animal found within the
park or rob or molest any bird nest or take the eggs of any bird; provided,
that the Chief of Police may designate persons to hunt, pursue, catch and kill
in a humane manner nuisance animals.
(Prior Code, § 927.03) (Ord. 84-1, passed 1-24-1984) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 OTHER PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Advertising signs. No person shall distribute or place any sign,
advertisement, circular, notice or statement, or distribute or place any
banner, emblem or design or political advertisement in a park without consent
of the city.
   (B)   Sales. No person shall sell or offer for sale any article, thing,
privilege or service within the park without the written consent of the city.
   (C)   Disturbing the peace. No person shall disturb the peace and good order
within the park by fighting, by quarreling or wrangling with loud voice or
shouts, by threatening violence to the person or property of others, or by
engaging in riotous clamor or tumult.
   (D)   Unlawful assemblage. No person or persons shall, within the park,
collect a group or a crowd for unlawful purposes or in riotous assemblage or
with the intent to annoy, harass or inflict property damage or bodily injury
upon another person or persons.
   (E)   Abusive language. No person shall use obscene, profane or abusive
language within the park.
   (F)   Assault and battery. No person shall willfully assault or commit
bodily injury upon another while within the park, or within the park be engaged
in, or abet or aid in, any fight, quarrel or other disturbance.
   (G)   Gambling. No person shall gamble or play games of chance within the
park.
   (H)   Open containers. No person shall, within the park, carry or possess
any unsealed container, or partially filled container of nonintoxicating beer
and/or intoxicating beverages. Under no circumstances whatsoever shall any
person be under the influence of any intoxicating liquor or wine within the
park.
   (I)   Glue sniffing. No person shall, within the park, sniff any type of
glue or other commercial material or product which contains Toluol or ethers.
   (J)   Use of narcotics, opiates and hallucinogens. No person shall smoke,
drink, have injected into one’s self or otherwise use, any type of narcotic
drug, dangerous drug, opiate, hallucinogen or marijuana within the park.
   (K)   Entering toilet facilities. No persons, except park maintenance
employees or park police in the performance of their official duties, shall
enter a toilet within the park set aside for members of the opposite sex.
   (L)   Indecent conduct and exposure. No person shall appear within the park
in a state of nudity, or therein commit, perform or engage in any lewd,
lascivious, obscene or indecent act or behavior and no person shall within the
park make any indecent exposure of his or her person.
   (M)   Solicitation. No person shall, within the park, solicit or ask anyone
to commit, perform or engage in, any unlawful, lewd, lascivious, obscene or
indecent act or behavior.
   (N)   Boats and water equipment. No person shall, without the written
consent of the Director, bring and use within the park any boat, surfboat,
surfboard, water skis, scuba diving gear and similar aquatic equipment.
   (O)   Compliance with order of police: failure to obey. No person shall fail
or refuse to comply with any reasonable order relating to these rules and
regulations or to the control of traffic or motor vehicles within the park, or
with any other order lawfully given by any park employee or police officer, or
willfully resist, obstruct or abuse any officer or any other official in the
execution of his or her office.
(Prior Code, § 927.04) (Ord. 84-1, passed 1-24-1984) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 REGULATED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Fires.
      (1)   No person shall start a fire within the park, except small fires
for culinary purposes in park grills or privately owned grills or fires in the
places or areas designated for such purpose by the city; provided, that the
city may at its discretion prohibit fires for limited periods at any location
or for any purpose when necessary for the protection of park property.
      (2)   All fires within the park shall be put out by the person or persons
starting or using the same before leaving the immediate vicinity of the fire.
      (3)   No person shall within the park dump hot ashes or fire onto the
grass or plants.
   (B)   No admittance after park is closed. No person, except city employees
in the performance of their official duties, shall be permitted within the park
or any part thereof after the same is closed for the night and prior to its
opening the following day.
   (C)   Camping. No person shall establish or maintain any camp or other
temporary lodging or sleeping place within the park without the written consent
of the city.
   (D)   Fishing.
      (1)   Fishing by the use of hooks left unattended, traps, spears, gigs or
bows and arrows are prohibited.
      (2)   Anyone fishing in the park must obey existing the state’s
Department of Natural Resources rules and regulations.
      (3)   All persons, walking or fishing on ice on Ridenour Lake, must use
safety ropes tied around them and attached to anchors on the shore.
      (4)   The use of minnows as live bait for catching of fish at Ridenour
Memorial Park is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   Domestic animals. No person shall bring within any city park, or
permit, have or keep within any city park, any dog or other domestic animal
destructive to birds or other wildlife. Any person in any city park who is
responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into areas other
than automobile parking concourses and walks immediately adjacent thereto, and
in such other areas as may be clearly marked by signs bearing the words
“Domestic Animals Prohibited in this Area” shall be responsible for the removal
of excrement deposited by such animal and its disposal in a sanitary manner.
The term SANITARY, as used above, requires an owner, keeper or person having
custody of, charge or control of a dog or other-domestic animal to immediately
remove all feces deposited by such animal and dispose of same in a sanitary
manner. Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting the running of dogs at
large. All dogs in those areas where such animals are permitted shall be
restrained at all times on adequate leashes of not more than ten feet in
length. Furthermore, digging, urinating or defecating by any domestic animal on
public property are nuisances punishable by law.
   (F)   Horses and horseback riding. Horseback riding is prohibited within the
park except with permission of the city.
   (G)   Sledding. Sledding at Ridenour Lake will be permitted only on the side
of the dam away from the lake.
   (H)   Swimming. Swimming within the park is permitted only in a swimming
pool or pools operated by the city, and all persons shall abide by the swimming
pool rules and regulations posted by the city at any such pool.
   (I)   Speed limit: parking restricted.
      (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle in excess of ten mph while within
the boundaries of Ridenour Park, excluding Blakes Creek Road.
      (2)   Proper signs shall be placed in conspicuous places indicating this
speed limitation.
      (3)   Five bump barriers, two inches in height, shall be placed on the
road at designated spots.
      (4)   No parking shall be allowed on the road across the dam, and signs
shall be placed accordingly.
   (J)   Miscellaneous. Other activities may be regulated or prohibited from
time to time by the posting of notices to that effect in conspicuous locations
around the facility, as determined by the Recreation Director.
(Prior Code, § 927.05) (Ord. 83-17, passed 11-1-1983; Ord. 84-1, passed 1-24-
1984; Ord. 87-7, passed 10-20-1987; Ord. 88-1, passed 2-11-1988; Ord. 03-02,
passed 2-4-2003) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 FACILITY USAGE.
   (A)   Fees. Fees for the use of facilities shall be set from time to time by
Council and/or the Mayor. All fees must be paid in advance of facility usage.
   (B)   Reservations. Any person having paid the appropriate fee(s) for
reservation of a facility has sole right of usage of that facility during time
stated in reservation. No person shall interfere with this right; provided,
that the city may cancel such reservation for a justifiable reason. In such
case, all fees paid by the person placing the reservation shall be refunded to
them.
   (C)   Cancellations. Any person wishing to cancel a reservation must do so a
minimum of 48 hours in advance of the starting time of the reservation. Failure
to do so will result in the forfeiture of all fees paid and/or owed to the city
for such reservation.
(Prior Code, § 927.06) (Ord. 84-1, passed 1-24-1984)
§ 94.07 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The operational hours of all recreation facilities will be set from time to
time by Council and posted at appropriate facilities in a conspicuous place.
(Prior Code, § 927.07) (Ord. 84-1, passed 1-24-1984) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.08 RIDENOUR LAKE BOUNDARIES.
   Ridenour Lake boundaries shall be properly posted.
(Prior Code, § 927.08) (Ord. 84-1, passed 1-24-1984)
§ 94.09 ADMISSION CHARGES TO CITY SWIMMING POOL FACILITIES; ATTENDANTS.
   (A)   The charges for admission to the city swimming pool facilities shall
be as from time to time established by Council by ordinance, a copy of which
shall be maintained on file at the swimming pool office.
   (B)   All such charges shall be collected by attendants at the gate of the
pool and facilities; and those attendants shall be appointed by the Mayor and
approved by Council.
   (C)   Season passes shall be sold at the gate of the pool and at the City
Building, by the City Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 927.09)
§ 94.10 FEEDING DUCKS AND GEESE AT RIDENOUR PARK.
   No person shall feed ducks or geese at Ridenour Park.
(Prior Code, § 927.10) (Ord. 97-08, passed 8-19-1997) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Fine and imprisonment: jurisdiction. Whoever violates any rule or
regulation set forth in §§
94.01 to
94.10, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be fined an amount not to
exceed state law or imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law, or both.
   (B)   State laws. The violation of any of these rules and regulations which
also constitutes the violation of any state law may be prosecuted and punished
as a violation of such state law rather than as a violation of these rules and
regulations.
   (C)   Feeding ducks and geese. Whoever violates §
94.10 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law, for a first offense.
Thereafter, any person convicted of successive violations of this section shall
be fined an amount not to exceed state law.
(Prior Code, § 927.99) (Ord. 84-1, passed 1-24-1984; Ord. 97-08, passed 8-19-
1997)
CHAPTER 95: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Authority of firefighters and police at scene of fire
   
95.02   Unauthorized riding upon Fire Department apparatus prohibited
   
95.03   Unauthorized use of or tampering with Fire Department equipment
   
95.04   Bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires restricted
   
95.05   Hot ashes and other dangerous materials
   
95.06   Incinerator types and construction
   
95.07   Incinerators in mobile home parks and trailer camps
   
95.08   Restrictions on incinerators
   
95.09   Kindling, maintaining or permitting fires on property of other persons
   
95.10   Accumulations of waste materials
   
95.11   Handling readily combustible materials
   
95.12   Storage of readily combustible materials
   
95.13   Flammable decorative materials in buildings of mercantile and
institutional occupancy
   
95.14   Open flames or lights restricted
   
95.15   Matches
   
95.16   Use of torches for removing paint and sweating pipe joints
   
95.17   Asphalt kettles
   
95.18   Smoking prohibited under certain conditions
   
95.19   Conflicts of law
   
95.20   Abandonment or removal of underground tanks
BOCA National Fire Prevention Code
   
95.35   Adoption
   
95.36   Administration and enforcement
   
95.37   Duration of permits; permit fees
   
95.38   Violations
   
95.39   Conflicts of law
 
   
95.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Adoption by reference, see W. Va. Code 8-11-4
   Authority of local Fire Departments, see W. Va. Code Art. 29-3A
   Power of Council regarding fires, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(15)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 AUTHORITY OF FIREFIGHTERS AND POLICE AT SCENE OF FIRE.
   (A)   Every person present at the scene of a fire shall be subject and
obedient to the orders of any police officer or member of the Fire Department
there present as to any matter relating to extinguishment of the fire, the
removal and protection of property or the maintenance of order; and no person
present at the scene of any fire shall disobey any such lawful order of any
police officer or member of the Fire Department there present.
   (B)   Firefighters and police officers present at the scene of any fire
shall have power to arrest any person for disobedience of the lawful order of a
police officer or firefighter given pursuant to this section and to hold the
offender in custody until the fire has been extinguished, at which time he or
she shall be taken before an appropriate judicial officer to be dealt with
according to law.
(Prior Code, § 1519.01)
§ 95.02 UNAUTHORIZED RIDING UPON FIRE DEPARTMENT APPARATUS PROHIBITED.
   No unauthorized person shall ride upon any fire apparatus of the city at any
time, and no person other than those assigned to such apparatus shall be
authorized to ride thereon while such apparatus is responding to a fire alarm
except by authority of the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 1519.02) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.03 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF OR TAMPERING WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment of the city for any
private purpose, nor shall any person willfully and without proper authority
remove, take away, tamper with, keep or conceal any tool, equipment, appliance
or other article used in any way by the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 1519.03) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 BONFIRES AND OUTDOOR RUBBISH FIRES RESTRICTED.
   (A)   Generally: at site of work project. No person shall kindle or maintain
any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or
maintained without authorization by the Fire Chief. During construction or
demolition of buildings or structures, no waste materials or rubbish shall be
disposed of by burning on the premises or in the immediate vicinity without
having obtained a permit or other proper authorization from the Fire Chief.
PROPER AUTHORIZATION, within the meaning of this subchapter, shall mean a
written permit, oral permission or compliance with instructions or regulations
of the Fire Chief which have been posted on the City Hall bulletin board and
placed on file in the office of the City Recorder.
   (B)   Location restricted. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or
rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any
private land unless:
      (1)   The location is not less than 50 feet from any structure and
adequate provision is made to prevent fire from spreading to within 50 feet of
any structure; or
      (2)   The fire is contained in a waste burner, of a type approved by the
Fire Chief, located safely not less than 15 feet from any structure; provided,
that no bonfire or rubbish fire shall be kindled or maintained on any part of
the streets, sidewalks, public squares or other public places in the city.
   (C)   Attendance of open fires. Bonfires and rubbish fires shall be
constantly attended by a competent person until such fire is extinguished. This
person shall have a garden hose connected to the water supply or other fire
extinguishing equipment readily available for use.
   (D)   Fire Chief may prohibit. The Fire Chief may prohibit any or all
bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires when atmospheric conditions or local
circumstances make such fires hazardous.
(Prior Code, § 1519.04) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.05 HOT ASHES AND OTHER DANGEROUS MATERIALS.
   No person shall deposit hot ashes or cinders, or smouldering coals, or
greasy or oily substances liable to spontaneous ignition, into any combustible
receptacle, or place the same within ten feet of any combustible materials,
except in metal or other noncombustible receptacles. Such receptacles, unless
resting on a noncombustible floor or on the ground outside the building, shall
be placed on noncombustible stands, and in every case shall be kept at least
two feet away from any combustible wall or partition or exterior window
opening.
(Prior Code, § 1519.05) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.06 INCINERATOR TYPES AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Every incinerator used shall comply with the provisions of this
section.
   (B)   Commercial, industrial and apartment type incinerators shall be
constructed in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code.
   (C)   Residential incinerators shall be of a type approved by the Fire
Chief.
   (D)   Every incinerator shall be equipped with an effective means for
arresting sparks.
   (E)   Every incinerator shall be constructed and maintained in accordance
with the requirements of the air pollution control district having
jurisdiction, or shall comply with the requirements of NFPA Standard No. 82,
“Standards on Incinerators”.
(Prior Code, § 1519.06)
§ 95.07 INCINERATORS IN MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAILER CAMPS.
   Any incinerator installed in a trailer camp, mobile home park or permanent
camping park shall be of a type and in a location approved by the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 1519.07)
§ 95.08 RESTRICTIONS ON INCINERATORS.
   (A)   If the Fire Chief determines that burning in incinerators located
within 500 feet of any brush or grass-covered area will create an undue fire
hazard due to atmospheric conditions, such burning shall be prohibited.
   (B)   All burning shall take place during hours approved by the Fire Chief.
   (C)   No waste matter shall be burned, under permit or otherwise, which will
cause or create a dense smoke or odor.
(Prior Code, § 1519.08) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.09 KINDLING, MAINTAINING OR PERMITTING FIRES ON PROPERTY OF OTHER PERSONS.
   No person shall kindle or maintain any fire upon the property of another
without authority of the owner of such property, nor shall any person willfully
or through neglect permit any fire on his or her own property to spread to the
property of another.
(Prior Code, § 1519.09) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.10 ACCUMULATIONS OF WASTE MATERIALS.
   Roofs, courts, yards, sidewalks, alleys, vacant lots and open spaces shall
be kept free and clear of deposits or accumulations of waste paper, hay, grass,
straw, weeds, litter or combustible waste or rubbish of any kind. All weeds,
grass, vines or other growth, when same endangers property, or is liable to be
fired, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the property.
(Prior Code, § 1519.10) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.11 HANDLING READILY COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person making, using, storing or having in charge or under his or
her control any shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw
or combustible waste materials shall fail or neglect at the close of each day
to cause all such material which is not compactly baled and stacked in an
orderly manner to be removed from the building or stored in suitable vaults or
in metal or metal lined, covered, receptacles or bins.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall require suitable baling presses to be installed
in stores, apartment buildings, factories and similar places where
accumulations of paper and waste materials are not removed at least every
second day.
(Prior Code, § 1519.11) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.12 STORAGE OF READILY COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS.
   (A)   Generally. No person shall keep or permit to be kept on any premises
owned or occupied by him or her any oily waste and oily rags, unless at all
times, when not actually in use, such oily waste and oily rags are kept in a
metal can with self-closing cover and riveted joints.
   (B)   When permit required. No person shall store in any building or upon
any premises in excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume of combustible empty
packing cases, boxes, barrels or similar containers, or rubber tires, or baled
cotton, rubber or cork, or other similarly combustible material without a
written permit from the Fire Chief.
   (C)   Storage requirements. Storage in buildings shall be orderly, shall not
be within two feet of the ceiling, shall be separated from heaters or heating
devices by distance or shielding so that ignition cannot occur, and not so
located as to endanger exit from the building. Storage in the open shall not be
more than 20 feet in height, and shall be so located, with respect to adjacent
buildings, as not to constitute a hazard, and shall be compact and orderly.
(Prior Code, § 1519.12) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.13 FLAMMABLE DECORATIVE MATERIALS IN BUILDINGS OF MERCANTILE AND
INSTITUTIONAL OCCUPANCY.
   Highly flammable materials such as cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves,
trees, artificial flowers or shrubbery and foam plastic materials shall not be
used for decorative purposes in show windows or other parts of mercantile and
institutional occupancies unless first rendered flameproof. Electric light
bulbs in mercantile and institutional occupancies shall not be decorated with
paper or other combustible materials unless such materials shall first have
been rendered flameproof.
(Prior Code, § 1519.13) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.14 OPEN FLAMES OR LIGHTS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No person shall take an open flame or light into any building, barn or
any other place where highly flammable, combustible or explosive material is
kept, unless such light or flame shall be well secured in a glass globe, wire
mesh cage or similar approved device.
   (B)   No heating or lighting apparatus or equipment capable of igniting
flammable material of the type stored or handled shall be used in the storage
area of any warehouse storing rags, excelsior, hair or other highly flammable
or combustible material; nor in the work area of any shop or factory used for
the manufacture, repair or renovating of mattresses or bedding; nor in the work
areas of any establishment used for the upholstering of furniture.
(Prior Code, § 1519.14) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.15 MATCHES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall manufacture matches without a permit.
No person shall store matches exceeding in aggregate 25 cases of matches
without a permit.
   (B)   Wholesale storage. At wholesale establishments and wherever matches
exceeding 25 cases are stored, shipping containers containing matches shall be
arranged in piles not exceeding 18 feet in height nor 25,000 cubic feet in
volume. Such pile units shall be separated from each other and from other
combustible material by a clear space of not less than four feet. In storage
rooms where shipping containers containing matches are open, the broken
containers and contents shall be neatly piled with other match stock in a
portion devoted to match storage exclusively.
(Prior Code, § 1519.15) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.16 USE OF TORCHES FOR REMOVING PAINT AND SWEATING PIPE JOINTS.
   (A)   Any person using a torch or other flame-producing device for removing
paint from any building or structure shall provide one fire extinguisher, of a
type approved by the Fire Chief, or water hose connected to a water supply in
the area where such burning is done. In all cases, a fire watcher shall remain
on the premises for one hour after the torch or flame-producing device has been
used.
   (B)   Any person using a torch or other flame-producing device for sweating
pipe joints in any building or structure shall have available in the immediate
vicinity where the sweating is done one such approved, fire extinguisher or
water hose connected to a water supply. Combustible material in the close
proximity of flame shall be protected against ignition by shielding, wetting or
other approved means. In all cases, a fire watcher shall remain in the vicinity
of the sweating operation for one-half hour after the torch or flame-producing
device has been used.
(Prior Code, § 1519.16) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.17 ASPHALT KETTLES.
   No person shall transport or permit to be transported any asphalt kettle
beneath which is maintained any open fire, heated coals or ashes, over any
street. Asphalt kettles shall not be used inside of or on the roof of any
building. There shall be at least one approved fire extinguisher of a minimum
12-B, C classification within 30 feet of each asphalt kettle during the period
such kettle is in use, and one additional 16-B, C classification fire
extinguisher on the roof being covered.
(Prior Code, § 1519.17) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.18 SMOKING PROHIBITED UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS.
   (A)   SMOKING means and includes the carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar,
cigarette, tobacco, marijuana or other substance in any form.
   (B)   Where conditions are such as to make smoking a hazard in any areas of
piers, wharves, warehouses, stores, industrial plants, institutions, places of
assembly and in open spaces where combustible materials are stored or handled,
the Fire Chief is empowered and authorized to order the owner or occupant in
writing to post “No Smoking” signs in each building, structure, room or place
in which smoking shall be prohibited. The Fire Chief shall designate specific
safe locations, if necessary, in any building, structure or place in which
smoking may be permitted.
   (C)   “No Smoking” signs of approved sized lettering and location required
in accordance with division (B) above shall read “By Order of the Fire Chief”.
   (D)   No person shall remove any legally required “No Smoking” sign or shall
smoke in any place, where such signs are posted.
(Prior Code, § 1519.18) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.19 CONFLICTS OF LAW.
   In the event of a conflict between any provision of this subchapter with any
statute of the state or any rule, regulation or order of the State Fire Marshal
promulgated or given pursuant to statute, the statute, rule, regulation or
order shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 1519.19)
§ 95.20 ABANDONMENT OR REMOVAL OF UNDERGROUND TANKS.
   (A)   Methods. Underground tanks taken out of service shall be safeguarded
or disposed of by any one of the three following means:
      (1)   Placed in a “temporarily out of service” condition. Tanks shall be
rendered “temporarily out of service” only when it is planned that they will be
returned to active service within a reasonable period or pending removal or
abandonment within 90 days;
      (2)   Abandoned in place, with proper safeguarding; or
      (3)   Removed.
   (B)   Records. In cases where tanks are either rendered temporarily out of
service or permanently abandoned, records shall be kept of tank size, location,
date of abandonment and method used for placing the abandoned tank in a safe
condition. With any of the methods described in division (A) above, no cutting
torch or other flame or spark producing equipment shall be used until the tank
has been completely purged or otherwise rendered safe. In each case, the steps
given shall be carried out successively.
   (C)   Tanks rendered temporarily out of service. With tanks rendered
temporarily out of service:
      (1)   The fill line, gage opening and pump suction shall be capped and
secured against tampering; and
      (2)   The vent line shall be left open.
   (D)   Tanks abandoned in place. With underground tanks abandoned in place:
      (1)   All flammable or combustible liquid shall be removed from the tank
and from all connecting lines;
      (2)   The suction, inlet, gage and vent lines shall be disconnected;
      (3)   The tank shall be filled completely with an inert solid material;
and
      (4)   The remaining underground piping shall be capped.
   (E)   Tanks removed. When underground tanks are removed:
      (1)   All flammable or combustible liquids in the tank and connecting
lines shall be removed;
      (2)   The suction, inlet, gage and vent lines shall be disconnected.
Sections of connecting lines which are not to be used shall be removed. Inlets,
outlets and leaks, if any, shall be capped or plugged; and
      (3)   After removal, the tank shall be gas freed on the premises if it
can be done safely at that location, or transported to an area not accessible
to the public and the tank gas freed at that location.
   (F)   Tanks that are junked. If a tank is to be disposed of as junk, it
shall be retested for flammable vapors, and, if necessary, rendered gas free.
After junking and before releasing to junk dealer, a sufficient number of holes
or openings shall be made in it to render it unfit for further use.
   (G)   Tanks that are reused. Used tanks which are to be reused for flammable
or combustible liquid service shall meet all the provisions of this Fire
Prevention Code for the installation of underground tanks.
   (H)   Conflicts. In the event of conflict of any provision of this section
with some other provision of this code, the more stringent provision shall
prevail.
(Prior Code, § 1519.20)
BOCA NATIONAL FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 95.35 ADOPTION.
   There is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, as if set out at
length herein, that certain code known as the BOCA National Fire Prevention
Code, 1990 edition; as promulgated by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc. for the purpose of establishing minimum
regulations governing the safeguarding of life and property from the hazards of
fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices; and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the use or occupancy of buildings of premises.
(Prior Code, § 1511.01)
§ 95.36 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The provisions of the Fire Prevention Code shall be administered and
enforced by the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 1511.02)
§ 95.37 DURATION OF PERMITS; PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Permits issued pursuant to the Fire Prevention Code shall be valid for
the period specified therein, not more than one year; provided, that when a
city license or other city permit is required in addition to a permit required
by the Fire Prevention Code, such permit may be made valid for an indefinite
period concurrent with the period of validity of such city license or other
city permit.
   (B)   Council may promulgate a schedule of fees to be charged for permits
issued pursuant to the Fire Prevention Code, and all such fees shall be payable
to the City Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 1511.03)
§ 95.38 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention
Code or fail to comply therewith, or shall violate or fail to comply with any
order made thereunder, or shall build in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate
or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or shall
fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Board of
Appeals and Adjustments or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the
time fixed therein. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The application of any penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Prior Code, § 1511.04)
§ 95.39 CONFLICTS OF LAW.
   In the event of a conflict between any provision of the Fire Prevention Code
and any statute of the state or any rule, regulation or order of the State Fire
Marshal promulgated or given pursuant to statute, the statute, rule, regulation
or order shall prevail; and in the event of a conflict between any provision of
the Fire Prevention Code, any other provision of the codified ordinances or
other ordinance of Council or with any provision of another technical code
adopted by Council or with any rule, regulation or order lawfully promulgated
and in effect pursuant to authority of the codified ordinances or other
ordinance of the city, the more stringent provision shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 1511.05)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which no other penalty
is provided, shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for
a term not to exceed state law or both.
(Prior Code, § 1511.99)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
        
110.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
        
111.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND TECHNICIANS
        
112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
        
113.   ADULT-ONLY ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER 110: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
110.01   Soliciting for charities and the like; begging
   
110.02   Solicitors for magazines and books
 
   
110.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fees, see
Chapter 39
   Taxation, see
Chapter 38
Statutory reference:
   Obtaining money by false pretenses, see W. Va. Code 61-3-24 et seq.
   Solicitation of charitable funds, see W. Va. Code Art. 29-19
§ 110.01 SOLICITING FOR CHARITIES AND THE LIKE; BEGGING.
   (A)   No person shall, without a city permit so to do, station himself or
herself in any public place or move about within the city for the purpose of
soliciting money or any other thing of value for any charitable, philanthropic
or other purpose, or to solicit or beg alms or charity for himself, herself or
for any other person.
   (B)   Any person desiring to procure a city permit under this section shall
apply therefor to Council in writing, and shall state his or her name and
address, his or her occupation, the purpose for which the permit is sought, the
place or places where such solicitation is intended to be made, the period of
time during which the solicitation is expected to continue, the arrangements to
be made for disposition of the money or other things of value which may be
procured by reason of such solicitation, and such detailed information
concerning the beneficiaries of such solicitation as may be required by
Council, including, but not limited to, the names and addresses of all officers
and director of a corporate beneficiary and the names, addresses and
occupations of noncorporate beneficiaries, the proposed disposition or use to
be made by the beneficiaries of all funds received by them; and such other
information as Council may require in the interest of safeguarding the public
from fraud.
   (C)   Council shall consider each application for a permit under this
section on its merits, and shall grant a public hearing to the applicant if he
or she requests such hearing; and Council shall, in the exercise of sound
discretion, grant or deny any permit so applied for. In granting a permit,
Council may include therein such conditions as it may deem proper for the
convenience and protection of the public, and no permit holder shall violate or
fail to comply with any condition of his or her permit. Council may also
require, as a condition precedent to the granting of a permit, that the
applicant therefor give bond payable to the city, with corporate surety, in
such amount as required by Council, and conditioned:
      (1)   Upon faithful adherence to all terms and conditions of any permit
issued to him or her under this section;
      (2)   Upon turning over to the beneficiary or beneficiaries of his or her
solicitations, as such beneficiary or beneficiaries may be stated in the
permit, of all funds solicited and received by him or her;
      (3)   Upon a true accounting to be made by him or her to Council within
30 days after the expiration of his or her permit, of all funds solicited and
received by him or her pursuant to his or her permit; and
      (4)   Upon payment by him or her of any judgment or decree rendered
against him or her for fraud or for misapplication or loss of funds so
solicited and received by him or her. These conditions may be altered in any
particular case to protect the public from any risk which appears to Council to
be inherent in the case. Prior to granting a permit under this section, Council
may refer the application for the permit to the Chief of Police and to the City
Attorney for an investigation and report, with findings and recommendations.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any bona fide
church, religious, charitable or other nonprofit organization to obtain a city
permit to conduct a solicitation solely among its own membership.
(Prior Code, § 745.01) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 110.02 SOLICITORS FOR MAGAZINES AND BOOKS.
   (A)   No person shall go from person to person or from door to door within
the city for the purpose of soliciting orders for books or subscriptions to
magazines or other periodicals or publications without first having obtained a
permit so to do from the City Recorder.
   (B)   Each applicant for a permit under this section shall furnish to the
City Recorder in writing, his or her full name, age and present residence and
business address; the address of each place wherein he or she has resided
during the preceding five years and the name and address of each person by whom
he or she has been employed or for whom he or she has been an independent
contractor during the preceding five years; the name and address of each person
or publisher for whom he or she proposes to solicit sales or subscriptions; a
copy of each sales contract or subscription order to be used by him or her in
the course of his or her transactions under the permit being applied for; and
his or her police record, if any.
   (C)   Upon the filing of an application for a permit under this section, the
City Recorder shall refer it to the Chief of Police, who shall investigate the
applicant’s police record, whether or not any reference is made thereto in the
application; and the Chief of Police shall make such further investigation,
including inquiries of recognized better business bureaus, credit agencies and
other organizations, as may be deemed necessary to determine the applicant’s
reliability and the reliability of the persons and publishers for whom he or
she proposes to solicit orders and subscriptions to adhere faithfully to the
terms of the proposed contracts and subscription orders; and the Chief of
Police shall then confer with the City Attorney concerning each contract and
subscription order form to determine whether they comply with all requirements
of state and federal law. Upon completion of such investigation, the Chief of
Police shall return the application to the City Recorder with his or her
findings and recommendations and the findings and recommendations of the City
Attorney attached thereto.
   (D)   Each applicant for a permit under this section who is not an actual,
bona fide resident of this city shall pay to the City Recorder at the time of
filing his or her application, the sum of $25 to defray the costs of
investigating the application.
   (E)   The City Recorder shall not issue a permit under this section if the
Chief of Police has determined that the applicant has been convicted of a
felony or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or that the applicant or
any person or publisher for whom he or she proposes to solicit orders or
subscriptions has failed to adhere faithfully to the terms of any contract or
subscription order; nor shall the City Recorder issue any permit under this
section if the City Attorney has determined that any proposed contract or
subscription order fails to meet any requirement of state or federal law.
   (F)   The City Recorder shall not issue a permit under this section to any
person who is not an actual, bona fide resident of this city until the
applicant has given bond to the city, secured by an owner of real property
within this city or within Kanawha or Putnam County, or with corporate surety,
in the amount of not less than $1,000, conditioned upon the payment of any loss
sustained by any person within the city who signs any contract or subscription
order hereunder by reason of any misrepresentation, fraud or failure of the
permit holder or the person or publisher for whom he or she solicits to adhere
faithfully to the terms of such contract or subscription order.
   (G)   No permit issued pursuant to this section shall be construed to
relieve the holder thereof from the necessity of procuring any city license
which may be required under any other provision of this code or other ordinance
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 745.02)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
CHAPTER 111: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND TECHNICIANS
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Applicability and exceptions
Massage Establishments and Off-Premises Businesses
   
111.15   License fees
   
111.16   Permits
   
111.17   Operating requirements and facilities
   
111.18   Revocation and suspension of permit
Massage Technicians
   
111.30   License fee
   
111.31   Massage technician permit
   
111.32   Examination required
   
111.33   Investigation; grounds for denial; issuance
   
111.34   Off-premises massage technicians; permit endorsement required
Miscellaneous Provisions
   
111.45   Operative date
   
111.46   Notification of change
   
111.47   Annual renewal application
   
111.48   New application after denial or revocation of permit
   
111.49   No effect on zoning law
   
111.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fees, see
Chapter 39
   axation, see
Chapter 38
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(23)
   Message practitioners, see W. Va. Code 7-1-32
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTERING OFFICER. The City Recorder or his or her authorized
representative.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Kanawha-Charleston Health Department.
   MASSAGE. Any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial,
health or hygenic purposes by means of pressure on or friction against, or
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, bathing, touching, binding,
painting, irritating, vibrating or stimulating the external parts of the body
with the hands or other parts of the body, with or without the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, or with or without
supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils,
powders, creams, lotions, soaps, ointments or other similar preparations
commonly used in this practice.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment having a fixed place of business
where any person engages in, conducts or carries on, or permits to be engaged
in, conducted or carried on, any business of giving or furnishing massages,
baths, administration fomentation, electric or magnetic treatments, alcohol
rubs or any other type of system for treating or manipulating the human body.
   MASSAGE TECHNICIAN. Any masseur, masseuse or other individual who, for any
form of consideration, gives or administers to another individual a massage as
defined in this section.
   OFF-PREMISES MASSAGE. The activity of providing massage at any location
other than the fixed place of business of a massage establishment having a
valid and outstanding permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   OFF-PREMISES MASSAGE BUSINESS. Any business enterprise having a source of
income or compensation derived from the practice of massage, and which has a
fixed place of business for receiving the requests of patrons for massage, but
massages are performed elsewhere.
   OFF-PREMISES MASSAGE TECHNICIAN. Any individual who, for any form of
consideration, gives or administers a massage to another individual at a
location other than one having a valid and outstanding massage establishment
permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   PERMIT. The permit required to be obtained from the License Division for the
operation of a massage establishment or an off-premises massage business, or
for performing the activities of a massage technician or an off-premises
massage technician.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association or any
combination of individuals of whatever form or character.
   SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA. The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or perineum
of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
(Prior Code, § 1123.01) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
§ 111.02 APPLICABILITY AND EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall have no application and no effect upon
and shall not be construed as applying to the following:
   (A)   Treatment administered in good faith in the course of practice of any
healing art or profession by a person licensed to practice any such art or
profession by any state board of examination or registration, or any other law
of this state, including physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths and
physical therapists;
   (B)   Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the
state while engaging in practices within the scope of their licenses, except
that this exception shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face,
scalp and hair of the customer or client; or
   (C)   Any business, calling or profession over which the state has assumed
exclusive jurisdiction as a matter of statewide concern and which gives the
services or treatments included in the term MASSAGE, as herein defined, as
incidents to such business, calling or profession, nor shall they apply to
regularly established hospitals, athletic associations or athletic teams.
(Prior Code, § 1123.02) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND OFF-PREMISES BUSINESSES
§ 111.15 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Massage establishment. Every person engaging in the business of owning
or operating a massage establishment shall pay a license fee of $100 per year.
   (B)   Off-premises massage business. Every person engaging in the business
of owning or operating an off-premises massage business shall pay a license fee
of $50 per year.
(Prior Code, § 1123.03) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
§ 111.16 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or
shall permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, upon any premises in
the city, the operation of a massage establishment or of an off-premises
massage business, as herein defined, without first obtaining a permit so to do
from the City Recorder. The possession of a valid massage establishment permit
or an off- premises massage business permit does not authorize the permittee to
perform work for which a massage technician permit is required.
   (B)   Permit fee. Applicants for a permit hereunder shall pay a
nonrefundable permit application fee of $100, plus the actual cost of an
inspection by the Health Department required under division (D) below.
   (C)   Application: contents. Any person desiring to obtain a permit to
operate a massage establishment or an off-premises massage business shall make
application under penalty of perjury to the City Recorder, which application
shall be submitted in duplicate and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, it shall
designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible
managing officer, and such person shall complete and sign all application forms
required by the Administering Officer;
      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership, there shall be submitted a copy
of any partnership agreement, which shall be certified by the responsible
managing officer;
      (3)   If the applicant is a limited partnership, there shall be submitted
a copy of the limited partnership agreement, if any, and the certificate of
limited partnership as filed with the County Clerk, which documents shall be
certified by the responsible managing officer;
      (4)   If the applicant is a corporation, or a partner or any partnership
is a corporation, then the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly
as shown in the articles of incorporation, and there shall be submitted a
certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with any
authorizations to issue or transfer stock, as well as proof that such
corporation is in good standing and, if a foreign corporation, duly authorized
to transact business in the state;
      (5)   The exact name, including any fictitious name, if applicable, under
which the business is to be operated;
      (6)   A description of the service or services to be provided, the
address of the proposed location and the facilities thereof;
      (7)   A description of any other business to be operated on the same
premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant;
      (8)   The names and residence addresses of all massage technicians who
are or will be employed, or acting as independent contractors, in the massage
establishment or the off-premises massage business;
      (9)   The massage or similar business license history of the applicant;
whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state
has had a business license or permit revoked or suspended, the reason therefor,
and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension
or revocation; and
      (10)   Every applicant for a permit, whether an individual or combination
of individuals, and each partner or limited partner of an applicant, if a
partnership applicant, and every officer, director and each stockholder holding
5% or more of the stock of a corporate applicant, shall furnish the following
information:
         (a)   The full name, date of birth, current residence and business
address, and telephone numbers;
         (b)   West Virginia driver’s license number or identification number
and Social Security number, if any;
         (c)   Any other names or aliases, including nicknames, used within
five years immediately prior to the date of filing the application;
         (d)   Each residence and business address for the five years
immediately prior to the date of filing the application, and the inclusive
dates of each such address;
         (e)   Written proof that each individual is at least 18 years of age;
         (f)   Height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair, photograph and
finger and thumb prints. Photographs shall be two inches by two inches, showing
the head and shoulders in a clear manner and shall have been taken within 60
days prior to the filing of the application;
         (g)   The massage or similar business license or permit history of
each individual; whether such individual, in previously operating in this or
any other city or state, has had a business license or permit revoked or
suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation
subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;
         (h)   The name and address of any massage business or other
establishment currently owned or operated by such individual wherein the
business of massage is conducted;
         (i)   Any conviction, forfeiture of bond or plea of nolo contendere
upon any criminal violation or city ordinance violation (except minor traffic
violations), within a five-year period, and, if so, the place and court in
which such conviction, plea or forfeiture was heard, the specific charge and
the sentence imposed as a result thereof;
         (j)   The names, current addresses and written statements of at least
two reliable property owners of Kanawha County who will certify as to such
individual’s good character or business responsibility; or, in lieu of such
references, such other available evidence as to the good character or business
responsibility of such individual as will enable the Chief of Police to
properly evaluate such character or business responsibility;
         (k)   The name and address of the record owner and lessor of the real
property upon or in which the massage establishment or off-premises massage
business is to be conducted, and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. If
the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be
accompanied by a notarized acknowledgment from the record owner of the property
that a massage establishment or an off-premises massage business will be
located on such property;
         (l)   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the
permit; and
         (m)   Such other identification and information as may be necessary to
verify the truth of the matters hereinabove specified as required to be set
forth in the application.
   (D)   Permit procedures.
      (1)   Subsequent to the filing of an application for a massage
establishment permit or an off-premises massage business permit, the City
Recorder shall transmit the application to the Chief of Police for
investigation and report pursuant to §
111.33; provided however, that the Recorder shall not forward an application
for a massage establishment permit to the Chief of Police unless and until a
letter of compliance has been issued by the Kanawha-Charleston Health
Department in accordance with the following procedures. Upon filing an
application for a massage establishment permit, the Recorder shall notify the
Environmental Health Division of the Kanawha-Charleston Health Department. The
Environmental Health Division shall cause an inspection to be made of the
premises for which a permit is desired within 20 days to ascertain if the
premises are in compliance with all applicable health laws. If the premises are
in compliance, the Environmental Health Division shall issue a letter so
stating and shall thereupon transmit the application to the County Sheriff for
investigation and report as provided herein. If the premises are not in
compliance, the Environmental Health Division shall issue a letter and shall
reinspect the premises no more than twice upon written request of the applicant
who shall pay all costs thereof. If a letter of full compliance is not issued
by the Environmental Health Division within 90 days of the date of the filing
of the application, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and a new
application must be filed.
      (2)   The City Recorder, concurrently with the referral of an application
to the Police Chief, shall also refer such application to the Fire Chief and
Building Inspector to investigate and ascertain within the scope, jurisdiction
and duties of such departments, whether the premises to be used are suitable,
proper and adequate and comply with the law for the issuance of the permit.
      (3)   The investigating officers or representatives of such departments
shall file with the City Recorder their reports in writing, stating the extent
of their investigation, particulars of objections and their recommendations.
      (4)   The City Recorder, within ten days after receiving the above-
mentioned recommendations, shall in his or her discretion grant or refuse to
grant the permit.
      (5)   In addition to grounds for refusal set forth in §
111.33, no permit shall be granted:
         (a)   In violation of any provisions of this chapter or the applicable
laws of the state; or
         (b)   If it is found that the applicant or any other person who will
be directly or indirectly engaged in the ownership, management or operation of
the massage establishment or the off- premises massage business:
            1.   Has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of facts in the permit application, or any other document required by
the city in conjunction therewith;
            2.   Is not 18 years of age or older;
            3.   Has had a massage establishment, off-premises massage
business, massage technician or other similar permit or license denied, revoked
or suspended by the county or any other state or local agency within five years
prior to the date of application; or
            4.   Has been convicted or has entered a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere for a felony or any crime of moral turpitude or any offense
involving sexual misconduct including, but not limited to, any crime or offense
specified in W. Va. Code Chapter 61, as amended from time to time, unless the
Chief of Police finds that the offense is not reasonably related to the
occupation being regulated.
      (6)   The City Recorder shall issue the permit if granted. The permit
shall be limited to the uses requested in the application and subject to such
other restrictions, terms and conditions as the Recorder may prescribe. Permits
may be granted conditionally in order to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1123.04) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
§ 111.17 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   General provisions. The operating requirements for a massage
establishment and for an off- premises massage business are as set forth in
division (B) below. The facilities requirements for a massage establishment are
as set forth in division (C) below. No permit to conduct a massage
establishment or an off-premises massage business shall be granted unless an
inspection is made under the provisions of this section and it is determined
that the applicant complies with the minimum requirements set forth in
divisions (B) and (C) below as may be applicable. A permit previously issued
shall be subject to revocation or suspension if any such requirements are not
met. Proof of compliance with all applicable provisions of this section shall
be provided to the City Recorder, Chief of Police or their authorized
representatives upon request.
   (B)   Massage establishments and off-premises massage businesses.
      (1)   Each person employed or acting as a massage technician shall have a
valid permit issued by the Administering Officer. No owner, operator,
responsible managing officer, manager or permittee in charge of or in control
of a massage establishment or off-premises massage business shall employ or
permit a person to act as a massage technician who is not in possession of a
valid massage technician permit issued pursuant to the provisions of §§
111.30 to
111.34.
      (2)   Massage services may be provided only between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m. A massage establishment shall have at least one person who
has a valid massage technician permit on the premises at all times while the
establishment is open for business.
      (3)   A list of services available and the cost of such services shall be
posted in an open and conspicuous place on the business premises. The services
shall be described in readily understandable language.
      (4)   The owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or
permittee of a massage establishment or an off-premises massage business shall
display in an open and conspicuous manner on the business premises the permit
issued therefor and a true and correct copy of the permit of each and every
massage technician employed thereby, and shall provide to every patron who so
requests the information contained in such permits.
      (5)   A permittee shall notify the Kanawha-Charleston Health Commissioner
and the City Recorder in writing, within 48 hours of any change in personnel
with regard to massage technicians.
      (6)   Every permittee operating a massage establishment shall cause to be
kept, and every off-premises massage technician employed by an off-premises
massage business shall keep, a record of the date, hour and place of each
treatment, the name of the massage technician administering such treatment and
the type of treatment administered. Each patron shall be required to supply
reliable verification of his or her identity. Such record shall be open to
inspection by officials charged with the enforcement of these provisions for
the purposes of law enforcement and for no other purpose. The information
furnished or secured as a result of any such inspection shall be confidential.
Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer or
employee of the county shall constitute a misdemeanor, and any such officer or
employee shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter in addition
to any other penalties provided by law. Such records shall be maintained for a
period of two years.
      (7)   No person owning, operating or managing a massage establishment or
an off- premises massage business shall knowingly cause, allow or permit any
agent, employee or any other person under his or her control or supervision to
perform acts prohibited by state or local laws or ordinances. KNOWINGLY
includes both actual and constructive knowledge.
      (8)   No massage establishment or off-premises massage business holding a
permit under this chapter shall depict, place, publish, distribute or cause to
be depicted, placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that
suggests to prospective patrons that any services are available other than
those services permitted by this chapter, or which would suggest that
employees, attendants or massage technicians are dressed in any manner other
than that permitted by this chapter, and all advertisements shall contain the
number of the permit held by the massage establishment or the off- premises
massage business.
      (9)   No massage establishment or off-premises massage business shall
operate as a school of massage, nor operate in the same location, nor use the
same facilities as that of a school of massage except as otherwise may be
provided by law.
      (10)   All massage technicians, employees and attendants shall wear
clean, nontransparent outer garments covering the sexual or genital areas, the
use of which garments is restricted to the massage establishment, or in the
case of an off-premises massage business, to the location where massage
services are administered.
      (11)   The sexual or genital areas of patrons shall be covered with
towels, clothes or undergarments when in the presence of an employee, attendant
or massage technician, whether in a massage establishment or, in the case of an
off-premises massage business, at any location where off- premises massage is
administered.
      (12)   No person employed by a massage establishment or by an off-
premises massage business shall place his or her hand upon or shall touch with
any part of his or her body, or shall fondle in any manner, or shall massage, a
sexual or genital area of any patron.
   (C)   Massage establishments.
      (1)   The Environmental Health Division of the Kanawha-Charleston Health
Department shall, from time to time, and at least once a year, make an
inspection of each massage establishment in the county for the purposes of
determining that the health provisions of the law of the state and this chapter
are met. The actual costs of any such inspection shall be added to the annual
permit renewal fee.
      (2)   (a)   A minimum of one bathtub or shower and one toilet and wash
basin shall be provided for the patrons in every massage establishment
location; however, if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously
at such establishment, separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male
and female patrons. In those establishments where steam rooms or sauna baths
are provided, if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously,
separate steam rooms and sauna rooms shall be provided for male and female
patrons. Hot and cold running water under pressure shall be provided to all
wash basins, bathtubs, showers and similar equipment. Each wash basin shall be
provided with soap or detergent and sanitary towels placed in permanently
installed dispensers. A trash receptacle shall be provided in each toilet room.
In addition to the wash basin provided for patrons, a minimum of one separate
wash basin shall be provided in each massage establishment, which basin shall
provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall
be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the
performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at each
wash basin, sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers.
         (b)   If the wash basin for the patrons is not in the toilet room, but
is adjacent thereto, this wash basin shall meet the separate wash basin
requirement if it is reasonably close to the area devoted to the performing of
massage. Water supplies serving the facility must meet the approval of the
Kanawha-Charleston Health Department. Sewage disposal system serving the
facility must meet the approval of the Kanawha Charleston Health Department.
      (3)   Reasonable ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the
standards as provided by the Kanawha-Charleston Health Department and city
zoning ordinances.
      (4)   Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with standards as
provided by the Health Department and Building Commission and, in addition, at
least one artificial light of not less than 60 watts shall be provided in each
enclosed room or booth where massage services are being performed on a patron.
      (5)   All walls, ceilings, floor, pools, showers, bathtubs, wet and dry
heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, tables and all other physical facilities
shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet
and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once each day the establishment is
in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized
after each use.
      (6)   Clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens shall be provided for
each patron of the establishment or each patron receiving massage services. No
common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. Towels, sheets and linens
shall be provided in sufficient quantity and shall not be used by more than one
person unless they have been first relaundered. Heavy white paper may be
substituted for sheets; provided, that such paper is used once for each person
and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. Separate closed cabinets or
containers shall be provided for the storage of clean and soiled linen and
shall be plainly marked: “clean linen”, “soiled linen”.
      (7)   Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment approved by the
Health Department shall be provided for any instruments used in performing any
massage.
      (8)   Pads used on massage tables shall be covered in a workmanlike
manner with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material acceptable
to the Health Department.
      (9)   All exterior doors shall be unlocked from the interior side during
business hours.
      (10)   A separate locker shall be provided for each person to be served,
which locker shall be capable of being locked and available at no extra charge.
      (11)   No person shall enter, be or remain in any part of a massage
establishment while in the possession of, consuming or using any alcoholic
beverage or drugs. The owner, operator, responsible managing officer, manager
or permittee shall not permit any such person to enter or remain upon such
premises.
      (12)   A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying
the establishment as a massage establishment; provided, that all such signs
shall comply with the sign requirements of the Kanawha County Planning
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 1123.05) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
§ 111.18 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   Any permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be summarily
and temporarily suspended by the Health Commissioner upon information and
belief, or knowledge, that the holder of such permit has violated or failed to
comply with any of the provisions concerning operating requirements and
facilities set forth in this chapter or has failed to enforce such provisions.
Such suspension shall be accomplished by posting a notice thereof on the
premises over the place where the permit is posted. Within 24 hours thereafter,
a copy of such notice, together with the reasons for the suspension, shall be
transmitted to the Chief of Police, the City Building Inspector and the City
Planning Commission. The Health Department Administering Officer shall, within
ten days after the suspension, hear the matter, giving at least three days’
notice of such hearing to the holder of the permit. The hearing may be
continued from time to time at the discretion of the Health Department and, on
the conclusion thereof, the Health Department may continue the suspension or
may revoke the permit, or may terminate the suspension and reinstate the
permit. Revocation or suspension for any reason other than the foregoing shall
be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1123.06) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
MASSAGE TECHNICIANS
§ 111.30 LICENSE FEE.
   Every individual employed or engaged in business as a massage technician
shall pay a license fee of $50 per year.
(Prior Code, § 1123.07) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
§ 111.31 MASSAGE TECHNICIAN PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit required. No individual shall engage in the business of acting
or act as a massage technician unless such individual holds a valid massage
technician permit issued by the City Recorder. This section shall not apply to
the classes of individuals exempted in §
111.02.
   (B)   Permit fee. Applicants for a permit hereunder shall pay a
nonrefundable permit application fee of $100, plus the actual cost of any
examination conducted by the Health Department.
   (C)   Application: contents. Any individual desiring to obtain a massage
technician permit shall make application under penalty of perjury to the City
Recorder, which application shall be submitted in duplicate and shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   The full name, date of birth, current residence and business
address, and telephone numbers;
      (2)   West Virginia driver’s license number and Social Security number,
if any;
      (3)   Any other names or aliases, including nicknames, used within five
years immediately prior to the date of filing the application;
      (4)   Each residence and business address for the five years immediately
prior to the date of filing the application, and the inclusive dates of each
such address;
      (5)   Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
      (6)   Height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair, photograph and finger
and thumb prints. Photographs shall be two inches by two inches, showing the
head and shoulders in a clear manner and shall have been taken within 60 days
prior to the filing of the application;
      (7)   The massage or similar business license or permit history of the
applicant; whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any other
city or state, has had a business license or permit revoked or suspended, or
has had any professional or vocational license or permit revoked or suspended,
and the reason therefor;
      (8)   The business, occupation and employment history of the applicant
for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application and the
address of each and every location where such business, occupation and
employment was engaged in or performed;
      (9)   Any conviction, forfeiture of bond or pleas of nolo contendere upon
any criminal violation or city ordinance violation (except minor traffic
violations), within a five-year period, and, if so, the place and court in
which such conviction, plea or forfeiture was heard, the specific charge and
the sentence imposed as a result thereof;
      (10)   The names, current addresses and written statements of at least
two reliable property owners of Kanawha County who will certify as to such
individual’s good character or business responsibility; or, in lieu of such
references, such other available evidence as to the good character or business
responsibility of such individual as will enable the Chief of Police to
properly evaluate such character or business responsibility;
      (11)   A certificate from a medical doctor, licensed to practice in the
State of West Virginia, issued within 30 days immediately prior to the filing
of the application, stating that the applicant has been examined and found to
be free of any contagious or communicable disease as of the date of such
examination. Such contagious or communicable diseases shall include, but not be
limited to, all venereal diseases, tuberculosis and other illnesses regulated
and serviced by the Kanawha- Charleston Health Department;
      (12)   The business address and all telephone numbers of any massage
establishment where the massage is to be practiced, and if other than a massage
establishment, the place or places where the applicant will engage in the
practice of massage;
      (13)   Such other identification and information necessary to discover
the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in
the application; and
      (14)   Authorization for the county, its agents and employees, to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application and qualifications of the applicant for the permit.
(Prior Code, § 1123.08) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
§ 111.32 EXAMINATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Upon application for a massage technician permit, and after the
applicant has paid the required fee and furnished the required information,
each applicant shall take and pass an examination of qualifications within 30
days preceding the date of issuance of the massage technician permit.
   (B)   The examination required by this section shall be conducted by the
Health Department, shall be such as to fairly determine the ability of the
applicant to properly perform the work which the applicant would be authorized
to do by the permit applied for, and shall cover the following subjects:
anatomy, physiology, hygiene and the practice and theory of massage as massage
is defined in this chapter. The examination shall include both a practical
demonstration and a written test. In the grading of the examination, practical
demonstrations shall prevail over written tests; that is, a greater number of
credits shall be allowed on practical demonstrations than on written tests.
   (C)   Any applicant who fails to pass an examination shall not be eligible
to take another examination until four weeks after taking the previous
examination, and any such examination shall be at applicant’s expense. Any
applicant who fails to pass upon the third trial shall not be eligible to take
another examination for six months thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 1123.09) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
§ 111.33 INVESTIGATION; GROUNDS FOR DENIAL; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Subsequent to the filing of an application for a massage technician
permit, the City Recorder shall transmit the application to the Chief of Police
for investigation and report pursuant to this chapter. Thereafter, the Chief of
Police or his or her representative shall file with the City Recorder a report
stating the extent of any investigation, particulars of objections and
recommendations.
   (B)   In addition to grounds for refusal set forth in sections of this code,
no permit shall be granted:
      (1)   In violation of any provision of this code or the applicable laws
of the state; or
      (2)   If it is found that the applicant:
         (a)   Has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement
of facts in the permit application, or any other document required by the city
in conjunction herewith;
         (b)   Is not 18 years of age or older;
         (c)   Has had a massage technician or other similar permit or license
denied, revoked or suspended by the city or any other state or local agency
within five years prior to the date of application; or
         (d)   Has been convicted of or has entered a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere to a felony or any crime of moral turpitude or any offense involving
sexual misconduct including, but not limited to, any crime or offense specified
in W. Va. Code Chapter 61, as amended from time to time, unless the Chief of
Police finds that the offense is not reasonably related to the occupation being
regulated.
   (C)   Within 30 days after the applicant passes the examination of
qualifications specified herein, or after receipt of the report of the Chief of
Police, whichever is last to occur, the Administering Officer shall in his or
her discretion grant or refuse to grant the permit. The License Division shall
issue the permit if granted. The permit shall be personal to the applicant and
nontransferable and shall be limited to the uses requested in the application
and subject to such other restrictions, terms and conditions as the City
Recorder may prescribed. Permits may be granted conditionally in order to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1123.10) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
§ 111.34 OFF-PREMISES MASSAGE TECHNICIANS; PERMIT ENDORSEMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall engage in the business of acting, or
act as an off- premises massage technician, unless such person holds a valid
and outstanding massage technician permit issued by the Administering Officer
and endorsed for off-premises work.
   (B)   Endorsement. A massage technician permit shall be endorsed by the City
Recorder for off-premises work upon application by the permittee if the
following conditions exist:
      (1)   The permit is valid and there are no pending proceedings for its
revocation or suspension; and
      (2)   The applicant pays a fee of $25 for such endorsement.
   (C)   Operating requirements. In addition to those requirements set forth in
sections of this chapter which expressly or by necessary implication apply to
off-premises massage technicians, the following operating requirements shall be
applicable.
      (1)   No individual holding an off-premises massage technician permit
shall perform any off-premises massage, as defined in §
111.01, in any hotel, motel or commercial establishment that does not have a
valid massage establishment permit.
      (2)   Each off-premises massage technician permittee shall display the
permit therefor to any patron who so requests.
      (3)   Upon any change of employer, an off-premises massage technician
permittee shall inform the City Recorder within 48 hours of such change.
(Prior Code, § 1123.11) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 111.45 OPERATIVE DATE.
   Any person conducting or carrying on an establishment or business described
herein, and all individuals operating or engaged as a masseur, masseuse or
massage technician on the date this chapter becomes effective, shall apply for
and obtain, if qualified therefor, the licenses and permit required by this
chapter within 90 days of its effective date.
(Prior Code, § 1123.12) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
§ 111.46 NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE.
   An application for a permit to operate or conduct a massage establishment or
an off-premises massage business, or a holder of such a permit, shall report
immediately to the Administering Officer any change in address of any person
having a financial interest in such massage establishments or off- premises
massage business, or any transfer of financial interest therein.
(Prior Code, § 1123.13) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
§ 111.47 ANNUAL RENEWAL APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every permit issued under this chapter shall expire on June 30 of each
year.
   (B)   An unrevoked permit may be renewed for one year on written application
to the City Recorder made on or before July 1 of each year, accompanied by the
required renewal fee; provided, however, that such renewal application shall
not be made prior to May 15 of such year.
   (C)   An applicant for renewal of a massage technician permit shall update,
under penalty of perjury, all information set forth on the original application
for permit, and shall submit a new certificate from a medical doctor as
required by §
111.31(C)(11). Renewal of such permit shall not require passage of an
examination. The annual permit renewal fee shall be $50 and, if endorsed for
off-premises work, the additional sum of $25. If the permittee fails to deliver
such a medical certificate or fails to provide such updated information, or
fails to pay the above-referenced renewal fee, within 30 days following the
anniversary date of the massage technician permit, then such permit shall be
null and void and shall be revoked by operation of this section.
   (D)   An applicant for renewal of a massage establishment permit or off-
premises massage business permit shall update, under penalty of perjury, all
information set forth in the original application for permit, and shall be
subject to an inspection by the Health Department to determine if the permittee
is in compliance with all applicable health laws. The annual permit renewal fee
shall be $75, plus the actual cost of any inspection by the Health Department
required hereunder. If the permittee fails to provide such updated information,
or fails to obtain a letter of compliance from the Health Department, or fails
to pay the above-referenced fee, within 30 days following the anniversary date
of the permit, then such permit shall be null and void and shall be revoked by
operation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 1123.15) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
§ 111.48 NEW APPLICATION AFTER DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   No person may apply for any permit authorized by this chapter within one
year from any denial or revocation of such permit unless the cause of the
denial or revocation has, to the satisfaction of the Health Commissioner, been
removed within such time.
(Prior Code, § 1123.16) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
§ 111.49 NO EFFECT ON ZONING LAW.
   The payment of license and permit fees hereunder shall be independent of any
processing of an application for a conditional use permit or other zoning
matters relating to the location of massage establishments or off-premises
massage business within the county.
(Prior Code, § 1123.17) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and is punishable as
provided for in this code. Revocation of a license or permit shall not be a
defense against prosecution.
   (B)   Any massage establishment or off-premises massage business operated,
conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be,
and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the
City Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action
hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal and
enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and the City Attorney shall
take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to
grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishment or off-
premises massage business and restrain such establishment or business contrary
to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1123.14) (Ord. 84-7, passed 9-4-1984)
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Intoxicating Liquor
   
112.01   Definitions contained in state law apply
   
112.02   Tax imposed on purchase prices of intoxicating liquors
   
112.03   Retail liquor license fee
Non-Intoxicating Beer
   
112.15   Acts prohibited without city license
   
112.16   Annual license required of all brewers and dealers
   
112.17   License tax imposed on brewers and dealers
   
112.18   License application; issuance; false swearing; display of state
license
   
112.19   Revocation of license
Private Clubs
   
112.30   License fee imposed
   
112.31   Duty of local holders of state licenses to report to City Recorder
   
112.32   City Recorder to maintain records of state licenses
   
112.33   Automatic revocation of city license when state license revoked
Liquor Control
   
112.45   Definitions
   
112.46   Regulations not applicable to certain uses by physicians, druggists
and others
   
112.47   Prohibited acts generally
   
112.48   Unlawful sale or possession by alcoholic liquor licensee
   
112.49   Unlawful purchase of alcoholic liquors from state agency
   
112.50   Intoxication or drinking in public places; illegal possession
   
112.51   Acts prohibited by non-intoxicating beer licensee
   
112.52   Unlawful purchase of non-intoxicating beer
   
112.53   Acts prohibited by private club licensee
   
112.54   Unlawful purchase from private club
   
112.55   Acts prohibited by wine dealers
   
112.56   Unlawful purchase of wine
 
   
112.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fees, see
Chapter 39
   Taxation, see
Chapter 38
Statutory reference:
   Authority to levy intoxicating liquor tax, see W. Va. Code 8-13-7; 60-7-7
   Authority to license private clubs, see W. Va. Code 8-13-7; 60-7-7
   Authority to regulate liquor sales, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(20)
   Local option, see W. Va. Code Art. 60-5
   Municipal license tax, see W. Va. Code 11-16-17
   Non-intoxicating beer, see W. Va. Code Art. 11-16
   Private clubs, see W. Va. Code Art. 60-7
   Search warrants, see W. Va. Code 60-6-18
INTOXICATING LIQUOR
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS CONTAINED IN STATE LAW APPLY.
   Words and phrases defined in W. Va. Code 11-16-2, 60-1-5 and 60-7-2 shall
have the same meanings as therein defined wherever such words and phrases are
used in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 705.01)
§ 112.02 TAX IMPOSED ON PURCHASE PRICES OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
   There is hereby imposed a tax of 5% of the retail purchase price of any and
all intoxicating liquors purchased from the Alcohol Beverage Control
Commissioner or from any person licensed to sell wine at retail to the public
under the provision of W. Va. Code Article 60-8, within the corporate
boundaries of the municipality. Such tax shall be levied upon the purchaser of
such intoxicating liquor or wine, and shall be added to any collected with the
retail purchase price of such intoxicating liquor or wine. Such tax shall be
received by the municipality from the State Treasury pursuant to the rules and
regulations adopted by the Alcohol Beverage Control Commissioner; provided,
however, that such tax shall not be collected on intoxicating liquors sold by
or purchased from holders of a license issued under the provisions of W. Va.
Code Article 60-7.
(Prior Code, § 705.02) (Ord. 81-5, passed 6-16-1981)
§ 112.03 RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   As the state requires a retail outlet to obtain a liquor license from
the state, the city shall also issue liquor licenses subsequent to the retail
outlet receiving a liquor license from the state. After the issuance of a state
liquor license, the applicant shall then file an application with the Recorder.
   (B)   The annual retail license period shall be from July 1 to June 30 of
the following year. The annual retail license fee, if an applicant holds a
Class A retail license under state law, shall be the sum of $1,500 per outlet.
The annual retail license fee, if an applicant holds a Class B retail license,
shall be $500 per outlet. The annual retail license fee for the initial year of
issuance shall be prorated based on the number of days remaining between the
date of issuance and the following June 30.
   (C)   A retail license shall expire on June 30 of each year and may be
renewed only upon the submission to the city’s Director of the Division of
Finance.
   (D)   No person may sell liquor at any retail outlet if the retail license
applicable to such outlet has been suspended or revoked, or has expired.
   (E)   All retail licenses issued or renewed under the provisions of this
section shall expire and be of no further force or effect as of July 1, 2000.
Licenses issued thereafter shall be so issued in accordance with applicable
law.
(Prior Code, § 705.021) (Ord. 91-2, passed 2-5-1991)
NON-INTOXICATING BEER
§ 112.15 ACTS PROHIBITED WITHOUT CITY LICENSE.
   No person within the city shall manufacture for sale, sell or possess for
sale, any non-intoxicating beer without a city license so to do as provided in
this subchapter; provided, that nothing contained in this subchapter, and no
license or payment under the provisions hereof, shall be taken to legalize any
act which otherwise may be in violation of law, or exempt any person from any
penalty prescribed for such violation.
(Prior Code, § 705.03) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.16 ANNUAL LICENSE REQUIRED OF ALL BREWERS AND DEALERS.
   Every person licensed by the state pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code
Article 11-16, whether as a retailer, private club, wholesaler or brewer of
non-intoxicating beer, and who does business as such within this city shall pay
to the city an annual license tax as provided in this subchapter. Upon the
payment of each such annual license tax to the city, the licensee shall be
issued a city license corresponding to the state license, which shall be
displayed at all times in a conspicuous place upon the premises thereby
licensed. City licenses under this subchapter shall not be transferable.
(Prior Code, § 705.04)
§ 112.17 LICENSE TAX IMPOSED ON BREWERS AND DEALERS.
   A license tax as set forth in §§
38.070 to
38.086 is hereby levied and imposed upon all brewers and dealers in or of non-
intoxicating beer within the city, which license period shall begin July 1 of
each year and end on June 13 of the following year, and if granted for a less
period the same shall be computed quarterly in proportion to the remainder of
the fiscal year.
(Prior Code, § 705.05)
§ 112.18 LICENSE APPLICATION; ISSUANCE; FALSE SWEARING; DISPLAY OF STATE
LICENSE.
   (A)   All licenses under the provisions of this subchapter shall be issued
by the City Recorder, upon written application therefor verified by the
applicant under oath. Application forms shall be furnished by the city,
designed to elicit all information necessary for the City Recorder to determine
the eligibility of the applicant for the license applied for; the amount of the
license fee; the location within the city of the premises to be licensed and
whether or not such premises and structures comply with all applicable
provisions of state law, this code and other ordinances; and it shall be
unlawful and shall constitute false swearing for any applicant to knowingly
make any false statement in any application for license under this subchapter.
   (B)   Before issuing any license hereunder, the City Recorder may require
the applicant to display his or her corresponding state license.
(Prior Code, § 705.06) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.19 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Council may revoke the license granted to any licensee under this
subchapter, subject to an appeal of any licensee to a court of competent
jurisdiction, whenever such licensee is aggrieved:
   (A)   When disorderly or immoral practices are permitted or intoxicating
liquor is sold on the premises;
   (B)   When circumstances happen or become known to Council which, had they
happened or been known at the time of the application for the license, would
have legally justified a refusal of such license; or
   (C)   When circumstances happen or become known to Council which constitute
a cause for the revocation of the city licensee’s corresponding state license.
(Prior Code, § 705.07)
PRIVATE CLUBS
§ 112.30 LICENSE FEE IMPOSED.
   All private clubs, as defined in W. Va. Code 60-7-2, the premises of which
are situated within the corporate limits of the city and which are operated for
a profit inuring to the benefit of their owners, shall pay to the city an
annual license fee for a license issued under the provisions of W. Va. Code
Article 60-7, as provided in §§
111.01 to 111.17.
(Prior Code, § 705.08)
§ 112.31 DUTY OF LOCAL HOLDERS OF STATE LICENSES TO REPORT TO CITY RECORDER.
   Each licensee holding a state license issued under the provisions of W. Va.
Code Article 60-7 for a private club, the premises of which are situated in
this city, shall, upon first obtaining such license and at the time of each
renewal thereof, report to the City Recorder and display such state license to
him or her and pay the city license fee which is imposed upon him or her by
this subchapter; and no such licensee or any officer, member or employee of any
private club so licensed, the premises of which are situated in this city,
shall sell intoxicating liquor upon such premises unless all fees due to the
city, as provided in this subchapter, have then been paid. All such fees shall
be paid in the City Recorder’s office at the City Hall on or before June 30 of
the ensuing fiscal year, whereupon a license shall be issued by the City
Recorder, which shall be on such form or forms as prescribed by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 705.09)
§ 112.32 CITY RECORDER TO MAINTAIN RECORDS OF STATE LICENSES.
   The City Recorder, upon display to him or her of a state private club
license, shall make a record thereof and preserve such record in his or her
office, and, upon payment to him or her of the city license fee as prescribed
in this subchapter, he or she shall issue to the licensee a receipt for such
payment, which shall indicate the amount paid, the type of private club and its
address within the city, and expiration date of the license for which such city
license fee has been paid. It shall be the duty of each such licensee to
maintain such city receipt on display in a conspicuous place on the premises of
the private club to which it relates.
(Prior Code, § 705.10)
§ 112.33 AUTOMATIC REVOCATION OF CITY LICENSE WHEN STATE LICENSE REVOKED.
   In the event that any private club license issued by the state, or any
agency thereof, is revoked, then in such event, any license issued under this
subchapter shall be likewise revoked and shall be null and void, without the
necessity of further proceedings hereunder, and the City Recorder shall note
the fact in his or her records.
(Prior Code, § 705.11)
LIQUOR CONTROL
§ 112.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol, beer, wine and spirits, and any liquid
or solid capable of being used as a beverage, but shall not include non-
intoxicating beer.
   BEER. Any beverage obtained by the fermentation of barley, malt, hops or any
other similar product or substitute, and containing more alcohol than that of
non-intoxicating beer.
   INTOXICATED. Having one’s faculties impaired by alcohol or other drugs to
the point where physical or mental control or both are markedly diminished.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the manufacture of any alcoholic liquor,
including, among others, a distiller, rectifier, wine maker and brewer.
   NON-INTOXICATING BEER. All cereal malt beverages or products of the brewing
industry commonly referred to as beer, lager beer, ale and all other mixtures
and preparations produced by the brewing industry, including malt coolers and
containing at least 0.5% alcohol by volume, but not more than 4.2% of alcohol
by weight, or 6% by volume, whichever is greater, all of which are hereby
declared to be non-intoxicating and the word LIQUOR as used in this subchapter
shall not be construed to include or embrace non-intoxicating beer nor any of
the beverages, products, mixtures or preparation included within this
definition.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, limited partnership, corporation
or voluntary association.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place, building or conveyance to which the public has or
is permitted to have access, including restaurants, soda fountains, hotel
dining rooms, lobbies and corridors of hotels, and any highway, street, lane,
park or place of public resort or amusement. PUBLIC PLACE does not mean or
include any of the above-named places or any portion or portions thereof which
qualify and are licensed under the provisions of W. Va. Code Chapter 60 or the
codified ordinances to sell alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises.
   SALE. Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means, for a
consideration, and includes all sales made by any principal, proprietor, agent
or employee.
   SELLING. Includes the solicitation or receipt of orders, possession for
sale, and possession with intent to sell.
   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
content of fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar.
(W. Va. Code 60-1-5) (Prior Code, § 521.01)
§ 112.46 REGULATIONS NOT APPLICABLE TO CERTAIN USES BY PHYSICIANS, DRUGGISTS
AND OTHERS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not prevent:
   (A)   A physician from prescribing the use of alcoholic liquors when
necessary for a bona fide patient;
   (B)   A druggist from selling, upon a prescription properly issued by a
physician, alcoholic liquors for medicinal purposes;
   (C)   A physician, dentist or veterinarian, in the legitimate practice of
his or her profession, from using and administering alcoholic liquors;
   (D)   Hospitals, sanitariums or that division of any institution which is
regularly conducted as a hospital, dispensary or infirmary from using or
administering alcoholic liquors to bona fide patients. Institutions and the
divisions thereof provided in this section may carry a stock of alcoholic
liquors sufficient for this purpose; and
   (E)   Religious organizations from using wine for sacramental purposes.
(W. Va. Code 60-6-5) (Prior Code, § 521.02)
§ 112.47 PROHIBITED ACTS GENERALLY.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Manufacture or sell in this city, without a license, any alcoholic
liquor except as permitted by W. Va. Code Chapter 60;
   (B)   Aid or abet in the manufacture or sale of alcoholic liquor without a
license, except as permitted by W. Va. Code Chapter 60;
   (C)   Sell without a license any alcoholic liquor other than provided by W.
Va. Code Article 60-6;
   (D)   Adulterate any alcoholic liquor by the addition of any drug, methyl
alcohol, crude, unrectified or impure form of ethyl alcohol, or any other
foreign or deleterious substance or liquid;
   (E)   Refill, with alcoholic liquor, any bottle or other container in which
alcoholic liquor has been sold at retail in this state;
   (F)   Advertise any alcoholic liquor in this state except in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the state’s Alcohol Beverage Control Commissioner;
   (G)   Distribute, deal in, process or use crowns, stamps or seals required
under the authority of W. Va. Code Chapter 60, except in accordance with the
rules and regulations prescribed by the state’s Alcohol Beverage Control
Commissioner; or
(W. Va. Code 60-6-7)
   (H)   Manufacture, sell, give or offer to make a sale or gift of, transport
or otherwise possess any alcoholic liquor or non-intoxicating beer except as
permitted by W. Va. Code Chapters 11 and 60.
(Prior Code, § 521.03)
§ 112.48 UNLAWFUL SALE OR POSSESSION BY ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR LICENSEE.
   No person licensed under W. Va. Code Chapter 60 shall:
   (A)   Sell alcoholic liquors of a kind other than that which is permissible
under W. Va. Code Chapter 60;
   (B)   Sell beer to which wine, spirits or alcohol has been added;
   (C)   Sell wine to which other alcoholic spirits have been added, otherwise
than as required in the manufacture thereof under regulations of the state’s
Alcohol Beverage Control Commissioner;
(W. Va. Code 60-6-8)
   (D)   (1)   Sell alcoholic liquors or non-intoxicating beer to a person who
is:
         (a)   Less than 21 years of age;
         (b)   An habitual drunkard;
         (c)   Intoxicated;
         (d)   Addicted to the use of any controlled substance as defined by W.
Va. Code Chapter 60A; or
         (e)   Mentally incompetent.
      (2)   It shall be a defense to a violation of division (D)(1)(a) above if
the seller shows that the purchaser:
         (a)   Produced written evidence which showed his or her age to be at
least the required age for purchase and which bore a physical description of
the person named on the writing which reasonably described the purchaser; or
         (b)   Produced evidence of other facts that reasonably indicated at
the time of sale that the purchaser was at least the required age.
(W. Va. Code 60-3-22)
   (E)   Keep on the premises covered by his or her license any alcoholic
liquor other than that which is authorized by W. Va. Code Chapter 60.
(W. Va. Code 60-6-8)
(Prior Code, § 521.04) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.49 UNLAWFUL PURCHASE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS FROM STATE AGENCY.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Being under the age of 21 years, for the purpose of purchasing
alcoholic liquors from a state liquor store or an agency, misrepresent his or
her age, or for such purpose present or offer any written evidence of age which
is false, fraudulent or not actually his or her own, or illegally attempt to
purchase alcoholic liquors from a state liquor store or an agency; or
   (B)   Knowingly buy for, give to or furnish to anyone under the age of 21
years to whom they are not related by blood or marriage, any alcoholic liquors
from whatever source.
(W. Va. Code 60-3-22a) (Prior Code, § 521.05) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.50 INTOXICATION OR DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES; ILLEGAL POSSESSION.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Appear in a public place in an intoxicated condition;
   (B)   Drink alcoholic liquor or non-intoxicating beer or carry or possess
any unsealed container, or partially filled container, of non-intoxicating beer
or intoxicating beverage upon any sidewalk, street, playground, recreational
facility or parking lot within the city except when specifically permitted by
the city during an organized activity;
   (C)   Drink alcoholic liquor or non-intoxicating beer in a motor vehicle on
any highway, street, alley or in a public garage. No person shall possess an
open container of non-intoxicating beer or alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle
except in a place which can be reached only by leaving the vehicle;
   (D)   Tender a drink of alcoholic liquor to another person in a public
place;
   (E)   Possess alcoholic liquor in the amount in excess of ten gallons, in
containers not bearing stamps or seals of the state’s Alcohol Beverage Control
Commissioner, without having first obtained written authority from the
Commissioner therefor; or
   (F)   Possess any alcoholic liquor which was manufactured or acquired in
violation of the provisions of W. Va. Code Chapter 60.
   (G)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100.
Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 60-6-9) (Prior Code, § 521.06) (Ord. passed 5-20-2025) Penalty,
see §
112.99
§ 112.51 ACTS PROHIBITED BY NON-INTOXICATING BEER LICENSEE.
   (A)   No licensee under W. Va. Code Article 11-16, his, her, its or their
servants, agents or employees shall sell, give or dispense, and no individual
shall drink or consume, in or on any licensed premises or in any rooms directly
connected therewith, non-intoxicating beer or cooler on weekdays between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 1:00
p.m. on any Sunday, except in private clubs licensed under the provisions of W.
Va. Code Article 60-7, where the hours shall conform with the hours of sale of
alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   No licensee, his, her, its or their servants, agents or employees
shall sell, furnish or give any non-intoxicating beer as defined in this
subchapter to any person visibly or noticeably intoxicated, or to any person
known to be insane or known to be a habitual drunkard.
   (C)   No licensee, his, her, its or their servants, agents or employees,
shall sell, furnish or give any non-intoxicating beer as defined in this
subchapter to any person who is less than 21 years of age.
   (D)   No distributor shall sell or offer to sell, and no retailer shall
purchase or receive, any non- intoxicating beer as defined in this subchapter,
except for cash; and no right of action shall exist to collect any claims for
credit extended contrary to the provisions of this division (D). Nothing herein
contained shall prohibit a licensee from crediting to a purchaser the actual
price charged for packages or containers returned by the original purchaser as
a credit on any sale, or from refunding to any purchaser the amount paid or
deposited for such containers when title is retained by the vendor.
   (E)   No brewer or distributor or brewpub or his, her, its or their agents,
shall transport or deliver non-intoxicating beer as defined in this subchapter
to any retail licensee on Sunday.
   (F)   No brewer or distributor shall give, furnish, rent or sell any
equipment, fixtures, signs or supplies directly or indirectly or through a
subsidiary or affiliate to any licensee engaged in selling products of the
brewing industry at retail, or offer any prize, premium, gift or other similar
inducement, except advertising matter of nominal value, to either trade or
consumer buyers; provided, that a distributor may offer, for sale or rent,
tanks of carbonic gas. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit a brewer from
sponsoring any professional or amateur athletic event or from providing prizes
or awards for participants and winners in any such events; provided, however,
that no such event shall be sponsored which permits actual participation by
athletes or other persons who are minors, unless specifically authorized by the
Non-intoxicating Beer Commissioner.
   (G)   No licensee shall permit in his or her premises any lewd, immoral or
improper entertainment, conduct or practice.
   (H)   No licensee except the holder of a license to operate a private club
issued under the provisions of W. Va. Code Article 60-7, or a holder of a
license for a private wine restaurant issued under the provisions of W. Va.
Code Article 60-8, shall possess a federal license, tax receipt or other permit
entitling, authorizing or allowing such licensee to sell liquor or alcoholic
drinks other than non- intoxicating beer.
   (I)   No licensee shall obstruct the view of the interior of his or her
premises by enclosure, lattice, drapes or any means which would prevent plain
view of the patrons occupying such premises. The interior of all licensed
premises shall be adequately lighted at all times; provided, that provisions of
this division (I) shall not apply to the premises of a Class B retailer, the
premises of a private club licensed under the provisions of W. Va. Code Article
60-7, or the premises of a private wine restaurant licensed under the
provisions of W. Va. Code Article 60-8.
   (J)   No licensee shall manufacture, import, sell, trade, barter, possess or
acquiesce in the sale, possession or consumption of any alcoholic liquors on
the premises covered by such license or on premises directly or indirectly used
in connection therewith; provided, that the prohibition contained in this
division (J) with respect to the selling or possessing or to the acquiescence
in the sale, possession or consumption of alcoholic liquors shall not be
applicable with respect to the holder of a license to operate a private club
issued under the provisions of W. Va. Code Article 60-7, nor shall the
prohibition be applicable to a private wine restaurant licensed under the
provisions of W. Va. Code Article 60-8, insofar as such private wine restaurant
is authorized to serve wine.
   (K)   No retail licensee shall sell or dispense non-intoxicating beer as
defined in this subchapter, purchased or acquired from any source other than a
distributor, brewer or manufacturer licensed under the laws of this state.
   (L)   No licensee shall permit loud, boisterous or disorderly conduct of any
kind upon his or her premises or permit the use of loud musical instruments if
either or any of the same may disturb the peace and quietude of the community
wherein such business is located; provided, that no licensee shall have in
connection with his or her place of business any loudspeaker located on the
outside of the licensed premises that broadcasts or carries music of any kind.
   (M)   No person whose license has been revoked shall obtain employment with
any retailer within the period of one year from the date of such revocation,
and no retailer shall employ knowingly any such person within such time.
   (N)   No distributor shall sell, possess for sale, transport or distribute
non-intoxicating beer except in the original container.
   (O)   No licensee shall knowingly permit any act to be done upon the
licensed premises, the commission of which constitutes a crime under the laws
of this state or municipality.
   (P)   No Class B retailer shall permit the consumption of non-intoxicating
beer upon his or her licensed premises.
   (Q)   No Class A licensee, his, her, its or their servants, agents or
employees, or any licensee, by or through such servants, agents or employees,
shall allow or permit any person less than 18 years of age to loiter in or upon
any licensed premises; except, however, that the provisions of this division
(Q) shall not apply where such person under the age of 18 years is in or upon
such premises in the immediate company of his or her parent or parents, or
where and while such person under the age of 18 years is in or upon such
premises for the purpose of and actually making a lawful purchase of any items
or commodities therein sold, or for the purchase of and actually receiving any
lawful service therein rendered, including the consumption of any item of food,
drink or soft drink therein lawfully prepared and served or sold for
consumption on such premises.
   (R)   No distributor shall sell, offer for sale, distribute or deliver any
non-intoxicating beer outside the territory assigned to such distributor by the
brewer or manufacturer of such non-intoxicating beer or sell, offer for sale,
distribute or deliver any such non-intoxicating beer to any retailer whose
principal place of business or licensed premises is within the assigned
territory of another distributor of such non-intoxicating beer; provided, that
nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit sales of convenience between
distributors licensed in this state wherein one such distributor sells,
transfers or delivers to another such distributor a particular brand or brands
for sale at wholesale.
   (S)   No licensee or any agent, servant or employee of any such licensee
shall knowingly violate any rule or regulation lawfully promulgated by the
Commissioner.
   (T)   Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any rule,
regulation or order lawfully promulgated by the Commissioner, or who makes any
false statement concerning any material fact in submitting application for
license or for a renewal of a license or in any hearing concerning the
revocation thereof, or who commits any of the acts herein declared to be
unlawful, shall be punished as provided in §
112.99(B).
   (U)   Nothing in this section nor any rule or regulation of the Commissioner
shall prevent or be deemed to prohibit any licensee from employing any person
who is at least 18 years of age to serve in such licensee’s lawful employ,
including the sale or delivery of non-intoxicating beer as defined in this
subchapter. With the prior approval of the Commissioner, a licensee whose
principal business is the sale of food or consumer goods or the providing of
recreation activities, including, but not limited to, nationally franchised
fast food outlets, family-oriented restaurants, bowling alleys, drug stores,
discount stores, grocery stores and convenience stores, may employ persons who
are less than 18 years of age but at least 16 years of age; provided, that such
person’s duties shall not include the sale or delivery of non-intoxicating beer
or alcoholic liquors; provided, however, that the authorization to employ such
persons under the age of 18 years shall be clearly indicated on the licensee’s
license.
(W. Va. Code 11-16-18) (Prior Code, § 521.07) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.52 UNLAWFUL PURCHASE OF NON-INTOXICATING BEER.
   (A)   No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase, consume, sell,
possess or serve non- intoxicating beer.
      (1)   Nothing in this section, nor any rule or regulation of the Alcohol
Beverage Control Commissioner, shall prevent or be deemed to prohibit any
person who is at least 18 years of age from serving in the lawful employment of
any licensee, which may include the sale or delivery of non- intoxicating beer.
Further, nothing in this section, nor any rule or regulation of the
Commissioner, shall prevent or be deemed to prohibit any person who is less
than 18 but at least 16 years of age from being employed by a licensee whose
principal business is the sale of food or consumer goods or the providing of
recreational activities, including, but not limited to, nationally franchised
fast food outlets, family- oriented restaurants, bowling alleys, drug stores,
discount stores, grocery stores and convenience stores: provided, that such
person shall not sell or deliver non-intoxicating beer.
      (2)   Nothing in this division (A) shall prohibit a person who is at
least 18 years of age from purchasing or possessing non-intoxicating beer when
he or she is acting upon the request of or under the direction and control of
any member of a state, federal or local law-enforcement agency or the state’s
Alcohol Beverage Administration while the agency is conducting an investigation
or other activity relating to the enforcement of the alcohol beverage control
statutes and the rules and regulations of the Commissioner.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years for the purpose of purchasing non-
intoxicating beer, shall misrepresent his or her age, or for such purpose
present or offer any written evidence of age which is false, fraudulent or not
actually his or her own, or shall illegally attempt to purchase non-
intoxicating beer.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly buy for, give to or furnish non-intoxicating
beer to anyone under the age of 21 years to whom they are not related by blood
or marriage.
(W. Va. Code 11-16-19) (Prior Code, § 521.08) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.53 ACTS PROHIBITED BY PRIVATE CLUB LICENSEE.
   (A)   No person licensed under W. Va. Code Article 60-7, or his or her
agent, employee or member thereof, on such licensee’s premises shall:
      (1)   Sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquors other than from the
original package or container;
      (2)   Authorize or permit: any disturbance of the peace; obscene, lewd,
immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practice; gambling or any slot
machine, multiple coin console machine, multiple coin console slot machine or
device in the nature of a slot machine;
      (3)   Sell, give away or permit the sale of, gift to or the procurement
of any non- intoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors for or to, or permit
the consumption of non-intoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors on the
licensee’s premises, by any person less than 21 years of age;
      (4)   Sell, give away, or permit the sale of, gift to or the procurement
of any non- intoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors, for or to any person
known to be deemed legally incompetent, or for or to any person who is
physically incapacitated due to consumption of non- intoxicating beer, wine or
alcoholic liquor or the use of drugs;
      (5)   Sell, give or dispense non-intoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic
liquors in or on any licensed premises or in any rooms directly connected
therewith, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on Sunday;
      (6)   Permit the consumption by, or serve to, on the licensed premises,
any non- intoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors covered by this
subchapter to any person who is less than 21 years of age;
      (7)   With the intent to defraud, alter, change or misrepresent the
quality, quantity or brand name of any alcoholic liquor;
      (8)   Sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquor to any person who is
not a duly elected or approved dues paying member in good standing of the
private club or a guest of such member;
      (9)   Sell, offer for sale, give away, facilitate the use of or allow the
use of carbon dioxide, cyclopropane, ethylene, helium or nitrous oxide for
purposes of human consumption except as authorized by the Commissioner;
      (10)   (a)   Employ any person who is less than 18 years of age in a
position where the primary responsibility for such employment is to sell,
furnish or give non-intoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors to any person;
         (b)   Employ any person who is between the ages of 18 and 21 who is
not directly supervised by a person aged 21 or over in a position where the
primary responsibility for such employment is to sell, furnish or give non-
intoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors to any person; or
      (11)   Violate any reasonable rule or regulation of the Alcohol Beverage
Control Commissioner.
   (B)   No licensee shall advertise in any news media or other means, outside
of the licensee’s premises, the fact that alcoholic liquors may be purchased
thereat.
(W. Va. Code 60-7-12) (Prior Code, § 521.09)
§ 112.54 UNLAWFUL PURCHASE FROM PRIVATE CLUB.
   (A)   No person under the age of 21 years shall order, pay for, share the
cost of or attempt to purchase any non-intoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic
liquors from a licensee or consume any non- intoxicating beer, wine or
alcoholic liquors purchased from a private club licensee or possess any non-
intoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors purchased from a licensee;
provided, that nothing in this division (A) shall prohibit a person who is at
least 18 years of age from purchasing or possessing non- intoxicating beer,
wine or alcoholic liquors when he or she is acting upon the request of or under
the direction and control of any member of a state, federal or local law-
enforcement agency or the state’s Alcohol Beverage Administration while the
agency is conducting an investigation or other activity relating to the
enforcement of the alcohol beverage control statutes and the rules and
regulations of the Commissioner.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years, for the purpose of purchasing
non-intoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors from a private club licensee,
misrepresent his or her age, or for such purpose present or offer any written
evidence of age which is false, fraudulent or not actually his or her own, or
illegally attempt to purchase non-intoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors
from a licensee.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly buy for, give to or furnish to anyone under
the age of 21 years any non-intoxicating beer, wine or alcoholic liquors
purchased from a licensee.
(W. Va. Code 60-7-12a) (Prior Code, § 521.10)
§ 112.55 ACTS PROHIBITED BY WINE DEALERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful:
      (1)   For a distributor to sell or deliver wine purchased or acquired
from any source other than a person registered under the provisions of W. Va.
Code 60-8-6, or for a retailer to sell or deliver wine purchased or acquired
from any source other than a licensed distributor or a farm winery as defined
in W. Va. Code 60-1-5a;
      (2)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for by the provisions of W.
Va. Code Article 60-8, for a licensee under W. Va. Code Article 60-8 to
acquire, transport, possess for sale, or sell wine other than in the original
package;
      (3)   For a licensee, his or her servants, agents or employees to sell,
furnish or give wine to any person less than 21 years of age or to a mental
incompetent or person who is physically incapacitated due to the consumption of
alcoholic liquor or the use of drugs;
      (4)   For a licensee to permit a person who is less than 18 years of age
to sell, furnish or give wine to any person;
      (5)   For a distributor to sell or deliver any brand of wine purchased or
acquired from any source other than the primary source of supply of the wine
which granted the distributor the right to sell such brand at wholesale. For
the purposes of this subchapter, PRIMARY SOURCE OF SUPPLY means the vintner of
the wine, the importer of a foreign wine who imports the wine into the United
States, the owner of a wine at the time it becomes a marketable product, the
bottler of a wine, or an agent specifically authorized by any of the above
enumerated persons to make a sale of the wine to a West Virginia distributor;
provided, that no retailer shall sell or deliver wine purchased or acquired
from any source other than a distributor licensed as such in this state;
provided, however, that nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit sales of
convenience between distributors licensed in this state wherein one such
distributor sells, transfers or delivers to another such distributor a
particular brand or brands for sale at wholesale of which brand or brands such
other distributor may be temporarily out of stock. The Alcohol Beverage
Commissioner shall promulgate such rules or regulations as may be necessary to
carry this division (A)(5) into effect; or
      (6)   For a person to violate any reasonable rule or regulation
promulgated by the Alcohol Beverage Control Commissioner under W. Va. Code
Article 60-8.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter, nor any rule or regulation of the
Commissioner, shall prevent or be deemed to prohibit any licensee from
employing any person who is at least 18 years of age to serve in any licensee’s
lawful employment, including the sale or delivery of wine under the provisions
of this subchapter. With the prior approval of the Commissioner, a licensee
whose principal business is the sale of food or consumer goods or the providing
of recreational activities, including, but not limited to, nationally
franchised fast food outlets, family-oriented restaurants, bowling alleys, drug
stores, discount stores, grocery stores and convenience stores, may employ
persons who are less than 18 years of age but at least 16 years of age;
provided, that such person’s duties shall not include the sale or delivery of
non-intoxicating beer or alcoholic liquors; provided, however, that the
authorization to employ such persons under the age of 18 years shall be clearly
indicated on the licensee’s license.
(W. Va. Code 60-8-20) (Prior Code, § 521.11)
§ 112.56 UNLAWFUL PURCHASE OF WINE.
   (A)   No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase, consume, sell,
possess or serve wine or other alcoholic liquor.
      (1)   Nothing in this section, nor any rule or regulation of the Alcohol
Beverage Control Commissioner, shall prevent or be deemed to prohibit any
person who is at least 18 years of age from serving in the lawful employment of
any licensee, which may include the sale or delivery of wine. Further, nothing
in this section, nor any rule or regulation of the Commissioner, shall prevent
or be deemed to prohibit any person who is less than 18 but at least 16 years
of age from being employed by a licensee whose principal business is the sale
of food or consumer goods or the providing of recreational activities,
including, but not limited to, nationally franchised fast food outlets, family-
oriented restaurants, bawling alleys, drug stores, discount stores, grocery
stores and convenience stores; provided, that such person shall not sell or
deliver wine or alcoholic liquor.
      (2)   Nothing in this division (A) shall prohibit a person who is at
least 18 years of age from purchasing or possessing wine or alcoholic liquor
when he or she is acting upon the request of or under the direction and control
of any member of a state, federal or local law-enforcement agency or the
state’s Alcohol Beverage Administration while the agency is conducting an
investigation or other activity relating to the enforcement of the alcohol
beverage control statutes and the rules and regulations of the Commissioner.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years, for the purpose of purchasing
wine or other alcoholic liquors from a licensee, shall misrepresent his or her
age, or for such purpose present or offer any written evidence of age which is
false, fraudulent or not actually his or her own, or illegally attempt to
purchase wine or other alcoholic liquors.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly buy for, give to or furnish wine or other
alcoholic liquors from any source to anyone under the age of 21 years to whom
they are not related by blood or marriage.
(W. Va. Code 60-8-20a)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates §§
112.49(A),
112.52(B) or
112.56(B)  shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law, or imprisoned for
a term not to exceed state law, or both, or, in lieu of such fine and
imprisonment, may, for the first offense, be placed on probation for not more
than one year.
      (2)   Whoever violates §§
112.49(b),
112.52(C) or
112.56(C)  shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law, or imprisoned for
a term not to exceed state law, or both.
(W. Va. Code 11-16-19, 60-3-22a, 60-8-20a, 60-3A-24)
      (3)   Whoever violates §
112.50(A) shall be sentenced in accordance with the following options:
         (a)   Upon first offense, a fine of an amount not to exceed state law.
If the individual, prior to conviction, agrees to voluntarily attend the
alcohol education program, the judge may delay sentencing until the program is
completed and upon completion may dismiss the charges;
         (b)   Upon conviction for a second offense, a fine of an amount not to
exceed state law and a term not to exceed state law in jail or completion of
not less than five hours of alcoholism counseling at the nearest community
mental health-mental retardation center; and
         (c)   Upon third and subsequent convictions, a fine of an amount not
to exceed state law and a term not to exceed state law in jail or a fine of an
amount not to exceed state law and completion of not less than five hours of
alcoholism counseling at the nearest community mental health- mental
retardation center; provided, that three convictions for public intoxication
within the preceding six months shall be considered evidence of alcoholism;
provided, however that for the educational counseling programs described in
this division (B)(3), the community mental health-mental retardation center may
charge each participant its usual and customary fee and shall certify in
writing to the referring judicial officer the completion or failure to complete
the prescribed program for each individual. A person charged with a violation
of §
112.50(A) who is an alcoholic shall be found not guilty by reason of addiction
and proper disposition made pursuant to W. Va. Code Articles 27-5 and 27-6A.
      (4)   Whoever violates §
112.50(B) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law; upon a second or
subsequent violation, shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or
imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law, or both.
      (5)   Whoever violates §
112.50(C) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisonment for
a term not to exceed state law, or both.
(W. Va. Code 60-6-9)
      (6)   Whoever violates §
112.50(D) or (E) is guilty of a misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be
fined an amount not to exceed state law.
(W. Va. Code 60-6-9)
      (7)   Whoever violates §§
112.52(A), or
112.56(A) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a
term not to exceed state law, or both, or in lieu thereof, may, for the first
offense, be placed on probation for a period not to exceed one year.
(W. Va. Code 11-16-19, 60-8-20a, 60-3A-24)
      (8)   Whoever violates §
112.53 shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a
term not to exceed state law, or both.
(W. Va. Code 60-7-12)
      (9)   Whoever violates §
112.54(A) or (B) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned
for a term not to exceed state law, or both, and in addition may, for the first
offense, be placed on probation for a period not to exceed one year.
      (10)   Whoever violates §
112.54(C) shall be fined an amount not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a
term not to exceed state law, or both.
(W. Va. Code 60-7-12a)
(Prior Code, § 521.99)
   (C)   Whoever violates §
112.47 is guilty of a misdemeanor for a first offense.
(Prior Code, § 521.03)
   (D)   Whoever violates §
112.50(E) or (F) is guilty of a misdemeanor for a first offense.
(Prior Code, § 521.06)
CHAPTER 113: ADULTS-ONLY ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
113.01   Title
   
113.02   Findings
   
113.03   Authority
   
113.04   Application
   
113.05   Purpose
   
113.06   Definitions
   
113.07   Land use regulations
   
113.08   Location of adults-only establishments
   
113.09   Parking
   
113.10   Signs
   
113.11   Application
   
113.12   Administration and enforcement
   
113.13   Procedures for violations
   
113.14   Appeal
   
113.15   Existing uses safeguarded
   
113.16   Abandonment of a non-conforming use
Cross-reference:
   Fees, see
Chapter 39
   Taxation, see
Chapter 38
§ 113.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as “the Adults-Only Establishment Location
Ordinance”.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 113.02 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The city finds that it has a substantial government interest in
protecting the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens.
   (B)   The city finds that adults-only establishments require special
supervision from public safety agencies to protect and preserve the health,
safety and welfare of the employees, patrons and neighbors of adults-only
establishments and the citizens of the city.
   (C)   The city finds that adults-only establishments, because of their very
nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly
when they are located in close proximity to each other, thereby contributing to
blight and downgrading the quality of life in adjacent areas.
   (D)   The city finds that the regulation of the location of adults-only
establishments is necessary to prevent undesirable secondary effects on
surrounding areas, including, without limitation, a tendency to attract an
undesirable quantity of transients; to adversely affect real property values;
to cause an increase in crime; to contribute io the blighting of residential
and commercial areas; and to impede the development of businesses and
residences.
   (E)   The city, through enactment of a land use ordinance, desires to
minimize and control these adverse secondary effects and thereby protect the
health, safety and welfare of the citizenry; protect the citizens from
increased crime; preserve the quality of life, preserve the property values and
character of adjacent areas; and deter the spread of blight.
   (F)   The city, although concerned about these adverse effects, upholds
constitutionally protected speech and expression and does not desire to
infringe on constitutionally protected speech and expression.
   (G)   The city wishes to enact a content neutral ordinance that addresses
only the secondary effects of adults-only establishments within the territorial
limits.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 113.03 AUTHORITY.
   The authority to enact this chapter is established under W. Va. Code 8A-1-
1 et seq., as amended, and the laws of the state.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 113.04 APPLICATION.
   The chapter shall apply to and be effective within the territorial limits.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 113.05 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the location of adults-only
establishments in the territorial limits on and after the effective date.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 113.06 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT and ABANDONED. The use, with respect to a premises, regardless
of the intent of the user, has ceased or has discontinued for a period of more
than 60 consecutive days, or an explicit declaration by the user of a premises
that it has ceased a use with respect to the premises that is non-conforming
with this chapter.
   ADULT. An individual person who is aged 21 years or older.
   ADULTS-ONLY BOOKSTORE. A commercial establishment that has as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock in trade or derives a substantial or
significant portion of its revenues or devotes a substantial or significant
portion of its interior business or advertising to any one or more of books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films for sale
or viewing on the premises by use of motion picture or video devices or other
coin-operated means, and other materials that are distinguished or
characterized by their principal emphasis on matters depicting, describing or
relating to nudity, explicit sexual conduct (whether auto-erotic, heterosexual,
homosexual or otherwise); bestiality; or sadomasochistic activity; or
instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use or marketed
primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for bestiality or
sadomasochistic use by patrons on or off the premises.
   ADULTS-ONLY ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. Either an exotic entertainment
establishment or a commercial establishment in which individual persons who
depict sexual conduct or activity are explicitly or implicitly encouraged or
tolerated.
   ADULTS-ONLY ESTABLISHMENT. An adults-only bookstore, and adults-only
entertainment establishment, an adults-only motion picture theatre or similar
adults-only establishment.
   ADULTS-ONLY MOTION PICTURE THEATRE. Part or all of a premises used regularly
and routinely for presenting adults-only material, including moving pictures,
videos or films, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to nudity, explicit sexual conduct (whether
auto-erotic, heterosexual, homosexual or otherwise), bestiality or
sadomasochistic activity, for observation or viewing by patrons on the
premises.
   APPLICANT. A person who has any legal or beneficial interest in a premises
who submits an application to the Building Department in an attempt to obtain
or re-obtain a certificate of compliance with respect to the premises.
   APPLICATION. The form or forms provided by the Building Department and
completed by an applicant, together with all required documents and items that
this chapter requires, by which the applicant seeks to obtain a certificate of
compliance.
   BOARD OF APPEALS. The public body of persons established by the city under
W. Va. Code Art. 8A-8, as amended.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A written document and renewals or amendments
thereto based on an application issued to an applicant (or retained by his or
her or its successor or assign) with respect to a premises by the Code Official
that evidence that such person and the premises comply or conform with the
provisions of this chapter.
   CITY. The City of Nitro, County(ies) Kanawha / Putnam, State of West
Virginia.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The individual whom the city has charged with the enforcement
of any ordinances of the city enacted pursuant to W. Va. Code 8A-1-1 et seq.,
as amended.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The document entitled “A Comprehensive Development Plan
for the City of Nitro, West Virginia,” dated                        20       ,
as amended, together with all maps, exhibits, schedules and addenda attached
thereto or incorporated by reference thereto.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. The date on which this chapter is enacted by the City
Council, or a subsequent date that is fixed in this chapter as the effective
date thereof.
   EXISTING USE. The use or uses to which any part or all of a premises, or
part or all of any improvement thereon, before the effective date are lawfully
pursued as a matter of right under local, state and federal law.
   EXOTIC ENTERTAINMENT. Live entertainment, dancing or other services
conducted by persons while nude or seminude in a commercial setting.
   EXOTIC ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. Part or all of a premises on which
exotic entertainment occurs.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any structure or building, whether or not existing on the
effective date, located on a premises or, if there is vested right to erect
such structure or building, to be located within or upon a premises.
   PERSON. Any individual or any corporation, limited liability company,
general partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, limited liability
partnership, trust, estate or any other legal entity that is duly organized or
existing and authorized to transaction business in the State of West Virginia.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The public body of persons established by the city
under W. Va. Code 8-24-6, as amended.
   PREMISES. A tract or tracts of land, whether containing existing or proposed
improvements, within the territorial limits that are identified as a parcel or
parcels on a tax district map or maps on file with the office of the Assessor
of Kanawha or Putnam County.
   RESIDENCE. A detached or un-detached dwelling for one or more persons and in
which there is not a predominating commercial or non-housing use, and shall not
mean a motel, hotel, inn or other lodging facility for transient persons.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. The individual person whom an applicant has designated
to attest to the truthfulness and accuracy of the contents of an application.
   SADOMASOCHISTIC ACTIVITY. Flagellation or torture by or upon a nude person;
a person clad in undergarments, or a mask or costume or condition of being
fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained with the intent to stimulate
or arouse sexually the initiator or the recipient.
   SEMINUDE. The appearance of at least:
      (1)   The female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the
areola at its highest point, including the entire lower portion of the human
female breast, but does not include any portion of the cleavage of the human
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or
other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed, in whole or in part;
      (2)   A human bare buttock, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area,
male genitals, female genitals or vulva, with less than a fully opaque
covering; or
      (3)   A human male genital in a discernibly turgid state even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   TERRITORIAL LIMITS. Those portions of land or area within the boundaries of
the city that are situated within the limits of the municipal corporation in
part or in whole within the city.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 113.07 LAND USE REGULATIONS.
   On and after the effective date, no person shall locate and operate an
adults-only establishment except in compliance or conformance with this
chapter. An applicant who desires to locate and operate an adults-only
establishment, upon an application therefor, shall obtain a certificate of
compliance with respect thereto in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 113.08 LOCATION OF ADULTS-ONLY ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   In the territorial limits, no public entrance to an adults-only
establishment shall be located within 2,000 feet of any property on which is
situated any of the following:
      (1)   A public or private child daycare facility, kindergarten,
elementary, grade, middle, junior, senior, secondary or vocational school;
      (2)   A public or private institution of higher education;
      (3)   A public or private business school or college;
      (4)   A public park or recreational facility, including, but not limited
to, a park, a playground, nature trail, swimming pool, athletic field,
basketball court, tennis court, wilderness area or other similar public land
within the territorial limits or otherwise;
      (5)   A public library;
      (6)   A church, mosque, temple or synagogue or other building used as a
place of religious worship or instruction;
      (7)   A federal, state, county or municipal office building;
      (8)   Another adults-only establishment;
      (9)   An establishment that is licensed to serve alcoholic beverages; or
      (10)   A residence.
   (B)   Each of the prescribed distances in division (A) above to a public
entrance of an adults- only establishment shall be measured along a straight
line from the nearest property line of the tract from which the measurement is
to be made.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 113.09 PARKING.
   (A)   Statement of intent. It is the purpose of this section to ensure that
every adults-only establishment maintains sufficient space on site to meet its
parking needs and to accommodate vehicular traffic that it generates.
   (B)   Parking requirements. Every adults-only establishment shall provide
and maintain on the site thereof one parking space for every 100 square feet of
the improvement in which the adults-only establishment operates or proposes to
operate.
   (C)   Parking space. For purposes of this section, a parking space shall
have dimensions of no less than eight and one-half feet wide and no less than
18 feet long, be paved and delineated with stripes.
   (D)   Traffic. No parking lot serving an adults-only establishment shall be
designed, constructed or maintained in such a manner as to permit motor
vehicles to reverse or back into a public or private road, alley, street or
highway.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 113.10 SIGNS.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this section to protect property values by
encouraging visually appealing, non-distracting signs; to permit such signs
that will not, by reason of their size, location or manner of display, to
detract from the economic viability of other persons and establishments in the
vicinity; to prevent signs from causing an annoyance or disturbance to a
substantial number of persons; and to promote a healthy and business-friendly
environmental in which signs relating to an adults-only establishment
contribute to and encourage rather than detract from the economic viability of
other persons and establishments in the vicinity.
   (B)   On and after the effective date, no person shall erect, structurally
alter or relocate any sign to advertise or promote any adults-only
establishment except in conformance with this chapter. It shall be unlawful for
any person to erect, structurally alter or relocate any sign or improvement
supporting a sign on or off premises of an adult-only establishment without
first obtaining a certificate of compliance based on an application therefor.
   (C)   The application for the approval of a sign shall be made upon forms
that the Code Official shall prepare and provide and shall include, without
limitation, an accurate scaled sketch or drawing of the proposed sign, its
proposed location and the content of the proposed sign.
   (D)   After a sign is constructed or installed based on the application
therefor, the applicant shall provide a letter to the Code Official certifying
that the sign was designed (including content), fabricated, sized, constructed
or installed according to the application as approved.
   (E)   Any sign promoting an adults-only establishment shall be flat and
mounted to the wall of the improvement in which the adults-only establishment
is located.
   (F)   No merchandise or depictions of adults-only matter, including, without
limitation, depictions of nude or seminude men or women, shall be displayed on
any sign advertising or promoting an adults-only establishment or otherwise,
nor in any windows or any other area that may be viewed from a public street,
alley, sidewalk or public way.
   (G)   The size of any sign promoting an adults-only establishment shall not
exceed more than one square foot per one lineal foot of street frontage of the
property on which an adults-only establishment is located. Notwithstanding
anything herein to the contrary, no sign promoting an adults- only
establishment shall have a dimension that exceeds three times any other
dimension or contain a maximum aggregate area that exceeds 30 square feet. The
permitted maximum size of a sign shall apply to the entire area enclosing the
extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or figure, together with any
frame or other material or color against which it is placed. If a sign is
painted on a wall, and includes background colors or graphics, and if the sign
is an integral part of the overall graphic scheme, the entire wall shall be
considered a sign and its measurement computed as such. If a sign is painted on
a wall, and the sign can be logically separated and measured separately from
the background graphics, the background graphic scheme shall not be computed in
the sign size.
   (H)   No adults-only establishment shall erect or display any portable or
movable sign on the premises thereof. No adults-only establishment shall erect
nor maintain more than one sign advertising or promoting an adults-only
establishment on the premises thereof.
   (I)   No sign promoting an adults-only establishment shall contain lights or
animated parts that incorporate in any manner flashing or moving lights or any
other visible moving or revolving part, except for a sign indicating time,
temperature or date.
   (J)   No sign promoting an adults-only establishment shall project more than
18 inches from the wall.
   (K)   Upon receipt of written notice an applicant, the Code Official shall
inspect the sign after it is completed and, upon a demonstration that such sign
complies or conforms with this chapter, issue a certificate of compliance to
the applicant, or if the Code Official determines that such sign does not
comply or conform with this chapter, issue a written denial of the application
therefor that shall include a written statement of the reason or reasons for
the denial.
   (L)   If any sign promoting and adults-only establishment is abandoned, such
sign shall be deemed a nuisance misleading the public and affecting or
endangering surrounding property values and shall be deemed detrimental to the
public health, safety and general welfare of the community and shall be abated.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.11 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person who desires to obtain a certificate of compliance shall
designate a responsible person who shall make an application in accordance with
this chapter to the Code Official.
   (B)   The Code Official shall accept no application unless the responsible
person shall attest that all of the statements contained therein and the
documents attached thereto are true and accurate in all material respects.
   (C)   The application shall include, without limitation, a copy of a site
plan of the existing or proposed improvement or improvements, the parcel or
parcels of land of which it or they are situated and all appurtenances and
rights-of-way related to or affecting the site, together with a letter
describing the proposed adults-only establishment.
   (D)   The site plan shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or
larger and shall include the following data:
      (1)   Name and address of the person who prepared the site plan; the date
of preparation; north point, and scale; a metes and bounds description of the
site; tax district, map and parcel identification numbers; and the names and
mailing addresses of the applicant and the responsible person;
      (2)   Existing and proposed contours of the premises;
      (3)   Certification by a land surveyor or engineer that the dimensions
and bearings on the site plan are accurately delineated and location of all
easements and rights-of-way with respect to the premises;
      (4)   Number and type of the proposed improvements on the premises; gross
floor area of each improvement on the premises;
      (5)   Location, shape, exterior dimensions and number of stories of each
improvement on the premises;
      (6)   Location, grade and dimensions of paved surfaces of the premises,
and of all streets, alleys, roads and highways abutting the premises;
      (7)   Complete traffic circulation and parking plan showing dimensions,
entrance and exit drives, planters and similar improvements with respect to the
premises;
      (8)   Location of landscaped areas (to be detailed on landscape plan),
fences, walls and other screening with respect to the premises;
      (9)   Signage plan;
      (10)   If required by another governmental authority or the state’s
sediment and erosion control plan;
      (11)   Drainage plan for the premises prepared by a registered
professional engineer licensed to practice in the state; and
      (12)   Certification of distances from properties on which uses set forth
in §
113.08 are found as of the date of the application on forms that the Code
Official shall provide to the applicant. The application fee shall be $100.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 113.12 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Code Official or his or her duly
authorized agent to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter,
except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Code Official to:
      (1)   Receive and process any application;
      (2)   Issue a certificate of compliance upon an application therefor;
      (3)   Conduct investigations as necessary to determine compliance or
conformance with or violation of this chapter;
      (4)   Abate any violation of this chapter;
      (5)   Seek the assistance of the office of local law enforcement, Sheriff
of the or the office of the prosecuting attorney of the appropriate county, as
the case may be, to abate or prosecute any violation of this chapter;
      (6)   Assist law enforcement officers to abate or prosecute any violation
of this chapter;
      (7)   Provide information about this chapter upon the request of citizens
and public agencies;
      (8)   Pursue enforcement of this chapter as this chapter and other law
provides; and
      (9)   Administer this chapter in all respects.
   (C)   No certificate of occupancy nor similar certificate shall be issued by
the city to any person to occupy or use any premises as an adults-only
establishment until the Code Official shall issue a certificate of compliance
therefor or determine that a certificate of compliance shall remain in force
and effect.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 113.13 PROCEDURES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully
the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Code Official. The Code
Official shall record properly such complaint, conduct appropriate
investigation and take action thereon as this chapter provides.
   (B)   If, after a certificate of compliance is issued to any applicant, the
Code Official finds that any part of the application on which the certificate
of compliance was issued was false in any material respect, or that the
premises for which the certificate of compliance was issued does not comply or
conform with this chapter, then the Code Official shall revoke the certificate
of compliance by issuing a written notice thereof to the applicant, and the
applicant or subsequent holder of a certificate of compliance therefor shall
immediately cease and desist the use or uses for which the certificate of
compliance was issued.
   (C)   If the Code Official finds that any of the provisions of this chapter
are violated, whether reported by any person or by any commission, board,
agency, officer or employee of the city, or by his or her own observation, he
or she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation.
Service of the written notice shall be deemed complete upon sending the notice
by certified mail to the last known address of the person or by personal
service by the office of the local law enforcement agency.
   (D)   Any such notice of violation of this chapter shall include the
following:
      (1)   Street address or legal description of the premises, including
identification by the tax district and tax map and parcel numbers;
      (2)   A statement of the nature of the violation;
      (3)   A description of the action required to correct the violation;
      (4)   A statement of the time within which compliance with this chapter
must be accomplished; and
      (5)   A statement that upon failure to comply with the requirements of
the notice, the Code Official shall take such enforcement actions as this
chapter authorizes.
   (E)   The Code Official may order the discontinuance of any use of a parcel
or parcels of land or any improvements that does not conform to this chapter by
issuing a written notice. The Code Official may seek other remedies provided by
law, including, without limitation, injunction, abatement by judicial
proceeding in the Circuit Court of the county.
   (F)   The Code Official may impose a monetary fine of an amount, not to
exceed state law, per day against any person or persons who violate this
chapter or any order or notice issued thereunder.
   (G)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City
Council from pursuing other lawful actions to prevent or remedy violations of
this chapter.
   (H)   The regulated aspects of an adults-only establishment subject to this
chapter shall be subject to the periodic inspections for the purpose of
verifying compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 113.14 APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person who is aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Code Official, administrative officer or body charged
with the enforcement of this chapter may appeal the same to the Board of
Appeals within the time and the manner prescribed by law.
   (B)   In addition to the right of appeal described in division (A) above,
any person who is aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Code Official, administrative officer or body charged
with the enforcement of this chapter may seek such other redress or relief as
state law provides.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 113.15 EXISTING USES SAFEGUARDED.
   This chapter shall not prohibit the continuance of the existing use of any
tract of land or improvement for the purpose for which such tract of land or
improvement is used on the effective date. This chapter shall not prohibit the
alteration or replacement of any improvement for the purpose for which such
improvement is used on the effective date, except that the use shall not be
expanded or enlarged unless it shall conform to this chapter.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 113.16 ABANDONMENT OF A NON-CONFORMING USE.
   Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, if an existing use
is nonconforming with this chapter has been abandoned, any future use of such
land or improvement shall conform with this chapter.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 9-18-2007)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GAMBLING
      
131.   INDECENCY AND OBSCENITY
      
132.   MINORS
      
133.   WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 130: GAMBLING
Section
   
130.01   Keeping or exhibiting gambling apparatus
   
130.02   Permitting gambling apparatus on premises
   
130.03   Acting as lookout or guard for keeper of gambling apparatus
   
130.04   Playing on gambling apparatus; hotels, public places
   
130.05   Making wager for value or furnishing money to another for wager
   
130.06   Permitting gambling at public places
   
130.07   Cheating or fraudulent actions while gambling or making a wager
   
130.08   Pool rooms and pool tickets
   
130.09   Lotteries and raffles
 
   
130.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Crimes against public policy, see W. Va. Code Art. 61-10
   Gambling at fairs prohibited, see W. Va. Code 19-7-8
   Gaming contracts, see W. Va. Code Art. 55-9
   Pari-mutuel system of wagering at race track permitted, see W. Va. Code 19-
23-9
§ 130.01 KEEPING OR EXHIBITING GAMBLING APPARATUS.
   No person shall keep or exhibit a gaming table, commonly called an A.B.C. or
E.O. table, faro bank, keno table, or any slot machine, multiple coin console
machine, multiple coin console slot machine or device in the nature of a slot
machine, or any other gaming table or device of like kind, under any
denomination or which has no name, whether the game, table, bank, machine or
device is played with cards, dice or otherwise, or be a partner, or concerned
in interest, in keeping or exhibiting such table, bank, machine or gaming
device of any character. Any such table, faro bank, machine or gaming device,
and all money staked or exhibited to allure persons to bet at such table or
upon such gaming device, may be seized by order of the Police Court and the
money so seized shall be forfeited to the municipality and paid into the
Municipal Treasury and the table, faro bank, machine or gaming device shall be
completely destroyed. However, the provisions of this section shall not extend
to coin-operated nonpayout machines with free play features or to automatic
weighing, measuring, musical and vending machines which are so constructed as
to give a certain uniform and fair return in value or services for each coin
deposited therein and in which there is no element of chance.
(W. Va. Code 61-10-1) (Prior Code, § 513.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 PERMITTING GAMBLING APPARATUS ON PREMISES.
   No person shall knowingly permit a gaming table, bank or device, as
mentioned in §
130.01, to be kept or exhibited on any premises in his or her occupation.
(W. Va. Code 61-10-2) (Prior Code, § 513.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 ACTING AS LOOKOUT OR GUARD FOR KEEPER OF GAMBLING APPARATUS.
   No person shall act as doorkeeper, guard or watch, or employ another person
to act as such, for a keeper or exhibitor of any gaming table, bank or device
as mentioned in §
130.01, nor resist, nor by any means or device, prevent, hinder or delay the
lawful arrest of such keeper or exhibitor, or the seizure of the table, bank or
device, or money exhibited or staked thereat, nor unlawfully take the same from
the person seizing it.
(W. Va. Code 61-10-3) (Prior Code, § 513.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 PLAYING ON GAMBLING APPARATUS; HOTELS, PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall bet or play at any gaming table, bank or device as mentioned
in §
130.01, or, at any hotel or tavern, other public place or place of public
resort, play at any game except bowling, chess or backgammon, draughts or a
licensed game, or bet on the side of those who play at any game, whether or not
the game is permitted or licensed.
(W. Va. Code 61-10-4) (Prior Code, § 513.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 MAKING WAGER FOR VALUE OR FURNISHING MONEY TO ANOTHER FOR WAGER.
   No person shall, at any place, public or private, bet or wage money or other
thing of value on any game of chance, or knowingly furnish any money or other
thing of value to any other person to bet or wage on any such game.
(W. Va. Code 61-10-5) (Prior Code, § 513.05) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 PERMITTING GAMBLING AT PUBLIC PLACES.
   No keeper of a hotel, tavern or other public place shall permit unlawful
gaming at his or her house, or at any outhouse, booth, arbor or other place
appurtenant thereto.
(W. Va. Code 61-10-6) (Prior Code, § 513.06) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.07 CHEATING OR FRAUDULENT ACTIONS WHILE GAMBLING OR MAKING A WAGER.
   No person playing at any game or making a wager, or having a share in any
stake or wager, or betting on the hands or sides of others playing at any game
or making a wager, shall cheat, or by fraudulent means win or acquire for
himself, or another, money or any other valuable thing.
(W. Va. Code 61-10-9) (Prior Code, § 513.07) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.08 POOL ROOMS AND POOL TICKETS.
   (A)   POOL ROOM, wherever used in this section, means any room where any
pool ticket, chance voucher or certificate is sold entitling or purporting to
entitle the holder or promisee thereof, or any other person, to money or other
thing of value, contingent upon the result of any horse race, prizefight, game
of chance, game of skill or science or other sport or contest.
   (B)   No person shall set up or promote, or be connected with or interested
in the management or operation of any pool room. The buying, selling or
transferring of tickets or chances in any lottery is hereby prohibited.
(W. Va. Code 61-10-10) (Prior Code, § 513.08) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.09 LOTTERIES AND RAFFLES.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall set up, promote or be
concerned in managing or drawing a lottery or raffle for money or other thing
of value; knowingly permit such lottery in any house under his or her control;
knowingly permit money or other property to be raffled for in such house or to
be won therein by throwing or using dice or by any other game of chance;
knowingly permit the sale in such house of any chance or ticket, or share of a
ticket in a lottery, or any writing, certificate, bill, token or other device
purporting or intended to guarantee or assure to any person or to entitle him
or her to a prize, or a share of or interest in a prize to be drawn in a
lottery. No person shall for himself, herself or any other person, buy, sell,
transfer or have in his or her possession for the purpose of sale or with
intent to exchange, negotiate or transfer, or aid in selling, exchanging,
negotiating or transferring a chance or ticket, or a share of a ticket, in a
lottery or any such writing, certificate, bill, token or device. However, this
section shall not be deemed to apply to that certain type or form of lottery or
raffle designated and familiarly known as “policy” or “numbers”.
(W. Va. Code 61-10-11) (Prior Code, § 513.09) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever violates §§
130.04 or
130.06 shall be fined not more than $100.
   (C)   Whoever violates §
130.05 shall be fined not more than $300.
(Prior Code, § 513.99)
CHAPTER 131: INDECENCY AND OBSCENITY
Section
   
131.01   Operating a place for or permitting or engaging in prostitution,
lewdness or assignation
   
131.02   Detention of person in place of prostitution
   
131.03   Pandering
   
131.04   Pimping
   
131.05   Profane swearing and drunkenness
   
131.06   Obscene or harassing telephone calls
   
131.07   Indecent exposure
   
131.08   Invasion of privacy by looking
   
131.09   Preparation, distribution or exhibition of obscene matter to minors
   
131.10   Sale or display of obscene matter
 
   
131.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prevent indecent practices, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(19)
   Authority to prohibit distribution of obscene literature, see W. Va. Code 8-
12-5(17)
   Authority to suppress houses of ill fame, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(18)
   Equitable remedies, see W. Va. Code Art. 61-9
§ 131.01 OPERATING A PLACE FOR OR PERMITTING OR ENGAGING IN PROSTITUTION,
LEWDNESS OR ASSIGNATION.
   (A)   No person shall keep, set up, maintain or operate any house, place,
building, hotel, tourist camp, other structure or part thereof, or vehicle,
trailer or other conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or
assignation; or own any place, house, hotel, tourist camp, other structure or
part thereof, or trailer or other conveyance knowing the same to be used for
the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation, or let, sublet or rent
any such place, premises or conveyance to another with knowledge or good reason
to know of the intention of the lessee or rentee to use such place, premises or
conveyance for prostitution, lewdness or assignation; or offer, or offer to
secure another for the purpose of prostitution or for any other lewd or
indecent act; or receive or offer or agree to receive any person into any
house, place, building, hotel, tourist camp or other structure, or vehicle,
trailer or other conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or
assignation, or permit any person to remain there for such purpose; or for
another or others, direct, take or transport, or offer or agree to take or
transport, or aid or assist in transporting any person to any house, place,
building, hotel, tourist camp, other structure, vehicle, trailer or other
conveyance, or to any other person with knowledge or having reasonable cause to
believe that the purpose of such directing, taking or transporting is
prostitution, lewdness or assignation; or aid, abet or participate in the doing
of any acts herein prohibited. Whoever violates this division (A) shall, for a
first offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall engage in prostitution, lewdness or assignation,
or solicit, induce, entice or procure another to commit an act of prostitution,
lewdness or assignation; or reside in, enter or remain in any house, place,
building, hotel, tourist camp or other structure, or enter or remain in any
vehicle, trailer or other conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness
or assignation; or aid, abet or participate in the doing of any of the acts
herein prohibited.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (B) shall, for a first or second
offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The subsequent offense provision shall
apply only to the pimp, panderer, solicitor, operator or any person benefitting
financially or otherwise from the earnings of a prostitute.
   (C)   All leases and agreements, oral or written, for letting, subletting or
renting any house, place, building, hotel, tourist camp or other structure
which is used for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation, shall
be void from and after the date any person who is a party to such an agreement
shall be convicted of an offense hereunder. TOURIST CAMP includes any temporary
or permanent buildings, tents, cabins or structures, or trailers or other
vehicles which are maintained, offered or used for dwelling or sleeping
quarters for pay.
   (D)   In the trial of any person charged with a violation of any of the
provisions of this section, testimony concerning the reputation or character of
any house, place, building, hotel, tourist camp or other structure, and of the
person or persons who reside in or frequent them, and of the defendant or
defendants, shall be admissible in evidence in support of the charge.
(W. Va. Code 61-8-5) (Prior Code, § 517.01) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.02 DETENTION OF PERSON IN PLACE OF PROSTITUTION.
   No person shall by any means keep, hold, detain or restrain any person in a
house of prostitution or other place where prostitution is practiced or
allowed; shall, directly or indirectly, keep, hold, detain or restrain or
attempt to keep, hold, detain or restrain, in any house of prostitution or
other place where prostitution is practiced or allowed, any person by any
means, for the purpose of compelling such person, directly or indirectly, to
pay, liquidate or cancel any debt, dues or obligations incurred or said to have
been incurred by such person.
(W. Va. Code 61-8-6) (Prior Code, § 517.02) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 PANDERING.
   (A)   No person shall procure an inmate for a house of prostitution, or by
promises, threats, violence or by any device or scheme, cause, induce, persuade
or encourage a person to become an inmate of a house of prostitution, or shall
procure a place as inmate in a house of prostitution for a person. No person
shall, by promises, threats, violence or any device or scheme cause, induce,
persuade or encourage an inmate of a house of prostitution to remain therein as
such inmate; or shall, by fraud or artifice, or by duress of person or goods,
or by abuse of any position of confidence or authority, procure any person to
become an inmate of a house of ill fame, to enter any place in which
prostitution is encouraged or allowed within this municipality, or to come into
or leave this municipality for the purpose of prostitution, or shall procure
any person to become an inmate of a house of ill fame within this municipality
or to come into or leave this municipality for the purpose of prostitution; or
shall receive or give or agree to receive or give any money or thing of value
for procuring or attempting to procure any person to become an inmate of a
house of ill fame within this municipality, or to come into or leave this
municipality for the purpose of prostitution.
   (B)   It shall not be a defense to prosecution for any of the acts
prohibited in this section that any part of such act or acts shall have been
committed outside of this municipality, and the offense shall in such case be
deemed and alleged to have been committed and the offender tried and punished
in the municipality or county in which the prostitution was intended to be
practiced, or in which the offense was consummated, or any overt act in
furtherance of the offense was committed.
   (C)   Any such person shall be a competent witness in any prosecution under
this section to testify for or against the accused as to any transaction, or as
to conversation with the accused, or by the accused with another person or
persons in his or her presence, notwithstanding his or her having married the
accused before or after the violation of any of the provisions of this section,
whether called as a witness during the existence of the marriage or after its
dissolution. The act or state of marriage shall not be a defense to any
violation of this section.
(W. Va. Code 61-8-7) (Prior Code, § 517.03) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 PIMPING.
   No person knowing another person to be a prostitute, shall live or derive
support or maintenance, in whole or in part, from the earnings or proceeds of
the prostitution of such prostitute, or from money loaned or advanced to or
charged against such prostitution by any keeper or manager or inmate of a house
or other place where prostitution is practiced or allowed, or shall tout or
receive compensation for touting for such prostitution. A prostitute shall be a
competent witness in any prosecution hereunder to testify for or against the
accused as to any transaction or conversation with the accused, or by the
accused with another person or persons in the presence of the prostitute, even
if the prostitute may have married the accused before or after the violation of
any of the provisions of this section, whether called as a witness during the
existence of the marriage or after its dissolution.
(W. Va. Code 61-8-8) (Prior Code, § 517.04) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.05 PROFANE SWEARING AND DRUNKENNESS.
   No person having arrived at the age of discretion shall profanely curse or
swear or get drunk in public.
(W. Va. Code 61-8-15) (Prior Code, § 517.05) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.06 OBSCENE OR HARASSING TELEPHONE CALLS.
   (A)   No person with intent to harass or abuse another by means of telephone
shall:
      (1)   Make any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene;
      (2)   Make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, without
disclosing his or her identity and with intent to harass any person at the
called number;
      (3)   Make or cause the telephone of another repeatedly or continuously
to ring, with intent to harass any person at the called number;
      (4)   Make repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues,
with intent to harass any person at the called number; or
      (5)   Threaten to commit a crime against any person or property.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly permit any telephone under his or her
control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section.
   (C)   Any offense committed under this section may be deemed to have
occurred at the place at which the telephone call was made, or the place at
which the telephone call was received.
(W. Va. Code 61-8-16) (Prior Code, § 517.06) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.07 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   No person shall intentionally expose his or her sex organs or anus or the
sex organs or anus of another person, or intentionally cause such exposure by
another or engage in any overt act of sexual gratification, under circumstances
in which the person knows that the conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm.
(W. Va. Code 61-8B-10) (Prior Code, § 517.07) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.08 INVASION OF PRIVACY BY LOOKING.
   No person shall unlawfully enter upon the property of another or secretly or
furtively peep through or attempt to peep into, through, or spy through a
window, door or other aperture of any building, structure or other enclosure of
any nature occupied by or intended for occupancy as a dwelling or dormitory,
whether or not such building, structure or enclosure be permanently situated or
transportable and whether or not such occupancy be permanent or temporary.
(Prior Code, § 517.08) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.09 PREPARATION, DISTRIBUTION OR EXHIBITION OF OBSCENE MATTER TO MINORS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DISTRIBUTE. To transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
      EMPLOYEE. Any individual who renders personal services in the course of a
business, who receives compensation therefor at a fixed rate and who has no
financial interest in the ownership or operation of the business other than his
or her salary or wages.
      EXHIBIT. To display or offer for viewing, whether with or without
consideration.
      KNOWINGLY. To display or offer for viewing, whether with or without
consideration.
      MATTER. Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written
material, or any picture, drawing or photograph, motion picture, or other
visual representation, or any statue or other figure, or live conduct, or any
recording, transcription or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or
any other articles, equipment, machines or materials.
      MINOR. Any individual under the age of 18 years.
      OBSCENE MATTER. To the average individual, applying contemporary state
standards, matter which:
         (a)   Considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient interests;
         (b)   Depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner ultimate
sexual acts, both normal and perverted, actual or simulated, masturbation,
sodomy, fellatio, cunnilingus, bestiality, sadism, excretory functions or lewd
exhibition of the genitals; and
         (c)   Considered as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
      PREPARE. To produce, publish or print.
      PUBLIC DISPLAY. The placing of material on or in a billboard, viewing
screen, theater, marquee, newsstand, display rack, window showcase, display
case or similar public place, so that the material within the meaning of
“obscene matter” is easily visible from a public thoroughfare, from the
property of others or from commercial or business premises generally open to
minors at the time of such placing.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly send or cause to be sent or bring or cause
to be brought into this municipality any obscene matter for distribution,
exhibition or public display to a minor, or in this municipality prepare for,
distribute to, exhibit to or publicly display to a minor any obscene matter, or
offer to prepare for, distribute to, exhibit to or publicly display to a minor
any obscene matter, or have in his or her possession with the intent to
distribute, exhibit or make a public display of, any obscene matter to a minor.
   (C)   No employees shall be guilty of a violation of this section when such
employee is a projectionist, ticket taker, usher or when such employee
distributes, prepares or exhibits obscene matter while acting within the scope
of his or her employment.
   (D)   Any person who distributes or exhibits obscene matter, or possesses
obscene matter with the intent to distribute or exhibit the same in the course
of his or her business, is presumed to do so with knowledge of its content or
character.
   (E)   No person shall be guilty of distributing or exhibiting obscene matter
to a minor when such person has reasonable cause to believe that the minor
involved was 18 years of age or more and such minor exhibited to such person a
driver’s license, draft card or other official or apparently official document
purporting to establish that such minor was 18 years of age or more.
   (F)   No person who, with knowledge that a person is a minor under 18 years
of age, or who, while in possession of such facts that he or she should
reasonably know that such person is a minor under 18 years of age, shall hire,
employ or use such minor to do or assist in doing any of the acts described in
the definition of “obscene matter” above.
(W. Va. Code Art. 61-8A) (Prior Code, § 517.09) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.10 SALE OR DISPLAY OF OBSCENE MATTER.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      INDIVIDUAL. Any human being regardless of age.
      KNOWINGLY. To have knowledge of or to be aware of the content or
character of obscene matter.
      MATTER. Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written
material, or any picture, drawing or photograph, motion picture, or other
visual representation, or live conduct, or any recording, transcription or
mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or any other articles,
equipment, machines or materials.
      OBSCENE. Matter which the average individual applying contemporary
community standards would find:
         (a)   Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest;
         (b)   Depicts or describes in a patently offensive way ultimate sexual
acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; and
         (c)   The matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value, and which either:
            1.   Depicts or describes patently offensive representation of
masturbation, excretory functions, lewd exhibition of the genitals, sodomy,
fellatio, cunnilingus, bestiality, sadism or masochism; or
            2.   Depicts or describes nudity or sexual acts of persons, male or
female, below the age of 18 years.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
      PREPARE. To produce, publish or print.
      PUBLIC DISPLAY. The placing of material on or in a billboard, viewing
screen, theater, marquee, newsstand, display sack, window, showcase, display
case or similar public places so that material can be purchased or viewed by
individuals.
   (B)   Individual relief. The Circuit Court shall have jurisdiction to issue
an injunction to enforce the purposes of this section upon petition by the
attorney for the municipality or a representative thereof or any citizen of the
municipality who can show a good faith and valid reason for making such
application. No bond shall be required unless for good cause shown.
   (C)   Activities prohibited. No person shall knowingly send, or cause to be
sent, or cause to be brought into the municipality for sale or public display,
or prepare, sell or make a public display, or in the municipality offer to
prepare, sell or make a public display, or have in his or her possession with
the intent to sell or make a public display of any obscene matter to any
individual.
   (D)   Employees not prosecuted. No employee shall be guilty of a violation
of this section when such employee is a projectionist, ticket taker, usher or
when such employee prepares, sells or makes a public display of obscene matter
while acting within the scope of his or her regular employment, unless such
employee has a proprietary interest in such obscene matter or is a shareholder
or officer of a corporation which has a proprietary interest in such obscene
matter.
   (E)   Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to apply
to any person exercising a right secured by the Constitution or laws of this
state or of these United States.
(W. Va. Code 8-12-5(b)) (Prior Code, § 517.10) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates §§
131.01(A) or
131.07 shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed state law, or both.
      (2)   Whoever violates §
131.01(B) shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed state law, or both, and for a second offense shall be fined a sum
not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law, or
both.
      (3)   Whoever violates §
131.10 shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed state law, for a first offense. For a second or subsequent
offense, such person shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law or imprisoned
for a term not to exceed state law, or both.
(Prior Code, § 517.99)
   (C)   Whoever violates §
131.02 shall, for a first offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor if the person so
kept, held, detained or restrained under §
131.02 is not a minor.
(W. Va. Code 61-8-6) (Prior Code, § 517.02)
   (D)   Whoever violates this §
131.03 is guilty of a misdemeanor for the first offense unless the inmate
referred to in this section is a minor.
(W. Va. Code 61-8-7) (Prior Code, § 517.03)
   (E)   Whoever violates §
131.04 shall, for a first offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor unless the
prostitute referred to in this section is a minor.
(W. Va. Code 61-8-8) (Prior Code, § 517.04)
CHAPTER 132: MINORS
Section
   
132.01   Contributing to delinquency or neglect of minor
   
132.02   Cruelty to children
   
132.03   Parental liability for acts of children
   
132.04   Abandoned airtight containers
   
132.05   Curfew
   
132.06   Tobacco usage restrictions
   
132.07   Smoking prohibited in motor vehicle while a person 16 years of age or
less is present; penalty
 
   
132.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Contributing to delinquency of minor, see W. Va. Code Art. 49-7
   Delinquent child defined, see W. Va. Code 31D-14-1401 et seq.
   Jurisdiction of municipal court, see W. Va. 49-5-101(b)
§ 132.01 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OR NEGLECT OF MINOR.
   No person shall by any act or omission contribute to, encourage or tend to
cause the delinquency or neglect of any child, including, but not limited to,
aiding or encouraging any such child to habitually or continually refuse to
respond, without just cause, to the lawful supervision of such child’s parent,
guardian or custodian or to be habitually absent from school without just
cause.
(W. Va. Code Art. 49-7) (Prior Code, § 525.01) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.02 CRUELTY TO CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person shall cruelly ill treat, abuse or inflict unnecessary cruel
punishment upon any infant or minor child, and no person, having the care,
custody or control of any minor child, shall willfully abandon or neglect the
minor child.
   (B)   In addition to any penalty provided under this chapter and any
restitution which may be ordered by the court, the court may order any person
convicted under the provisions of this section to pay all or any portion of the
cost of medical, psychological or psychiatric treatment of the victim, the need
for which results from the act or acts for which the person is convicted,
whether or not the victim is considered to have sustained bodily injury.
(W. Va. Code 61-8D-4) (Prior Code, § 525.02) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.03 PARENTAL LIABILITY FOR ACTS OF CHILDREN.
   (A)   The custodial parent or parents of any minor child shall be personally
liable in an amount not to exceed that specified in W. Va. Code 55-7A-2 for
damages which are the proximate result of any one or a combination of the
following acts of the minor child:
      (1)   The malicious and willful injury to the person of another;
      (2)   The malicious and willful injury or damage to the property of
another, whether the property be real, personal or mixed;
      (3)   The malicious and willful setting fire to a forest or wooded area
belonging to another; or
      (4)   The willful taking, stealing and carrying away of the property of
another, with the intent to permanently deprive the owner of possession.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, CUSTODIAL PARENT OR PARENTS means the
parent or parents with whom the minor child is living, or a divorced or
separated parent who does not have legal custody but who is exercising
supervisory control over the minor child at the time of the minor child’s act.
   (C)   Persons entitled to recover damages under this section shall include,
but are not limited to, the state, any municipal corporation, county commission
and board of education, or other political subdivision of this state or any
person or organization of any kind or character. The action may be brought in
magistrate or another court of competent jurisdiction. Recovery hereunder shall
be limited to the actual damages, based upon direct out-of-pocket loss, taxable
court costs and interest from date of judgment. The right of action and remedy
granted herein shall be in addition to and not exclusive of any rights of
action and remedies therefor against a parent or parents for the tortious acts
of his, her or their children heretofore existing under the provisions of any
law, statutory or otherwise, or now so existing independently of the provisions
of this section.
(W. Va. Code 55-7A-2) (Prior Code, § 525.03)
§ 132.04 ABANDONED AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   No person shall abandon any refrigerator or food freezer appliance or other
airtight appliance having a height or length of greater then two feet without
first removing all entry doors therefrom.
(W. Va. Code 61-2-26) (Prior Code, § 525.04) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.05 CURFEW.
   (A)   No minor under the age of 18 years shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll
or play in or upon the streets, parks, playgrounds, wharves, docks or other
public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and
entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, either on foot or to
cruise about without a set destination in any vehicle, in, about or upon any
place in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the
following day; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to
a minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, custodian or other adult
person having the care, custody or control of such minor, or while the minor is
legally employed and is going to or from the place of employment or is engaged
in the duties thereof or unless the minor is on an emergency errand or specific
business or activity directed or permitted by his or her parent, guardian,
custodian or other adult person having the care, custody or control of such
minor.
   (B)   Any minor violating this section shall be deemed a delinquent under
the provisions of state law and shall be dealt with as such under state law.
   (C)    No parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having the care,
custody or control of a minor under the age of 18 years shall knowingly permit
such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public
streets, parks, playgrounds, wharves, docks or other public grounds, public
places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots
or other unsupervised places, either on foot or to cruise without a set
destination in any vehicle, in, about or upon any place in the city between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, that the
provisions of this section shall not apply when the minor is accompanied by his
or her parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having the care,
custody or control of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand
or legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian, custodian or
other adult person having the care, custody or control of the minor, or where
the minor is lawfully employed and is going to or from the place of such
employment or is engaged in the duties thereof.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $50; and
upon a second or subsequent conviction within one year thereafter, shall be
fined not more than $100. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added
to each conviction.
(Prior Code, § 525.05) (Ord. 94-01, passed 3-1-1994; Ord. passed 4-15-2025)
Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.06 TOBACCO USAGE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Sale or gift of tobacco to persons under 21. No person, firm,
corporation or business entity may sell, give or furnish, or cause to be sold,
given or furnished, to any person under the age of 21 years:
      (1)   Any pipe, cigarette paper or any other paper prepared, manufactured
or made for the purpose of smoking any tobacco or tobacco product; or
      (2)   Any cigar, cigarette, snuff, chewing tobacco or tobacco product, in
any form; or any electronic smoking device accessories that contain tobacco or
nicotine. A tobacco product also includes electronic smoking devices and any
accessory of a tobacco product or electronic smoking device, whether or not any
of these contain tobacco or nicotine, including but not limited to, filters,
rolling papers, blunt or hemp wraps, and pipes.
   (B)   Sale or gift of tobacco to persons under 21 by any firm, corporation,
or business entity. Any firm, corporation, or business entity that violates the
provisions of division (A) above and any individual who violates the provisions
of division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined $250 for the first offense. Upon any conviction of any
subsequent violation at the same location or operating unit, the firm,
corporation, or business entity or the individual shall be fined $500. Court
costs as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
   (C)   Use or possession of tobacco by persons under the age of 21 years. No
person under the age of 21 years shall have on or about his or her person or
premises or use any cigarette, or cigarette paper or any other paper prepared,
manufactured or made for the purpose of smoking any tobacco products, in any
form; or, any pipe, snuff, chewing tobacco or tobacco product; provided, that
minors participating in the inspection of locations where tobacco products are
sold or distributed pursuant to W. Va. Code 16-9A-7 shall not be deemed to
violate the provisions of this division(C).
(W. Va. Code 16-9A-3) (Prior Code, § 525.06) (Ord. passed 2-18-2025) Penalty,
see §
132.99
§ 132.07 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE A PERSON 16 YEARS OF AGE OR
LESS IS PRESENT; PENALTY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LIT TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any lighted pipe, cigarette, cigar, or other lighted
device or product containing a tobacco-based product manufactured or made for
the purpose of smoking. A tobacco product also includes electronic smoking
devices and any accessory of a tobacco product or electronic smoking device,
whether or not any of these contain tobacco or nicotine, including but not
limited to, filters, rolling papers, blunt or hemp wraps, and pipes.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. A Class A, Class B, Class H, or Class J vehicle as those
terms are defined in W. Va. Code 17A-10-1.
   (B)   No person who is 18 years of age or older may smoke or possess a lit
tobacco product in a motor vehicle if an individual 16 years of age or less is
in the motor vehicle.
   (C)   Enforcement of this section may only be accomplished as a secondary
action when a driver of a motor vehicle has been detained for probable cause of
violating another section of this municipal code.
   (D)   Each time a driver of a vehicle is detained for probable cause of
violating another provision of this code and is cited for the offense created
pursuant to this section, it shall be considered a single offense regardless of
the number of individuals 16 years of age or less in the motor vehicle.
   (E)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $25. No court costs or other fees
may be assessed for a violation of this section.
(Ord. passed 2-18-2025)
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
132.04 shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed state law, or both.
(Prior Code, § 525.99)
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates §
132.05 shall be fined as follows:
         (a)   For the first offense, a fine not to exceed state law or 20
hours of public service;
         (b)   For the second offense occurring within three months of the
first offense, a fine not to exceed state law or 40 hours of public service;
and
         (c)   For the third offense occurring within three months of the first
offense, a fine not to exceed state law or 100 hours of public service.
      (2)   If the minor or parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person
having the care, custody or control of said minor elects public service, said
minor or parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having care of said
minor may, as an alternative, attend an appropriate class of study under the
direction of the Chief of Police. Upon satisfactory completion of such class,
the fines listed in divisions (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b) and (C)(1)(c) above and
public service shall be waived.
(Prior Code, § 525.05)
   (D)   (1)   Any firm or corporation that violates any provision of §§
132.06(A)(1) or (A)(2) and any individual who violates any provision of §
132.06(A)(1) shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law for the first
offense. Upon any subsequent violation at the same location or operating unit,
the firm, corporation or individual shall be fined as follows: a sum not to
exceed state law for the second offense, if it occurs within two years of the
first conviction; a sum not to exceed state law for the third offense, if it
occurs within two years of the first conviction; a sum not to exceed state law
for the fourth offense, if it occurs within five years of the first conviction;
and a sum not to exceed state law for the fifth and any subsequent offenses, if
the fifth or subsequent offense occurs within five years of the first
conviction.
      (2)   Any individual who knowingly and intentionally sells, gives or
furnishes or causes to be sold, given or furnished to any person under the age
of 18 years any cigar, cigarette, snuff, chewing tobacco or tobacco product, in
any form, for the first offense shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law;
upon conviction thereof for a second or subsequent offense shall be fined a sum
not to exceed state law.
      (3)   Any person violating the provisions of §
132.06(B) shall for the first violation be fined a sum not to exceed state law
and be required to serve eight hours of community service; for a second
violation, the person shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law and be
required to serve 16 hours of community service; and for a third and each
subsequent violation, the person shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law
and be required to serve 24 hours of community service.
(W. Va. Code 16-9A-2) (Prior Code, § 525.06)
(Ord. 94-01, passed 3-1-1994)
CHAPTER 133: WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
   
133.01   Definitions
   
133.02   Carrying concealed deadly weapons without license
   
133.03   Exceptions as to prohibitions against carrying concealed deadly
weapons
   
133.04   Persons prohibited from possession of firearms
   
133.05   Possession of deadly weapons by minors prohibited
   
133.06   Possession of machine guns
   
133.07   Display or sale of deadly weapons
   
133.08   Brandishing deadly weapons
   
133.09   Shooting across road or near building or crowd
   
133.10   Fireworks sale, possession and discharge
   
133.11   Discharging firearms
   
133.12   Throwing or shooting missiles
 
   
133.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit carrying weapons, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(16)
   Dangerous weapons, see W. Va. Code Art. 61-7
   Limitations on power to restrict ownership, see W. Va. Code 8-2-5a
§ 133.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLACKJACK. A short bludgeon consisting, at the striking end, of an encased
piece of lead or some other heavy substance and, at the handle end, a strap or
springy shaft which increases the force of impact when a person or object is
struck. BLACKJACK includes, but is not limited to, a billy, billy club, sand
club, sandbag or slapjack.
   CONCEALED. Hidden from ordinary observation so as to prevent disclosure or
recognition. A deadly weapon is CONCEALED when it is carried on or about the
person in such a manner that another person in the ordinary course of events
would not be placed on notice that the deadly weapon was being carried.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as is ascribed to that term in W.
Va. Code Art. 60A-1.
   DEADLY WEAPON. An instrument which is designed to be used to produce serious
bodily injury or death, or is readily adaptable to such use. The term DEADLY
WEAPON includes, but is not limited to, many of the instruments defined herein,
or other DEADLY WEAPONS of like kind or character which may be easily concealed
on or about the person.
   DRUG. Has the same meaning as is ascribed to that term in W. Va. Code Art.
60A-1.
   FIREARM. Any weapon which will expel a projectile by action of an explosion.
   GRAVITY KNIFE. Any knife that has a blade released from the handle by the
force of gravity or the application of centrifugal force, and when so released
is locked in place by means of a button, spring, lever or other locking or
catching device.
   KNIFE. An instrument, intended to be used or readily adaptable to be used as
a weapon, consisting of a sharp-edged or sharp-pointed blade, usually made of
steel, attached to a handle, which is capable of inflicting cutting, stabbing
or tearing wounds. KNIFE includes, but is not limited to, any dagger, dirk,
poniard or stiletto with a blade over three and one-half inches in length, any
switchblade knife or gravity knife and any other instrument capable of
inflicting cutting, stabbing or tearing wounds. A pocket knife with a blade
three and one-half inches or less in length, a hunting or fishing knife carried
for hunting, fishing, sports or other recreational uses, or a knife designed
for use as a tool or household implement shall not be included within the term
KNIFE as defined herein, unless such KNIFE is knowingly used or intended to be
used to produce serious bodily injury or death.
   METALLIC OR FALSE KNUCKLES. A set of finger rings attached to a transverse
piece, to be worn over the front of the hand for use as a weapon, and
constructed in such a manner that, when striking another person with the fist
or closed hand, considerable physical damage may be inflicted upon the person
struck. The term METALLIC OR FALSE KNUCKLES includes any such instrument,
without reference to the metal or other substance or substances from which the
metallic or false knuckles are made.
   NUNCHUKU. A flailing instrument consisting of two or more rigid parts,
connected by a chain, cable, rope or other nonrigid, flexible or springy
material, constructed in such a manner as to allow the rigid parts to swing
freely, so that one rigid part may be used as a handle and the other rigid part
may be used as the striking end.
   PISTOL. A short firearm having a chamber which is integral with the barrel,
designed to be aimed and fired by the use of a single hand.
   REVOLVER. A short firearm having a cylinder of several chambers that are
brought successively into line with the barrel to be discharged, designed to be
aimed and fired by the use of a single hand.
   SWITCHBLADE KNIFE. Any knife having a spring-operated blade which opens
automatically upon pressure being applied to a button, catch or other releasing
device in its handle.
(W. Va. Code 61-7-2) (Prior Code, § 545.01)
§ 133.02 CARRYING CONCEALED DEADLY WEAPONS WITHOUT LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall carry a concealed deadly weapon without a state
license or other lawful authorization established under the provisions of W.
Va. Code 61-7-4 et seq.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or about his or her
person any deadly weapon at any type of function, regardless of sponsor, that
is held on city property including, but not limited to, City Hall, Council
Chambers, Municipal Court, City Community Center, City Park, Ridenour Lake,
city children’s park, city pool, public library or the city’s Public Works
Department.
   (C)   Security measures necessary to carry out the intent of division (B)
above shall be implemented to ensure the public safety.
   (D)   (1)   If a person voluntarily and peaceably delivers and abandons to
the Police Department any weapon as defined in §
133.01, such delivery shall preclude the arrest and prosecution of such person
on a charge of violating any provision of this chapter with respect to the
weapon voluntarily delivered. Delivery under this section may be made at the
headquarters of the Police Department or by summoning a police officer to the
person’s residence or place of business. Every weapon to be delivered and
abandoned to the Police Department under this division (D)(1) shall be unloaded
and securely wrapped in a package and, in the case of delivery to the police
headquarters, the package shall be carried in open view. No person who delivers
and abandons a weapon under this division (D)(1) shall be required to furnish
identification, photographs or fingerprints. No amount of money shall be paid
for any weapon delivered or abandoned under this division (D)(1).
      (2)   Whenever any weapon is surrendered under this division (D), the
Police Department shall inquire of all law enforcement agencies whether such
weapon is needed as evidence and if the same is not needed as evidence, it
shall be destroyed.
   (E)   All weapons ordered confiscated by the court under the provisions of §
133.99(B) and all weapons received by the Police Department under and by virtue
of division (D) above shall be held and identified as to owner, where possible,
by the Police Department for a period of five years prior to their being
destroyed.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed or applied to necessarily
require or excuse noncompliance with any provision of the laws of the state or
to the laws of the United States. This chapter and the penalties proscribed for
violation hereof shall not supersede, but shall supplement all statutes of the
state or of the United States in which similar conduct may be prohibited or
regulated.
(Prior Code, § 545.02) (Ord. 03-01, passed 1-21-2003) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.03 EXCEPTIONS AS TO PROHIBITIONS AGAINST CARRYING CONCEALED DEADLY
WEAPONS.
   The licensure provisions set forth in W. Va. Code Article 61-7 shall not
apply to:
   (A)   Any person carrying a deadly weapon upon his or her own premises; nor
shall anything herein prevent a person from carrying any firearm, unloaded,
from the place of purchase to his or her home, residence or place of business
or to a place of repair and back to his or her home, residence or place of
business, nor shall anything herein prohibit a person from possessing a firearm
while hunting in a lawful manner or while traveling from his or her home,
residence or place of business to a hunting site, and returning to his or her
home, residence or place of business;
   (B)   Any person who is a member of a properly organized target-shooting
club authorized by law to obtain firearms by purchase or requisition from the
state, or from the United States for the purpose of target practice, from
carrying any pistol, as defined in §
131.01, unloaded, from his or her home, residence or place of business to a
place of target practice, and from any such place of target practice back to
his or her home, residence or place of business, for using any such weapon at
such place of target practice in training and improving his or her skill in the
use of such weapons;
   (C)   Any law-enforcement officer or law-enforcement official as such are
defined in W. Va. Code 30-29-1;
   (D)   Any employee of the state’s Department of Corrections duly appointed
pursuant to the provisions of W. Va. Code 25-1-116 while such employee is on
duty;
   (E)   Any member of the armed forces of the United States or the militia of
the state while such member is on duty; and
   (F)   Any circuit judge, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting
attorney or a duly appointed investigator employed by a prosecuting attorney.
(W. Va. Code 61-7-6) (Prior Code, § 545.03)
§ 133.04 PERSONS PROHIBITED FROM POSSESSION OF FIREARMS.
   (A)   Except as provided for in this section, no person shall possess a
firearm such as is defined in §
133.01 who:
      (1)   Has been convicted in any court of a crime punishable by
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year;
      (2)   Is addicted to alcohol;
      (3)   Is an unlawful user of or addicted to any controlled substance;
      (4)   Has been adjudicated as a mental defective or who has been
involuntarily committed to a mental institution;
      (5)   Being an alien is illegally or unlawfully in the United States;
      (6)   Has been discharged from the armed forces under dishonorable
conditions;
      (7)   Is subject to a domestic violence protective order that:
         (a)   Was issued after a hearing of which such person received actual
notice and at which such person had an opportunity to participate;
         (b)   Restrains such person from harassing, stalking or threatening an
intimate partner of such person or child of such intimate partner or person, or
engaging in other conduct that would place an intimate partner in reasonable
fear of bodily injury to the partner or child; and
         (c)   1.   Includes a finding that such person represents a credible
threat to the physical safety of such intimate partner or child; or
            2.   By its terms explicitly prohibits the use, attempted use or
threatened use of physical force against such intimate partner or child that
would reasonably be expected to cause bodily injury.
      (8)   Has been convicted in any court of a misdemeanor crime of domestic
violence.
   (B)   Any person prohibited from possessing a firearm by the provisions of
division (A) above may petition the Circuit Court of the county in which he or
she resides to regain the ability to possess a firearm and, if the court finds
by clear and convincing evidence that the person is competent and capable of
exercising the responsibility concomitant with the possession of a firearm, the
court may enter an order allowing the person to possess a firearm if such
possession would not violate any federal law.
(W. Va. Code 61-7-7) (Prior Code, § 545.04) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.05 POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPONS BY MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, a
person under the age of 18 years who is not married or otherwise emancipated
shall not possess or carry, concealed or openly, any deadly weapon; provided,
that a minor may possess a firearm upon premises owned by such minor or his or
her family or on the premises of another with the permission of his or her
parent or guardian and, in the case of property other than his or her own or
that of his or her family, with the permission of the owner or lessee of such
property. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a minor from possessing a
firearm while hunting in a lawful manner or while traveling from a place where
he or she may lawfully possess a deadly weapon, to a hunting site, and
returning to a place where he or she may lawfully possess such weapon.
   (B)   A violation of this section by a person under the age of 18 years
shall subject the child to the jurisdiction of the Circuit Court under the
provisions of W. Va. Code 49-5-101, and such minor may be proceeded against in
the same manner as if he or she had committed an act which if committed by an
adult would be a crime, and may be adjudicated delinquent.
(W. Va. Code 61-7-8) (Prior Code, § 545.05) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.06 POSSESSION OF MACHINE GUNS.
   No person shall carry, transport or have in his or her possession, any
machine gun, submachine gun or any other fully automatic weapon unless he or
she has fully complied with applicable federal statutes and all applicable
rules and regulations of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States
relating to such firearms.
(W. Va. Code 61-7-9) (Prior Code, § 545.06) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.07 DISPLAY OR SALE OF DEADLY WEAPONS.
   No person shall publicly display and offer for rent or sale, or, where the
person is other than a natural person, knowingly permit an employee thereof to
publicly display and offer for rent or sale, to any passersby on any street,
road or alley, any deadly weapon, machine gun, submachine gun or other fully
automatic weapon, any rifle, shotgun or ammunition for same.
(W. Va. Code 61-7-10) (Prior Code, § 545.07) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.08 BRANDISHING DEADLY WEAPONS.
   No person armed with a firearm or other deadly weapon, whether licensed to
carry the same or not, shall carry, brandish or use such weapon in a way or
manner to cause, or threaten, a breach of the peace.
(W. Va. Code 61-7-11) (Prior Code, § 545.08) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.09 SHOOTING ACROSS ROAD OR NEAR BUILDING OR CROWD.
   (A)   No person shall shoot or discharge any firearm across or in any public
road in the municipality, at any time, or within 400 feet of any schoolhouse or
church, or within 500 feet of any dwelling house by any person other than the
owner and his or her or her family or guests, or on or near any park or other
place where persons gather for purposes of pleasure.
   (B)   Any person operating a gun repair shop, licensed to do business in the
state and duly licensed under applicable federal statutes, is exempt from the
prohibition established by this section and W. Va. Code 20-2-58 for the purpose
of testing firearms.
(Prior Code, § 545.09) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.10 FIREWORKS SALE, POSSESSION AND DISCHARGE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AMUSEMENT PARK. Any person or organization which holds a permit for the
operation of an amusement ride or amusement attraction under W. Va. Code
Chapter 21, Article 10, as amended.
      CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Small fireworks devices that are designed to produce
visible effects by combustion that are required to comply with the
construction, chemical composition and labeling regulations promulgated by the
United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 C.F.R. parts 1500 and
1507 (2014), and that are listed in APA Standard 87-1. CONSUMER FIREWORKS do
not include sparkling devices, novelties, toy caps or model rockets.
      DISPLAY FIREWORKS. Large fireworks to be used solely by professional
pyro-technicians licensed by the State Fire Marshal and designed primarily to
produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation
and includes, but is not limited to, salutes containing more than two grains
(130 milligrams) of explosive materials, aerial shells containing more than 40
grams of pyrotechnic compositions and other display pieces that exceed the
limits of explosive materials for classification as consumer fireworks and are
classified as fireworks UN0333, UN0334 or UN0335 under 49 C.F.R. § 172.101
(2014).
      DISTRIBUTOR. A person who sells fireworks to wholesalers and retailers
for resale.
      FIRE MARSHAL. The State Fire Marshal.
      FIREWORK or FIREWORKS. Any composition or device designed for the purpose
of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or
detonation. FIREWORKS include consumer fireworks, display fireworks and special
effects. FIREWORKS does not include sparkling devices, novelties, toy caps or
model rockets.
      INTERSTATE WHOLESALER. A person who is engaged in interstate commerce
selling fireworks.
      MODEL ROCKET. As that term is defined in National Fire Protection
Association Standard 1122, “Code for Model Rocketry”.
      NOVELTIES. As that term is defined under APA standard 87-1, § 3.2; but
shall not include toy pistols, toy caps, toy canes, toy guns or other similar
devices.
      PERSON. An individual or the responsible person for an association, an
organization, a partnership, a limited partnership, a limited liability
company, a corporation or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
      PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS. A public entertainment feature that is
advertised to the general public or is on public property that includes the
display or discharge of fireworks.
      RETAILER. A person who purchases consumer fireworks for resale to
consumers.
      SPARKLING DEVICES. Means “ground or handheld sparkling devices” as that
phrase is defined under APA 87-1, §§ 3.1.1 and 3.5.
      SPECIAL EFFECTS. A combination of chemical elements or chemical compounds
capable of burning independently of the oxygen in the atmosphere and designed
and intended to produce an audible, visual, mechanical or thermal effect as an
integral part of a motion picture, radio, television, theatrical or opera
production or live entertainment.
      TOY CAPS. As that term is defined under APA 87-1, § 3.3.
      WHOLESALER. Any person who sells consumer fireworks to a retailer or any
other person for resale and any person who sells articles of pyrotechnics,
display fireworks and special effects to a person licensed to possess and use
those devices.
   (B)   Licensing requirement. No person or entity may manufacture, wholesale,
distribute, import, sell or store for the purpose of resale, fireworks,
sparkling devices, novelties or toy caps without:
      (1)   First registering each business location in Nitro with the city;
      (2)   First paying a business registration fee of $100 for each place of
business located in the city; and
      (3)   First being registered to pay all applicable taxes derived from
doing business in the city.
   (C)   Sale of fireworks.
      (1)   A retailer selling fireworks shall have a consumer fireworks
certificate issued under the authority of W. Va. Code 29-3E-5.
      (2)   The sale of fireworks shall be under the direct supervision and
control of a competent person at least 21 years of age and duly qualified and
responsible for the enforcement of all safety measures.
      (3)   Smoking, matches and open flames shall not be permitted within 50
feet of fireworks being sold. Signs shall be posted in conspicuous places in,
on and around all fireworks being displayed for sale with the words “FIREWORKS
– NO SMOKING” in letters of not less than four inches in height.
      (4)   Fire extinguishing equipment shall be kept and maintained upon the
sale premises and shall include, but not be limited to, a ten-pound A.B.C. fire
extinguisher.
      (5)   All electrical fixtures contained upon the sale premises shall be
dust-ignition proof. No fewer than two unobstructed exits shall be maintained
upon the fireworks sale premises at all times.
      (6)   No fireworks shall be offered for sale within 300 feet of the
property line of any church, hospital or school, or within 50 feet of the
property line of any lot upon which any flammable liquid dispensers or
flammable liquid storage areas are located.
      (7)   Any outdoor fireworks sales shall be located not less than 25 feet
from any building, structure and all rights of way including, but not limited
to, highways, streets, alleys, and sidewalks.
      (8)   Fireworks shall not be sold to any person under the age of 18
years.
   (D)   Storage of fireworks.
      (1)   Fireworks shall be stored in a manner to be fire-resistant,
weather-resistant and theft-resistant from any external or internal source.
      (2)   Fireworks storage shall be under the direct supervision and control
of a competent person at least 18 years of age.
      (3)   Consumer fireworks shall be stored in accordance with the
manufacturer’s printed instructions.
   (E)   Fireworks, use requirements, generally. A person using fireworks:
      (1)   Shall not do so while that person is under the influence of
alcoholic liquor or controlled substance or a combination of both;
      (2)   Shall be 18 years of age or older or shall be under the direct
supervision of his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of the minor;
      (3)   Shall be responsible for the removal of all debris accumulated
within 24 hours of such fireworks use and be financially responsible for all
cleanup costs and damages due to the use of such fireworks;
      (4)   Shall be responsible for all costs and expenses associated with
emergency response efforts, including, but not limited to, fire suppression
efforts, related to such fireworks; and
      (5)   Shall abide by all legal requirements concerning such fireworks
use.
   (F)   Consumer fireworks, use requirements. A person using consumer
fireworks:
      (1)   Shall not do so within 100 feet of any building or structure;
      (2)   Shall not do so except between 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day and between 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
on the holiday weekends corresponding to those holidays, or between 10:00 a.m.
on December 31 and 12:30 a.m. on January 1;
      (3)   Shall not do so from any motor vehicle or boat;
      (4)   Shall ensure that such consumer fireworks do not travel through,
come in contact with or discharge or explode onto any public street, highway or
sidewalk, in or upon any building, at or near any person or within 500 feet of
any location posing a special fire danger, such as a gas station or chemical
storage area;
      (5)   Shall not do so during periods of very high or extreme fire danger
as determined by the city’s Fire Department or the West Virginia Division of
Forestry, or while wind conditions are such that proper fireworks control
cannot be exercised; and
      (6)   Shall do so in accordance with the fireworks manufacturer’s printed
instructions.
   (G)   Display fireworks.
      (1)   Display fireworks shall be used by a competent operator licensed or
certified as to competency by the State Fire Marshal and shall be of such
composition and character and so located and used so as to be safe in the
opinion of the Fire Chief and Police Chief.
      (2)   The use of display fireworks is conditioned on compliance with the
provisions of this section, W. Va. Code Art. 29-3E and the regulations of the
State Fire Marshal.
      (3)   The operator shall provide to the Mayor proof of liability
insurance coverage issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in
the state in the minimum amount of one million dollars and of a character and
form as the Mayor determines to be necessary for the protection of the public,
with the city being a named insured to satisfy claims for damages to property
or personal injuries arising out of any act or omission on the part of the
operator or an employee thereof.
      (4)   After such privilege shall have been granted, the sale, possession,
use and distribution of display fireworks shall be lawful for that purpose
only.
      (5)   No privilege granted hereunder shall be transferable.
   (H)   Seizure authorized. The city may seize, take, remove and dispose of at
public auction or destroy at the expense of the owner, or cause to be seized,
taken or removed and disposed of at public auction, or destroyed at the expense
of the owner, all fireworks or combustibles offered for sale, stored or held in
violation of this section, W. Va. Code Art. 29-3E or an emergency or
legislative rule promulgated thereunder by the Fire Marshal.
   (I)   Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
Fire Chief, the Police Chief or their designees.
(W. Va. Code 15A-10-7) (Prior Code, § 545.10) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.11 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge any air gun, rifle, shotgun, revolver,
pistol or other firearm within the corporate limits of the municipality.
   (B)   This section does not apply when firearms are used in self defense in
the discharge of official duty or when otherwise lawfully authorized.
(Prior Code, § 545.11) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.12 THROWING OR SHOOTING MISSILES.
   No person shall throw, shoot or propel an arrow, missile, pellet, stone,
metal or other similar substance capable of causing physical harm to persons or
property, in or on any public place, in or on the property of another, or from
any private property into or onto any public place or the property of another.
This section does not apply to supervised archery ranges or instruction, nor
when otherwise lawfully authorized.
(Prior Code, § 545.12) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating §
133.02(A) or (B) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined a sum not
to exceed state law, or incarcerated for a term not to exceed state law for
each such offense. Upon conviction of a violation of §
133.02(A) or (B), any weapon seized shall be confiscated by the municipal court
and when no longer needed for evidentiary purposes, the court may transfer such
weapon to the Police Department to be held and disposed of in accordance
applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 545.02)
   (C)   Whoever violates §
133.04 shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed state law, or both.
(Prior Code, § 545.99)
   (D)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §
133.10 shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law. Each violation of the
provisions of §
133.10 shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 545.10)
(Ord. 03-01, passed 1-21-2003)
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS AND PROPERTY
Section
Offenses Relating to Persons
   
134.01   Assault and battery
   
134.02   Assault and battery on school employees
   
134.03   Interfering with city work projects
Offenses Relating to Property
   
134.15   Shoplifting
   
134.16   Trespass
   
134.17   Petit larceny
   
134.18   Dealing with stolen goods
   
134.19   Injury or destruction of property or monuments
   
134.20   Tampering with and theft of utilities; CATV
   
134.21   Littering and deposit of garbage, rubbish, junk and the like
   
134.22   Barricades and warning lights; abandoned excavations
   
134.23   Unauthorized use of dumpsters
Limited Smoking in a Destination Resort Casino
   
134.35   Findings and purpose
   
134.36   Definitions
   
134.37   Limited smoking in designated gaming areas
   
134.38   Posting of signs
   
134.39   Enforcement
 
   
134.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Harassing telephone calls, see §
131.06
   Intoxication or drinking in public places, see §
112.50
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate advertising, see W. Va. Code 8-12-5(31)
   State law provisions, see W. Va. Code Art. 61-2 and Art. 61-3
   Uniform Controlled Substances Act, see W. Va. Code Ch. 60A
OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS
§ 134.01 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   (A)   Assault. No person shall unlawfully attempt to use physical force
causing injury to the person of another or unlawfully commit an act that places
another in reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving an injury. Any
person convicted of assault shall be fined not more than $100 or confined in
jail not more than 30 days, or both.
   (B)   Battery. No person shall unlawfully and intentionally make physical
contact of an insulting or provoking nature to the person of another or
unlawfully and intentionally cause physical harm to another person. Any person
convicted of battery shall be fined not more than $500 or confined in jail not
more than 30 days, or both.
   (C)   Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each
conviction for violating this §
134.01.
(Ord. passed 4-21-2015) (Ord. passed 10-1-2024) Penalty, see §  
134.99
§ 134.02 ASSAULT AND BATTERY ON SCHOOL EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   No person shall commit an assault:
      (1)   By unlawfully attempting to commit a violent injury to the person
of a school employee while he or she is engaged in the performance of his or
her duties, is commuting to or from his or her place of employment or if the
motive for the assault is retaliation for some action taken by the employee to
supervise or discipline one or more pupils pursuant to W. Va. Code 18A-5-1 or
18A-5-1a; or
      (2)   By unlawfully committing an act which places a school employee in
reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving a violent injury while the
employee is engaged in the performance of his or her duties, is commuting to or
from his or her place of employment or if the motive for the assault is
retaliation for some action taken by the employee to supervise or discipline
one or more pupils pursuant to W. Va. Code 18A-5-1 or 18A-5-1a;
   (B)   No person shall commit a battery:
      (1)   By unlawfully and intentionally making physical contact of an
insulting or provoking nature with the person of a school employee while he or
she is engaged in the performance of his or her duties, is commuting to or from
his or her place of employment or if the motive for the battery is retaliation
for some action taken by the employee to supervise or discipline one or more
pupils pursuant to W. Va. Code 18A-5-1 or 18A-5-1a; or
      (2)   By unlawfully and intentionally causing physical harm to a school
employee while he or she is engaged in the performance of his or her duties, is
commuting to or from his or her place of employment or if the motive for the
battery is retaliation for some action taken by the employee to supervise or
discipline one or more pupils pursuant to W. Va. Code 18A-5-1 or 18A-5-1a.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      SCHOOL EMPLOYEE. A person employed by a county board of education,
whether employed on a regular full-time basis, an hourly basis or otherwise.
For the purposes of this section, a SCHOOL EMPLOYEE includes a student teacher.
(W. Va. Code 61-2-15) (Prior Code, § 529.02) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.03 INTERFERING WITH CITY WORK PROJECTS.
   No person, without having authority from the city so to do, shall willfully
prevent, delay, hinder, obstruct or otherwise interfere with, directly or
indirectly, any contractor, workman or other person who is engaged upon any
construction, repair or other project or enterprise for or on behalf of the
city or willfully impede the progress of any such project or enterprise in any
manner.
(Prior Code, § 529.03) Penalty, see §
134.99
OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
§ 134.15 SHOPLIFTING.
   (A)   General definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CONCEAL. To hide, hold or carry merchandise so that, although there may
be some notice of its presence, it is not visible through ordinary observation.
      MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where merchandise is displayed, held
or offered for sale, either at retail or wholesale. MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT
does not include adjoining parking lots or adjoining areas of common use with
other establishments.
      MERCHANDISE. Any goods, foodstuffs, wares or personal property or any
part or portion thereof of any type or description displayed, held or offered
for sale, or a shopping cart.
      MERCHANT. An owner or operator of any mercantile establishment, and
includes the merchant’s employees, servants, security agents or other agents.
      VALUE OF THE MERCHANDISE. The merchant’s stated price of the merchandise,
or in the event of altering, transferring or removing a price marking or
causing a cash register or other sales device to reflect less than the retail
value of the merchandise, as defined in division (B) below, the difference
between the merchant’s stated price of the merchandise and the altered price.
(W. Va. Code 61-3A-6)
   (B)   Shoplifting prohibited.
      (1)   A person commits the offense of shoplifting if, with intent to
appropriate merchandise without paying the merchant’s stated price for the
merchandise, such person, alone or in concert with another person, knowingly:
         (a)   Conceals the merchandise upon his or her person or in another
manner;
         (b)   Removes or causes the removal of merchandise from the mercantile
establishment or beyond the last station for payment;
         (c)   Alters, transfers or removes any price marking affixed to the
merchandise;
         (d)   Transfers the merchandise from one container to another;
         (e)   Causes cash register or other sales recording device to reflect
less than the merchant’s stated price for the merchandise; or
         (f)    Removes a shopping cart from the premises of the mercantile
establishment; or
         (g)   Repudiates a card-not-present credit or debit transaction after
having taken delivery of merchandise ordered from the merchant an does not
return the merchandise or attempt to make other arrangements with the vendor.
      (2)   A person also commits the offense of shoplifting if such person,
alone or in concert with another person, knowingly and with intent obtains an
exchange or refund or attempts to obtain an exchange or refund for merchandise
which has not been purchased from the mercantile establishment.
(W. Va. Code 61-3A-1)
   (C)   Breach of peace: detention. An act of shoplifting, as described in
division (B) above, is hereby declared to constitute a breach of peace and any
owner of merchandise, his or her agent or employee, or any law enforcement
officer who has reasonable ground to believe that a person has committed
shoplifting, may detain such person in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable
length of time not to exceed 30 minutes, for the purpose of investigating
whether or not such person has committed or attempted to commit shoplifting.
Such reasonable detention shall not constitute an arrest nor shall it render
the owner of merchandise, his or her agent or employee, liable to the person
detained.
(W. Va. Code 61-3A-4)
   (D)   Evidence.
      (1)   Evidence of stated price or ownership of merchandise may include,
but is not limited to:
         (a)   The actual merchandise alleged to have been shoplifted;
         (b)   The unaltered content of the price tag or marking from such
merchandise; or
         (c)   Properly identified photographs of such merchandise.
      (2)   Any merchant may testify at a trial as to the stated price or
ownership of merchandise, as well as to other matters pertaining to the case.
(W. Va. Code 61-3A-2)
   (E)   Civil liability.
      (1)   General rule. Any person who commits any of the acts described in
this section shall be civilly liable:
         (a)   To restore the merchandise to the mercantile establishment;
         (b)   If such merchandise is not recoverable or is damaged, for actual
damages, including the value of the merchandise involved in the shoplifting;
         (c)   For other actual damages arising from the incident, not
including the loss of time or loss of wages incurred by the mercantile
establishment or any merchant in connection with the apprehension and
processing of the suspect; and
         (d)   In all cases, for a penalty to be paid to the mercantile
establishment in the amount of $50 or double the value of the merchandise,
whichever is higher.
      (2)   Costs and attorneys’ fees. A merchant who is a prevailing party
under this section is entitled to costs.
      (3)   Effect of conviction. A conviction for the offense of theft by
shoplifting is not a prerequisite to the maintenance of a civil action
authorized by this section. However, a merchant who has recovered the penalty
prescribed by §
134.99(D) is not entitled to recover the penalty imposed by this section.
      (4)   Right to demand payment. The fact that a mercantile establishment
may bring an action against an individual as provided in this section does not
limit the right of such establishment to demand, orally or in writing, that a
person who is liable for damages or a penalty under this section remit such
damages or penalty prior to the commencement of any legal action.
(W. Va. Code 61-3A-5)
(Prior Code, § 533.01)
   (F)   Penalties.
      (1)   First offense shoplifting conviction.
         (a)   When the value of the merchandise is equal to or less than $500,
the person is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $250. In
all cases, a penalty shall be paid to the mercantile establishment in the
amount of $50 or double the value of the merchandise, whichever is higher.
Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
         (b)   When the value of the merchandise exceeds $500, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined $500, and such fine shall not be
suspended, or jailed up to 30 days, or both fined and jailed. In all cases, a
penalty shall be paid to the mercantile establishment in the amount of $50 or
double the amount of merchandise, whichever is higher. Court costs as
determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
      (2)   Second or subsequent offense shoplifting conviction.
         (a)   When the value of the merchandise is equal to or less than $500,
the person is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $350,
and such fine shall not be suspended, or jailed up to 30 days, or both fined
and jailed. In all cases a penalty shall be paid to the mercantile
establishment in the amount of $50 or double the value of the merchandise,
whichever is higher. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
         (b)   When the value of the merchandise exceeds $500, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined $500, and such fine shall not be
suspended, or jailed up to 30 days, or both fined and jailed. In all cases a
penalty shall be paid to the mercantile establishment in the amount of $50 or
double the value of the merchandise, whichever is higher. Court costs as
determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
(Ord. passed 5-20-2025)
§ 134.16 TRESPASS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ANIMAL. Poultry, livestock, domestic animals, and captive cervids owned
and possessed by persons licensed pursuant to W. Va. Code §§ 19-2H-1 et seq.
The term does not include an animal used for illegal gaming.
      ANIMAL OR CROP FACILITY. A facility that is used in the production,
management, sale, or processing of animals or crops. The term includes, but is
not limited to:
         (a)   A building, greenhouse, structure, laboratory, pasture, field,
paddock, pond, impoundment, or premises where animals or crops are located;
         (b)   A managed bee colony;
         (c)   A livestock market;
         (d)   A facility used for the preparation of, or processing of,
animals, crops, or value-added foods for sale; and
         (e)   A facility used to carry out any agritourism activity, as that
term is defined and used in W. Va. Code §§ 19-36-1 et seq.
      CONVEYANCE. Any motor vehicle, vessel, railroad car, railroad engine,
trailer, aircraft or sleeping car, and TO ENTER A CONVEYANCE includes taking
apart any portion of the conveyance.
      CROP. A shrub, vine, tree, seedling, shoot, slip, or other plant capable
of producing food, fiber, medicine, nursery stock, floral products, or
aesthetic beauty.
      CULTIVATED LAND. The land which has been cleared of its natural
vegetation and is presently planted with a crop, orchard, grove, pasture or
trees or is fallow land as part of a crop rotation.
      FENCED LAND. The land which has been enclosed by a fence of substantial
construction, whether with rails, logs, post and railing, iron, steel, barbed
wire, other wire or other material, which stands at least three feet in height.
For the purpose of this section, it shall not be necessary to fence any
boundary or part of a boundary of any land which is formed by water and is
posted with signs pursuant to the provisions of this section.
      POSTED LAND. Land that has:
         (a)   Reasonably maintained signs are placed not more than 500 feet
apart along and at each corner of the boundaries of the land upon which signs
there appears prominently in letters of not less than two inches in height the
words “no trespassing” and, in addition thereto, the name of the owner, lessee
or occupant of the land. The signs shall be placed along the boundary line of
POSTED LAND in a manner and in a position as to be clearly noticeable from
outside of the boundary line. It shall not be necessary to give notice by
posting on any enclosed land or place not exceeding five acres in area on which
there is a dwelling house or property that by its nature and use is obviously
private in order to obtain the benefits of this section pertaining to trespass
on enclosed lands; or
         (b)   Boundaries marked with a clearly visible purple painted marking,
consisting of one vertical line no less than eight inches in length and two
inches in width, and the bottom of the mark not less than three nor more than
six feet from the ground or normal water surface. Such marks shall be affixed
to immovable, permanent objects that are no more than one hundred feet apart
and readily visible to any person approaching the property. Signs shall also be
posted at all roads, driveways or gates of entry onto the posted land so as to
be clearly noticeable from outside the boundary line.
      STRUCTURE. Any building of any kind, either temporary or permanent, which
has a roof over it, together with the curtilage thereof.
      TRESPASS. The willful unauthorized entry upon, in or under the property
of another, but shall not include the following:
         (a)   Entry by the state, its political subdivisions or by the
officers, agencies or instrumentalities thereof as authorized and provided by
law;
         (b)   The exercise of rights in, under or upon property by virtue of
rights-of-way or easements by a public utility or other person owning such
right-of-way or easement whether by written or prescriptive right;
         (c)   Permissive entry, whether written or oral, and entry from a
public road by the established private ways to reach a residence for the
purpose of seeking permission shall not be trespass unless signs are posted
prohibiting such entry;
         (d)   Entry performed in the exercise of a property right under
ownership of an interest in, under or upon such property; or
         (e)   Entry where no physical damage is done to property in the
performance of surveying to ascertain property boundaries, and in the
performance of necessary work of construction, maintenance and repair of a
common property line fence, or buildings or appurtenances which are immediately
adjacent to the property line and maintenance of which necessitates entry upon
the adjoining owner’s property.
(W. Va. Code 61-3B-1)
   (B)   Interpretation.
      (1)   An act is committed “in the course of committing” if it occurs in
an attempt to commit the offense or in flight after the attempt or commission.
      (2)   Where lands are posted, cultivated or fenced as described herein,
then such lands, for the purpose of this section, shall be considered as
enclosed and posted.
   (C)   Trespass in structure or conveyance–penalty.
      (1)   Any person who knowingly enters in, upon or under a structure or
conveyance without being authorized, licensed or invited, or having been
authorized, licensed or invited is requested to depart by the owner, tenant or
the agent of such owner or tenant, and refuses to do so, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $100.
Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
      (2)   For a person convicted for a first violation of this division (C)
offense of trespass on condemned property, a court may substitute community
service or pretrial diversion in lieu of a fine or confinement for trespassing
on condemned property.
      (3)      If the offender is armed with a firearm or other dangerous
weapon while in the structure or conveyance, with the intent to do bodily
injury to a human being in such structure or conveyance at the time the
offender knowingly trespasses, such offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined $500. Court costs as determined by
the court shall be added to each conviction.
(W. Va. Code 61-3B-2)
   (D)   Trespass on an animal or crop facility–penalty.
      (1)   Any person who willfully trespasses on the property of another
which constitutes an animal or crop facility with the intent to commit larceny,
destroy property, or disrupt the operation of the facility is guilty of willful
trespass upon an animal or crop facility.
      (2)   Any person who conspires with one or more persons to violate this
division (D) commits an overt act in furtherance thereof is guilty of
conspiracy to willfully trespass upon an animal or crop facility.
      (3)   Any person who violates this division (D) is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined $500 or confined in
jail not more than 30 days, or both fined and confined. Court costs as
determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
   (E)   Trespass on property other than structure or conveyance.
      (1)   Whoever knowingly and without being authorized, licensed or
invited, enters or remains on any property, other than a structure or
conveyance, as to which notice against entering or remaining is either given by
actual communication to such person or by posting, fencing or cultivation,
shall for the first conviction be fined not more than $100; upon a second
conviction shall be fined not more than $200; and upon a third or subsequent
conviction, be fined not more than $500. Court costs as determined by the court
shall be added to each conviction.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly and without being authorized defies an order to
leave, personally communicated to him or her by the owner, tenant or agent of
such owner or tenant, or if the offender opens any door, fence or gate, and
thereby exposes animals, crops or other property to waste, destruction or
freedom, or causes any damage to property by such trespassing on property other
than a structure or conveyance, he or she shall for the first conviction be
fined not more than $100; upon a second conviction shall be fined not more than
$200; and upon a third or subsequent conviction, be fined not more than $500.
Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to each conviction.
      (3)   If the offender is armed with a firearm or other dangerous weapon
with the intent to do bodily injury to a human being during his or her
commission of the offense of trespass on property, other than a structure or
conveyance, such offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof, be imprisoned for a term not to exceed 30 days, or fined a sum not to
exceed $500, or both. Court costs as determined by the court shall be added to
each conviction.
      (4)   Notwithstanding and in addition to any other penalties provided by
law, any person who performs or causes damage to property in the course of a
willful trespass shall be liable to the property owner in the amount of twice
the amount of such damage, provided, that the provisions of this section shall
not apply in a labor dispute.
(W. Va. Code 61-3B-3)
(Prior Code, § 533.02) (Ord. passed 1-21-2025)
§ 134.17 PETIT LARCENY.
   No person shall commit petit larceny as defined in W. Va. Code 61-3-13
within the city.
(Prior Code, § 533.03) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.18 DEALING WITH STOLEN GOODS.
   If any person buys or receives from another person, or aids in concealing,
or transfers to a person other than the owner thereof, any stolen goods or
other thing of value which he or she knows or has reason to believe has been
stolen, he or she shall be deemed guilty of the larceny thereof and may be
prosecuted although the principal offender is not convicted.
(W. Va. Code 61-3-18) (Prior Code, § 533.04)
§ 134.19 INJURY OR DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY OR MONUMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall unlawfully, but not feloniously, take and carry away
or destroy, tamper with, injure or deface any property, real or personal, not
his or her own.
   (B)   No person shall break down, destroy, injure, deface or remove any
monument erected for the purpose of designating the boundaries of the
municipality, tract or lot of land, or any tree marked for that purpose.
(W. Va. Code 61-3-30) (Prior Code, § 533.05) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.20 TAMPERING WITH AND THEFT OF UTILITIES; CATV.
   (A)   No person with intent to injure or defraud shall procure, make or
cause to be made, any pipe, tube, wire or other conductor of gas, water or
electric energy, and connect the same, or cause it to be connected, with any
main, service pipe or other pipe for conducting or supplying gas, or water or
any wires or other conductor of electric energy, in such manner as to supply
gas, water or electric energy to any lamp, motor, burner, orifice or any other
device, by or at which gas, water or electric energy is consumed, around or
without passing through the meter provided for measuring and registering the
quantity of gas, water or electric energy consumed, or in any other manner so
as to evade payment therefor, and no person, with like intent, shall injure or
alter any gas, water or electric meter, or obstruct its action.
(W. Va. Code 61-3-44)
   (B)   No person with intent to injure or defraud shall connect, or cause to
be connected, any pipe, tube, wire, electrical conductor or other instrument
with any main, service pipe or other pipe or conduit or flume for conducting
water, or with any main, service pipe or other pipe or conduit for conducting
gas, or with any main, service wire or other electric conductor used for the
purpose of conducting electric energy for light, heat or motive services, for
the purpose of taking therefrom water, gas or electric energy, without the
knowledge of the owner thereof and with intent to evade payment therefor.
(W. Va. Code 61-3-45)
   (C)   No person shall make any unauthorized connection, whether physically,
electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a CATV
system within the municipality for the purpose of enabling anyone to receive
any television signal, radio signal, picture, sound or other transmission,
without payment for the service.
   (D)   No person, without the consent of the owner, shall willfully tamper
with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of
television signals, radio signals, pictures, sound or other transmission.
(Prior Code, § 533.06) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.21 LITTERING AND DEPOSIT OF GARBAGE, RUBBISH, JUNK AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person shall, without lawful authority, place or dispose of in any
manner, upon any public property or upon the premises of another, any paper,
trash, garbage, waste, rubbish, refuse, junk or any substance or material which
is or may become noxious, offensive, injurious or dangerous to the public
health, comfort or safety.
   (B)   No person shall cause or allow trash, garbage, waste, rubbish, refuse
or any other noxious or offensive materials or substances to be collected or
remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of the public, or
unlawfully obstruct, impede, divert, corrupt or render unwholesome or impure,
any natural watercourse.
(Prior Code, § 533.07) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.22 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS; ABANDONED EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on public or
private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which is in the
process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration unless the same
is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by warning devices
or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably prove dangerous to
life or limb.
   (B)   No person shall destroy, remove, damage or extinguish any barricade or
warning light that is placed for the protection of the public so as to prevent
injury to life or limb.
   (C)   Any owner or agent in control of a premises upon which a basement,
cellar, well or cistern has been abandoned due to demolition, failure to build
or any other reason shall cause the same to be filled to the ground surface
with rock, gravel, earth or other suitable material.
(Prior Code, § 533.08) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.23 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF DUMPSTERS.
   No person, without authorization, shall dump garbage or trash, or assist in
the unauthorized dumping of garbage or trash, in a dumpster or other solid
waste container which is located on the property of another person and leased
or otherwise owned or maintained by another person. The act of throwing
isolated objects into a dumpster or other solid waste container in the
prevention or elimination of litter is specifically excepted from any penalties
under this section.
(W. Va. Code 61-3-53) (Prior Code, § 533.09) Penalty, see §
134.99
LIMITED SMOKING IN A DESTINATION RESORT CASINO
§ 134.35 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council finds:
      (1)   In enacting the state’s Lottery Racetrack Table Games Act, W. Va.
Code Chapter 29, Article 22C, as amended, the State Legislature found that
horse racing and dog racing play a critical role in the economy of this state
and contribute vital revenues to the counties and municipalities in which these
activities take place;
      (2)   In enacting the aforesaid state’s Lottery Racetrack Table Games
Act, the State Legislature found that the operation of state lottery table
games at licensed horse or dog racetracks would protect and preserve the horse
and dog racing industries and protect and enhance the tourism industry in the
state;
      (3)   Dog racing and state table games licensed by this state are
critical to the economy of the city because those activities provide local
jobs, generate critical revenue and enhance local tourism;
      (4)   All of the state licensed racetracks outside of Kanawha County that
possess state lottery table games licenses permit smoking in certain designated
gaming areas;
      (5)   Some destination resort casino patrons, including some patrons
residing outside of the state, smoke and that at least some of those patrons
will not patronize destination resort casinos that do not accommodate smoking;
      (6)   The United States Surgeon General and other credible public health
authorities have determined that the inhalation of environmental tobacco smoke
can cause or contribute to numerous health problems and diseases, including
heart disease, cancer and respiratory illness in nonsmokers;
      (7)   In addressing the public health risk posed by environmental tobacco
smoke, many health authorities, both within and outside of the state, have
concluded that under appropriate circumstances limited smoking in public places
can be accommodated;
      (8)   Local municipal governments are uniquely situated in evaluating the
needs of their local citizens, businesses and communities;
      (9)   Article VI, Sec, 39a of the State Constitution vests the city with
the power to pass all laws and ordinances relating to its municipal affairs;
and
      (10)   The State Legislature has granted cities plenary power and
authority to provide for the government, regulation and control of their
municipal affairs.
   (B)   Therefore, the purpose of this subchapter is to exercise the police
powers of the city with respect to the protection of public health, while
balancing the need to protect and enhance the local economy.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 8-18-2009)
§ 134.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Nitro, West Virginia.
   COMPLETELY ENCLOSED. Enclosure of all space between the floor and ceiling on
all sides by solid walls or windows with any ingress or egress occurring
through self-closing doors which provide an air seal to the maximum extent
possible.
   DESIGNATED GAMING AREA. One or more specific floor areas of a licensed
racetrack within which the state’s Lottery Commission has authorized operation
of racetrack video lottery terminals or table games, or the operation of both
racetrack video lottery terminals and state lottery table games.
   DESTINATION RESORT CASINO. A business that offers lodging, possesses a
licensed racetrack, offers state lottery table games, and that actively markets
its gaming amenities to potential patrons both inside and outside of the state,
all as defined in W. Va. Code 29-22A-3, as amended.
   ENVIRONMENTAL TOBACCO SMOKE or SECONDHAND SMOKE. Tobacco smoke that could be
voluntarily or involuntarily inhaled by persons who did not generate the smoke.
   LICENSE or LICENSED. Any license issued by the West Virginia Lottery
Commission or by the West Virginia Racing Commission, including a license to
act as an agent of the State Lottery Commission in operating state lottery
table games at a licensed racetrack.
   RACETRACK. A thoroughbred horse racing facility or greyhound dog racing
facility licensed under W. Va. Code Chapter 19, Article 23, as amended.
   SEPARATELY VENTILATED. Ventilation equipment sized and installed to produce
sufficient negative air pressure to effectively move air from a designated
smoking area to the outside.
   SMOKING. The personal use of cigarettes, cigars and pipes for the general
purpose for which those items are intended.
   WEST VIRGINIA LOTTERY COMMISSION. The State of West Virginia agency created
by W. Va. Code Chapter 29, Article 22A, as amended, which owns, licenses the
right to provide and regulates state lottery table games and state racetrack
video lottery games.
   WEST VIRGINIA LOTTERY TABLE GAME or TABLE GAME. Any game played with cards,
dice or any mechanical, electromechanical or electronic device or machine for
money, credit or any representative of value, including, but not limited to,
baccarat, blackjack, poker, craps, roulette, wheel of fortune or any variation
of these games similar to design or operation and expressly authorized by rule
of the state’s Lottery Commission, including multi-player electronic table
games, machines and devices, but excluding video lottery, punchboards, faro,
numbers tickets, push cards, jar tickets, pull tabs or similar games.
   WEST VIRGINIA RACETRACK VIDEO LOTTERY GAME or VIDEO LOTTERY GAME. A West
Virginia Lottery Commission approved, owned and controlled electronically
simulated game of chance which is displayed on a video lottery terminal as
defined by W. Va. Code 29-22A-3(y), as amended.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 8-18-2009)
§ 134.37 LIMITED SMOKING IN DESIGNATED GAMING AREAS.
   (A)   Each licensed destination resort casino located within the city
offering state lottery table games shall be permitted to provide such table
games in certain designated gaming areas where smoking shall be permitted;
provided, that such designated gaming areas are completely enclosed and
separately ventilated from areas where smoking is not permitted.
   (B)   Licensed destination resort casinos located within the city offering
state racetrack video lottery games shall be permitted to provide such video
lottery games in certain designated gaming areas where smoking shall be
permitted; provided, that such designated gaming areas are completely enclosed
and separately ventilated from areas where smoking is not permitted.
   (C)   Licensed destination resort casinos located within the city operating
licensed racetracks shall be permitted to provide simulcast viewing areas for
racetrack customers where smoking shall be permitted; provided, that such
viewing areas are completely enclosed and separately ventilated from areas
where smoking is not permitted.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 8-18-2009)
§ 134.38 POSTING OF SIGNS.
   (A)   “No Smoking” signs or the international “No Smoking” symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a
red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted,
in every area where smoking is prohibited.
   (B)   At every entrance to designated gaming areas or racetrack viewing
areas in which smoking is permitted pursuant to the terms of §
134.37, a conspicuous sign shall be posted that reads as follows:
         HEALTH WARNING
      SMOKING IS PERMITTED WITHIN THIS AREA. YOU WILL BE EXPOSED TO SECONDHAND
SMOKE. SUCH EXPOSURE CAN CAUSE OR CONTRIBUTE TO CANCER, HEART DISEASE,
RESPIRATORY ILLNESS AND OTHER SERIOUS HEALTH PROBLEMS.
   (C)   The lettering of such signs shall be in bold text and shall be at
least two inches in height and three-eighths of an inch in width.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 8-18-2009)
§ 134.39 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Responsibility.
      (1)   Each owner, operator, manager, supervisor, or employee of any
destination resort casino within the boundaries of the city shall perform their
respective duties in a manner that confines the smoking activities of
themselves and patrons of the destination resort casino to those designated
areas where smoking is permitted.
      (2)   Each owner, operator, manager, supervisor or employee of any
destination resort casino within the boundaries of the city shall inform any
person observed to be violating this subchapter of the requirements of this
subchapter.
      (3)   No owner, operator, manager, supervisor or employee of any
destination resort casino within the boundaries of the city may allow any
person to smoke in any location other than a designated area where smoking is
permitted.
   (B)   Investigation.
      (1)   Any patron of any destination resort casino within the boundaries
of the city who wishes to report violations of this subchapter may do so by
contacting the city’s Police Department; provided, that the city’s Police
Department shall commence an investigation within 24 hours subsequent to
receiving a complaint alleging a violation of this subchapter.
      (2)   The city’s Police Department shall have the right to inspect any
destination resort casino within the boundaries of the city to assure
compliance with this subchapter.
   (C)   Citation.
      (1)   The city’s Police Department shall issue a citation to any owner,
operator, manager, supervisor or employee of any destination resort casino
within the boundaries of the city that as a result of an investigation is
determined to have authorized or permitted smoking in any area other than an
area designated for that purpose.
      (2)   The city’s Police Department shall issue a citation to any owner,
operator, manager, supervisor or employee of any destination resort casino
within the boundaries of the city that, as a result of an inspection or
investigation, is observed or found to have allowed or permitted smoking in any
area other than an area designated for that purpose.
      (3)   With respect to the designated gaming areas and simulcast viewing
areas that allow smoking pursuant to the terms of this subchapter, the city’s
Police Department shall possess the sole and exclusive power to enforce this
subchapter and any other smoking regulations applicable to such designated
gaming areas and simulcast viewing areas.
   (D)   No conflict intended. Nothing within this subchapter shall be
interpreted or is intended to conflict with the right of the state’s Lottery
Commission to enforce any regulations promulgated by the Commission or statutes
enacted by the State Legislature relating to public health or safety.
   (E)   Penalty.
      (1)   On and after September 1, 2009, any owner, operator, manager,
supervisor or employee of any destination resort casino within the boundaries
of the city who violates any of the provisions of §§
112.15 to
112.19 who allows or permits any other person to violate any of the provisions
of §§
112.15 to
112.19 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, shall be subject to immediate
prosecution in the city’s Municipal Court and shall be subject to the fine
imposed by division (B)(2) below.
      (2)   Any person found guilty of the misdemeanor stated in division (B)
(1) above shall be subject to a fine $100 plus court costs for each violation.
(Ord. 09-09, passed 8-18-2009)
§ 134.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
131.02(A) shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed state law, or both.
(Prior Code, § 529.99)
   (C)   Whoever violates §
134.19(B) shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed state law, or both.
(Prior Code, § 533.99)
   (D)   A person convicted of shoplifting (in violation of §
134.15(B)) shall be punished as follows.
      (1)   First offense conviction. Upon a first shoplifting conviction:
         (a)   When the value of the merchandise is less than or equal to $500,
the defendant shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law; and
         (b)   When the value of the merchandise exceeds $500, the defendant
shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law and such fine shall not be
suspended; or the defendant shall be confined in jail for a term not to exceed
state law, or both.
      (2)   Second offense conviction. Upon a second shoplifting conviction:
         (a)   When the value of the merchandise is less than or equal to $500,
the defendant shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law and such fine shall
not be suspended; or the defendant shall be confined in jail for a term not to
exceed state law, or both;
         (b)   When the value of the merchandise exceeds $500, the defendant
shall be fined a sum not to exceed state law and shall be confined in jail for
a term not to exceed state law; and
         (c)   In addition to the fines and imprisonment imposed by this
section, in all cases of conviction for the offense of shoplifting, the court
shall order the defendant to pay a penalty to the mercantile establishment
involved in the amount not to exceed state law, or double the value of the
merchandise involved, whichever is higher. The mercantile establishment shall
be entitled to collect such mandatory penalty as in the case of a civil
judgment. This penalty shall be in addition to the mercantile establishment’s
rights to recover the stolen merchandise.
      (3)   Prior convictions. In determining the number of prior shoplifting
convictions for purposes of imposing punishment under this division (D), the
court shall disregard all such convictions occurring more than seven years
prior to the shoplifting offense in question.
(W. Va. Code 61-3A-3) (Prior Code, § 533.01)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
151.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
152.   PLANNING AND ZONING CODE
      
153.   FLOODPLAIN AREA
      
154.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
      
155.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
CHAPTER 150: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Policy
   
150.002   Purpose
   
150.003   Authority
   
150.004   Jurisdiction
   
150.005   Interpretation, conflict and separability
   
150.006   Savings provision
   
150.007   Reservations and appeals
   
150.008   Amendments
   
150.009   Conditions
   
150.010   Resubdivision of land
   
150.011   Vacation of plats
   
150.012   Variances
   
150.013   Enforcement; violations
Application and Approval Process
   
150.025   General procedure
   
150.026   Sketch plat
   
150.027   Preliminary plat
   
150.028   Final subdivision plat
   
150.029   Signing and recording of plat
   
150.030   Assurance for completion and maintenance of improvements
Requirements for Improvements, Reservations and Design
   
150.045   General improvements
   
150.046   Self-imposed restrictions
   
150.047   Monuments
   
150.048   Character of the land
   
150.049   Subdivision name
   
150.050   Lot improvements
   
150.051   Soil preservation, grading and seeding
   
150.052   Debris and waste
   
150.053   Fencing
   
150.054   Water bodies and watercourses
   
150.055   Performance bond to include lot improvement
   
150.056   Streets and roads
   
150.057   Drainage and storm sewers
   
150.058   Water facilities
   
150.059   Sewerage rates
   
150.060   Sidewalks
   
150.061   Utilities
   
150.062   Public uses
   
150.063   Preservation of natural features and amenities
   
150.064   Nonresidential subdivisions
Specifications and Documents
   
150.075   Sketch plat
   
150.076   Preliminary plat
   
150.077   Construction plans
   
150.078   Final subdivision plat
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 POLICY.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to consider the
subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat as
subject to the control of the city for the orderly, planned, efficient and
economical development of the municipality.
   (B)   Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used
safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood
or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until available public
facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been made for
drainage, water, sewerage and capital improvements such as schools, parks,
recreation facilities, transportation facilities and improvements.
   (C)   The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be
properly related to the proposals shown in the comprehensive plan of the city,
and it is intended that these subdivision regulations shall supplement and
facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in
Building and Housing Codes and zoning ordinances of the city.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.002 PURPOSE.
   These subdivision regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general
welfare of the city;
   (B)   To guide the future growth and development of the municipality;
   (C)   To provide for adequate light, air and privacy, to secure safety from
fire, flood and other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue
congestion of population;
   (D)   To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all
parts of the city and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of
all parts of the city;
   (E)   To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the city and the
value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of land and buildings;
   (F)   To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide
adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks,
playgrounds, recreation and other public requirements and facilities;
   (G)   To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land
and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the city, having
particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways,
and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land
and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and
building lines;
   (H)   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivisions and resubdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use
of land; and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided
land;
   (I)   To ensure that public facilities are available and will have a
sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision;
   (J)   To prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage
the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the city in order
to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community and the value
of the land;
   (K)   To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the city and to
ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features; and
   (L)   To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and
layout of the land, including the use of average density in providing for
minimum width and area of lots, while preserving the density of land as
established in the zoning regulations of the city.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.003 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   By authority (resolution, order, zoning regulations) of the Planning
Commission (hereinafter referred to as “Commission”) adopted pursuant to the
powers and jurisdictions vested through W. Va. Code Article 8-24-1 et seq., and
other applicable laws, statutes, rules and regulations of the state, the
Commission does hereby exercise the power and authority to review, approve and
disapprove plats for subdivision land within the corporate limits of the city
which show lots, blocks or sites with or without new streets or highways.
   (B)   By the same authority, the Commission does hereby exercise the power
and authority to pass and approve the development of plat subdivisions of land
already recorded in the office of the County Clerk if such plats are entirely
or partially undeveloped.
   (C)   The plat shall be considered to be entirely or partially undeveloped
if:
      (1)   Such plat has been recorded with the County Clerk’s office without
prior approval by the Commission; or
      (2)   Such plat has been approved by the Commission where the approval
has been granted more than three years prior to granting a building permit, on
the partially or entirely undeveloped land and the zoning regulations, either
bulk or use, for the district in which the subdivision is located, have been
changed subsequent to the original final subdivision approval.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.004 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   These subdivision regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land,
as defined herein, located within the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   No land shall be subdivided within the corporate limits of the city
until:
      (1)   The subdivider or his or her agent submits a sketch plat of the
parcel to the Commission;
      (2)   Such subdivider obtains approval of the sketch plat and preliminary
and final approval of the plat itself by the Commission; and
      (3)   The approved plat is filed with the County Clerk.
   (C)   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision after the effective
date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of these subdivision
regulations, and no excavation of land or construction of any public or private
improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with the
subdivision regulations.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.005 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY.
   (A)   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of these subdivision regulations shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general
welfare.
   (B)   Conflict with public and private provisions.
      (1)   Public provisions. The subdivision regulations are not intended to
interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
statute or other provisions of law. Where any provision of these subdivision
regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
provision of these subdivision regulations or any other ordinance, rule or
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
      (2)   Private provisions. These subdivision regulations are not intended
to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or
restriction, provided that where the provisions of these subdivision
regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than
such easement, covenant or other private agreement or restriction, the
requirements of these subdivision regulations shall govern. Where the
provisions of the easement, covenant or private agreement or restriction impose
duties and obligations more restrictive, or higher standards than the
requirements of these subdivision regulations, or the determinations of the
Commission or the city in approving a subdivision or in enforcing these
subdivision regulations, and such private provisions are not inconsistent with
these subdivision regulations or determinations thereunder, then such private
provisions shall be operative and supplemental to these subdivision regulations
and determinations made thereunder.
   (C)   Separability. If any part of the provisions of these subdivision
regulations or application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined
in its operations to the part, provision or application directly involved in
all controversy in which such judgment has been rendered and shall not affect
or impair the validity of the remainder of these subdivision regulations or the
application thereof to other persons or circumstances. The Commission hereby
declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these subdivision
regulations even without any such part, provision or application.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.006 SAVINGS PROVISION.
   These subdivision regulations shall not be construed as abating any action
now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or
as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the municipality under any section or provision
existing at the time of adoption of these subdivision regulations, or as
vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm or corporation,
by lawful action of the municipality except as shall be expressly provided for
in these subdivision regulations.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.007 RESERVATIONS AND APPEALS.
   Upon the adoption of these subdivision regulations according to law, the
subdivision regulations, adopted as amended, are hereby repealed, except as to
such sections expressly retained herein.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.008 AMENDMENTS.
   For the purpose of providing the public health, safety and general welfare,
the Commission may from time to time amend the provisions imposed by these
subdivision regulations. Public hearings on all proposed amendments shall be
held by the Commission in manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.009 CONDITIONS.
   Regulation of the subdivisions of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated
by the state of this city. The developer has the duty of compliance with
reasonable conditions laid down by the Commission for design, dedication,
improvement and restrictive use of land so as to conform to the physical and
economical development of the city and to the safety and general welfare of the
future plot owners in the subdivision and of the community at large.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.010 RESUBDIVISION OF LAND.
   (A)   Procedure for resubdivision. For any change in a map of an approved or
recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on
such map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it
affects any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any
regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be approved by the
Commission by the same procedure, rules and regulations as for a subdivision.
   (B)   Procedure for subdivisions where future resubdivision is indicated.
Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or
more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that
such lots will eventually be resubdivided into small building sites, the
Commission may require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of
streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing for
the future opening and extension of such streets may be made a requirement of
the plat.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.011 VACATION OF PLATS.
   (A)   Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the
premises, at any time before the sale of any lots therein, by a written
instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same
to be vacated.
   (B)   Such an instrument shall be approved by the Commission in like manner
as plats of subdivisions. Council may reject any such instrument which abridges
or destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, streets
or alleys.
   (C)   Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and
recorded or filed, in like manner as plats of subdivisions; and being duly
recorded or filed shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the
recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the
streets, alleys and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described
in such plat.
   (D)   When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein
provided by all the owners of lots in such plat joining in the execution of
such writing.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.012 VARIANCES.
   (A)   General. Where the Commission finds that extraordinary hardships or
practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these subdivision
regulations and/or the purposes of these subdivision regulations may be served
to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
approve variances to these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice
may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variance shall
not have effect of nullifying the intent and purposes of these subdivision
regulations; and further provided the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not approve
variances unless it makes written findings based upon the evidence presented to
it that all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property;
      (2)   The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property;
      (3)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of these subdivision regulations is carried out; and
      (4)   The variance will not in any manner vary the provisions of the
zoning ordinances.
   (B)   Conditions. In approving variances, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements of these subdivision regulations.
   (C)   Procedures. A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for
the consideration of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The petition shall state
fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the
petitioner.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.013 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The Zoning Officer shall enforce these subdivision regulations and
shall bring to the attention of the City Attorney any violations or lack of
compliance herewith.
      (2)   No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a
proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a plat of
the subdivision has been approved by the Commission, in accordance with the
provisions of these subdivision regulations, and filed with the County Clerk.
      (3)   (a)   The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land, by the use
of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease with
the intent of evading these subdivision regulations, shall not be permitted.
         (b)   All such described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the
requirements contained in these subdivision regulations.
      (4)   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation
of the provisions of these subdivision regulations.
   (B)   Civil enforcement. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by
law or in equity to prevent any violation of these subdivision regulations, to
prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct or
abate a violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described
above.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS
§ 150.025 GENERAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Classification of subdivision. Whenever any subdivision of land is
proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of any part thereof, and
before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision
is granted, the subdividing owner or his or her authorized agent shall apply
for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the
following procedure, which includes basically two steps for a minor subdivision
and three steps for a major subdivision.
      (1)   Minor subdivision:
         (a)   Sketch plat; and
         (b)   Final subdivision plat.
      (2)   Major subdivision:
         (a)   Sketch plat;
         (b)   Preliminary plat; and
         (c)   Final subdivision plat.
   (B)   Official submission dates. For the purpose of these subdivision
regulations, for both major and minor subdivisions, the date of the regular
meeting of the Commission at which the public hearing on final approval of the
subdivision plat, including any adjourned date thereof, is closed, shall
constitute the official submittal date of the plat at which the statutory
period required for formal approval or disapproval of the plat shall commence
to run.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.026 SKETCH PLAT.
   (A)   Discussion of requirements. Before preparing the sketch for a
subdivision, the applicant is encouraged, but not necessarily obligated, to
discuss with the Commission or Zoning Officer the procedure for adoption of a
subdivision plat and the requirements as to general layout of streets and for
reservations of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire protection
and similar matters, as well as the availability of existing services. The
Commission or Zoning Officer shall also advise the applicant, where
appropriate, to discuss the proposed subdivision with those officials who must
eventually approve these aspects of the subdivision plat coming within their
jurisdiction. It is the intent of this section that such discussion is
necessary and desirable to advise the applicant of all requirements so that
future problems and questions can be reduced.
   (B)   Application procedure and requirements. Prior to subdividing land, an
owner of the land, or his or her representative, shall file an application for
approval of a sketch plat. The application shall:
      (1)   Be made on forms available at the office of the Zoning Officer;
      (2)   Include all contiguous holdings of the owner including land in the
“same ownership” as defined in §
152.011, with an indication of the portion which is proposed to be subdivided,
accompanied by an affidavit of ownership, which shall include the dates the
respective holdings of land were required, together with the book and page of
each conveyance to the present owner as recorded in the County Clerk’s office.
The affidavit shall advise as to the legal owner of the property, the contract
owner of the property, the date the contract of sale was executed, and, if any
corporations are involved, a complete list of all directors, officers and
stockholders of each corporation owning more than 5% of any class of stock;
      (3)   Be accompanied by a minimum of seven copies of the sketch plat as
described in these subdivision regulations and complying in all aspects with
these subdivision regulations;
      (4)   Be presented to the Zoning Officer in duplicate;
      (5)   Be accompanied by a fee as established by the city; and
      (6)   The application shall include an address and telephone number of an
agent who shall be authorized to receive all notices required by these
subdivision regulations.
   (C)   Classification.
      (1)   Tentative classification of the sketch plat shall be made at this
time by the Commission, as to whether the subdivision is a major or minor
subdivision as defined in these subdivision regulations. Subsequent to
classification of the subdivision, the Commission shall place the matter on the
next available regular meeting agenda of the Commission for formal approval of
the sketch plat.
      (2)   Subsequent to such approval by the Commission, the applicant may
proceed directly with the filing of an application for approval of a final
subdivision plat as provided in these subdivision regulations if classified as
a minor subdivision, and, if classified as a major subdivision, the applicant
shall first file an application for approval of a preliminary plat, as provided
in these subdivision regulations, before filing for final subdivision plat
approval.
   (D)   Study of sketch plat.
      (1)   The Commission shall transmit the sketch plat for review to
appropriate officials or agencies of the city, adjoining counties or
municipalities, school and special districts, and other official bodies as it
deems necessary or as mandated by law, including any review required by
metropolitan, regional or state bodies under applicable state or federal law.
The Commission shall request that all officials and agencies, to whom a request
for review has been made, submit their report to the Commission within twenty
days after receipt of the request. The Commission shall consider all the
reports submitted by the officials and agencies concerning the sketch plat.
      (2)   The Commission shall study the sketch plat, taking into
consideration the requirements of the subdivision regulations and the best use
of the land being subdivided. Particular attention shall be given to the
arrangement, location and width of streets, their relation to the topography of
the land, sewage disposal, drainage, lot sizes and arrangement, the further
development of adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided.
   (E)   Field trip. After the regular Commission meeting at which the
subdivision is first discussed, the Commission may schedule a field trip to the
site of the proposed subdivision, accompanied by the applicant or his or her
representative. In order to facilitate field inspection and review of the site
of the proposed subdivision, temporary staking along the centerline of all
proposed roads in the subdivision will be required in time for such field trip,
or if impracticable, the Commission shall permit a suitable alternative
procedure.
   (F)   Approval of sketch plat. After reviewing and discussing the sketch
plat and other reports, as submitted by invited agencies and officials, the
Commission shall advise the applicant of the specific changes or additions, if
any, it will require in the layout, and the character and extent of required
improvements and reservations which it will require as a prerequisite to the
approval of the subdivision plat. The Commission may require additional changes
as a result of further study of the subdivision in final form. Such approval
shall constitute authorization to prepare and submit a preliminary plat in the
case of a major subdivision and a final subdivision plat in the case of a minor
subdivision. Such approval or disapproval shall be made by the Planning
Commission within 30 days after receiving the application for approval of a
sketch plat.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.027 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Application procedure and requirements. Based upon the approval of the
Planning Commission of the sketch plat, the applicant should file in duplicate
an application for approval of a preliminary plat. The application shall:
      (1)   Be made on forms available at the office of the Zoning Officer
together with the specified fee;
      (2)   Include all land which the applicant proposes to subdivide and all
land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom, or of that directly
opposite thereto, extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite
land, with the names of the owners as shown in the assessor’s files. This
information may be shown on a separate current tax map reproduction from the
Assessor’s office showing the subdivision superimposed thereon;
      (3)   Be accompanied by a minimum of ten copies of the preliminary plat
as described in these subdivision regulations;
      (4)   Be accompanied by a minimum of three copies of construction plans
as described in these subdivision regulations;
      (5)   Comply in all respects with the sketch plat as approved; and
      (6)   Be presented to the Commission at least four weeks prior to a
regular meeting of the Commission.
   (B)   Public hearing. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
preliminary plat. Such hearing shall be advertised in the same manner as the
subsequent public hearing on the final subdivision plat. At the time of the
public hearing, the applicant shall submit an affidavit stating that he or she
has notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, each adjacent or
opposite owner of property as indicated on the application for subdivision
approval at least 15 days prior to the public hearing, and that the applicant
has placed four posters provided to him by the Commission on the four closest
public roads in visible locations surrounding the proposed subdivision
property.
   (C)   Preliminary approval. After the Commission has reviewed the
preliminary plat and construction plans, any city recommendations and testimony
and exhibits submitted at the public hearing, the applicant shall be advised of
any required changes and/or additions. The Commission shall approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove the preliminary plat within 30 days after
the date of the regular meeting of the Commission at which the public hearing
on preliminary approval including adjourned date thereof, is closed. One copy
of the proposed preliminary plat shall be returned to the developer with the
date of approval, conditional approval or disapproval and the reasons therefor
accompanying the plat. Before the Commission approves a preliminary plat
showing park reservation or land for other city use proposed to be dedicated to
the local government, the Commission shall obtain approval of the park or land
reservation from Council.
   (D)   Public improvements. The Commission may require that all public
improvements are installed and dedicated prior to the signing of the
subdivision plat by the Chairperson of the Commission. If the Commission does
not require that all public improvements be installed and dedicated prior to
signing of the subdivision plat by the Chairperson of the Commission, the
amount of the bond shall be established by the Commission based upon the
recommendation of the City Engineer, which bond shall be submitted by the
applicant at the time of application for final subdivision plat approval. The
Commission shall require the applicant to indicate on the plat all roads and
public improvements to be dedicated, all special districts for water, fire and
utility improvements which shall be required to be established or extended and
any other special requirements deemed necessary by the Commission.
   (E)   Effective period of preliminary approval. The approval of a
preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one year at the end of
which time final approval on the subdivision must have been obtained from the
Commission, although the plat need not yet be signed and filed with the County
Clerk. Any plat not receiving final approval within the period of time set
forth herein shall be null and void, and the developer shall be required to
resubmit a new plat for preliminary approval subject to all new zoning
restrictions and subdivision regulations.
   (F)   Zoning regulations. Every plat shall conform to existing zoning
regulations and subdivision regulations applicable at the time of proposed
final approval, except that any plat which has received preliminary approval
shall be exempt from any subsequent amendments to the zoning regulations
rendering the plat nonconforming as to bulk or use, provided that final
approval is obtained within a one-year period.
   (G)   Grading of site prior to final approval. Subsequent to preliminary
approval, the developer may apply for a topsoil and excavation permit from the
Commission or such other agency or person as the city shall direct, and upon
receipt of such permit may commence construction to the grades and elevations
required by the approved preliminary plat.
   (H)   Model homes. For the purpose of allowing the early construction of
model homes in a subdivision, the Commission in its discretion may permit a
portion of a major subdivision involving no more than two lots to be created in
accordance with the procedures for a minor subdivision, provided such portion
derives access from an existing city, township, county or state highway, and
provided no future road or other improvement is anticipated where such lots are
proposed. The subdivision plat for the minor portion shall be submitted to the
Commission simultaneously with the preliminary plat for the entire major
subdivision. Subsequent to preliminary approval, the model may be constructed,
subject to such additional requirements that the Commission may require.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.028 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT.
   (A)   Application procedure and requirements. Following the approval of the
sketch plat in the case of a minor subdivision, or of the preliminary plat in
the case of a major subdivision, the applicant, if he or she wishes to proceed
with the subdivision, shall file with the Commission an application for final
approval of a subdivision plat. The application shall:
      (1)   Be made on forms available at the zoning office, together with the
specified fee;
      (2)   Include the entire subdivision, or section thereof, which derives
access from an existing state, county or local government highway;
      (3)   Be accompanied by a minimum of ten copies of the subdivision plat
and the construction plans, as described in these subdivision regulations;
      (4)   Comply in all respects with the sketch plat or preliminary plat, as
approved, whichever is applicable, depending upon the classification of the
subdivision;
      (5)   Be presented to the Commission at least four weeks prior to a
regular meeting of the Commission in order that a public hearing may be
scheduled and the required 15-day notice given. The date of the regular meeting
of the Commission at which the public hearing on final approval, including any
adjourned date thereof, is closed, shall constitute the official submittal date
of the plat for the purposes of these subdivision regulations;
      (6)   (a)   Be accompanied by all formal irrevocable offers of dedication
to the public of all streets, city uses, utilities, parks and easements, in a
form approved by the City Attorney, and the subdivision plat shall be marked
with a notation indicating the formal offers of dedication as follows:
 
The owner, or his or her representative, hereby irrevocably offers for
dedication to the city all the streets, city uses, easements, parks and
required utilities shown in the within subdivision plat and construction plans
in accordance with an irrevocable offer of dedication date ............... ,
and recorded in the Office of the County Clerk of Kanawha County.
By ___________________________________________________________ ______
Owner or Representative _______________________________________________
Date ___________________________________________________________ _____
 
         (b)   The applicant shall deliver a full covenant and warranty deed to
all such lands in proper form for recording, together with a title policy for
the city in the sum of not less than $10,000, which sum shall be determined by
the City Attorney before signing of the final subdivision plat.
      (7)   Be accompanied by the escrow deposit certification or performance
bond, if required, in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney and in an amount
established by the Commission upon recommendation of the city and shall include
a provision that the principal of the escrow deposit or bond shall comply with
all the terms of the resolution of final subdivision plat approval as
determined by the Commission and shall include, but not be limited to, the
performance of all required subdivision and off-site improvements, and that all
improvements and land included in the irrevocable offer of dedication shall be
dedicated to the city free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the
premises;
      (8)   Be accompanied by stamped No. 10 envelopes addressed to each owner
of property immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom, or of that
directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such
opposite property owners as are correct within the knowledge of the applicant
as shown on the latest tax assessment roll; and
      (9)   Be accompanied by an inspection fee in an amount to be determined
on the basis of the provisions of these subdivision regulations, and by written
assurance from the public utility companies and improvement districts that
necessary utilities will be installed and proof that the applicant has
submitted petitions in writing for the creation or extension of any improvement
districts as required by the Planning Commission upon preliminary plat
approval. The applicant shall also pay a $50 fee for each street sign shown in
the construction plans, which street signs shall be installed by the city.
   (B)   Endorsement of health authorities. The final subdivision plat shall be
properly endorsed by the Health Department or Health Officer with respect to
all sewer and water facilities and that the same complies with all rules,
subdivision regulations and requirements of city, regional, state and national
authorities.
   (C)   Notice of public hearing. Upon receipt of the formal application and
all accompanying material, the Commission shall call a public hearing for the
next scheduled meeting of the Commission to be held at least 15 days after the
date of the application. The Commission shall submit a notice for publication
in one newspaper of general circulation to be published at least 15 days prior
to the public hearing and mail notices to all property owners, as specified in
division (A)(8) above, and shall maintain file copies of the plat and
construction plans for public review prior to the hearing. The Commission shall
furnish four posters to the applicant to be posted by the applicant on the four
closest public roads in visible locations surrounding the proposed subdivision
property at least ten days prior to the public hearing.
   (D)   Public hearing and determination.
      (1)   At the public hearing, the applicant shall furnish an affidavit as
to placement of posters required by division (C) above and the Commission shall
give an opportunity to any interested persons to examine or comment upon the
plat and construction plans.
      (2)   After the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall, within 30
days after closing of the public hearing, approve, modify and approve, or
disapprove the subdivision application by resolution which shall set forth in
detail any conditions to which the approval is subject, or reasons for
disapproval. In the final resolution, the Commission shall stipulate the period
of time when the performance bond shall be filed or the required improvements
installed, whichever is applicable. In no event shall an escrow deposit or
performance bond be submitted later than six months from the date of final
resolution, together with all required documents and completion of required
procedures. In no event shall the period of time stipulated by the Commission
for completion of required improvements exceed two years from the date of the
final resolution. One copy of the final subdivision plat shall be returned to
the subdivider with the date of approval, conditional approval or disapproval
noted thereon and the reasons therefor accompanying the plat.
   (E)   Submission and review. Subsequent to the resolution of the Commission,
three paper copies of the construction plans, and one copy of the original of
the subdivision plat on tracing cloth, and/or reproduction Mylar, and two
copies of the subdivision plat on sepia paper and two copies of the subdivision
plat on paper shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer for final review. A
check payable to the County Clerk in the amount of the current filing fee shall
be provided. No final approval shall be endorsed on the plat until a review has
indicated that all requirements of the resolution have been met.
   (F)   Vested rights. No vested rights shall accrue to any plat by reason of
preliminary or final approval until the actual signing of the plat by the
Chairperson of the Commission. All requirements, conditions or regulations
adopted by the Commission applicable to the subdivision or on all subdivisions
generally shall be deemed a condition for and subdivision prior to the time of
the signing of the final plat by the Chairperson of the Commission and Zoning
Officer. Where the Commission has required the installation of improvements
prior to signing of the final plat, the Commission shall not unreasonably
modify the conditions set forth in the final approval.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.029 SIGNING AND RECORDING OF PLAT.
   (A)   Signing of plat.
      (1)   When an escrow deposit or bond is required, the Chairperson of the
Commission and the Zoning Officer shall endorse approval on the plat after the
escrow deposit or bond has been approved by Council, and all the conditions of
the resolution pertaining to the plat have been satisfied.
      (2)   When installation of improvements is required, the Chairperson of
the Commission shall endorse approval on the plat after all conditions of the
resolution have been satisfied and all improvements satisfactorily completed.
There shall be written evidence that the required public facilities have been
installed in a manner satisfactory to the city as shown by a certificate signed
by the City Engineer and City Attorney that the necessary dedication of public
lands and improvements has been accomplished.
   (B)   Recording of plat.
      (1)   The Chairperson and Zoning Officer shall sign the tracing cloth or
reproducible Mylar original of the subdivision plat and two sepia prints of the
subdivision plat. The sepia prints shall be returned to the applicant’s
engineer.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to file the plat
with the County Clerk’s office within 30 days of the date of signature.
Simultaneously with the filing of the plat, the Zoning Officer shall record the
agreement of dedication together with such legal documents as shall be required
to be recorded by the local government attorney.
   (C)   Sectionalizing major subdivision plats. Prior to granting final
approval of a major subdivision plat, the Commission may permit the plat to be
divided into two or more sections and may impose such conditions upon the
filing of the sections as it may deem necessary to assure the orderly
development of the plat. The Commissioner may require that the performance bond
be in such amount as is commensurate with the section or sections of the plat
to be filed and may defer the remaining required escrow deposit or performance
bond principal amount until the remaining sections of the plat are offered for
filing. The developer may also file irrevocable offers to dedicate streets and
public improvements in the sections offered to be filed and defer filing offers
of dedication for the remaining sections until such sections, subject to any
conditions imposed by the Commission, are granted concurrently with final
approval of the plat. In the event of approval of sectionalizing, the entire
approved subdivision plat including all sections shall be filed within 90 days
after the date of final approval with the City Clerk’s office and such sections
as have been authorized by the Commission shall be filed with the County Clerk.
Such sections shall contain at least 10% of the total number of lots contained
in the approval plat. The approval of all remaining sections not filed with the
County Clerk shall automatically expire unless such sections have been approved
for filing by the Commission, all fees paid, all instruments and offers of
dedication submitted and performance bonds approved and actually filed with the
Recorder of Deeds within three years of the date of final subdivision approval
of the subdivision plat.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.030 ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Improvements and escrow deposits or performance bond.
      (1)   Completion of improvements. Before the plat is signed by the
Chairperson of the Commission, all applicants shall be required to complete, in
accordance with the Commission’s decision and to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer, all the street, sanitary and other improvements including lot
improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision as required in these
subdivision regulations, specified in the final subdivision plat, and as
approved by the Commission, and to dedicate the same to the city, free and
clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property and public improvements
thus dedicated.
      (2)   Escrow deposits for lot improvements.
         (a)   Acceptance of escrow funds. Whenever, by reason of the season of
the year, any lot improvements required by the subdivision regulations cannot
be performed, the Zoning Inspector may, nevertheless, issue a certificate of
occupancy, provided there is no danger to health, safety or general welfare
upon accepting a cash escrow deposit in an amount to be determined by the City
Engineer for the cost of such improvements. The performance bond covering such
lot improvements shall remain in full force and effect.
         (b)   Procedures on escrow fund. All required improvements for which
escrow moneys have been accepted by the Zoning Officer at the time of issuance
of a certificate of occupancy shall be installed by the developer within a
period of nine months from the date of deposit and issuance of the certificate
of occupancy. In the event that the improvements have not been properly
installed, at the end of the time period, the Zoning Inspector shall give two
weeks’ written notice to the developer requiring him or her to install the
same, and in the event that the same are not installed properly in the
discretion of the Zoning Officer, the Zoning Officer may request the governing
body to authorize the city to proceed to contract out the work for the
installation of the necessary improvements in a sum not to exceed the amount of
the escrow deposit. At the time of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy
for which escrow moneys are being deposited with the Zoning Officer, the
applicant shall obtain and file with the Zoning Officer prior to obtaining the
certificate of occupancy a notarized statement from the purchaser of the
premises authorizing the Zoning Officer to install the improvements at the end
of the nine-month period in the event that the same have not been duly
installed by the developer.
      (3)   Performance bond.
         (a)   The Planning Commission in its discretion may waive the
requirement that the applicant complete and dedicate all public improvements
prior to the signing of the subdivision plat, and that, as an alternative, the
applicant post a bond at the time of application for final subdivision approval
in an amount estimated by the Commission as sufficient to secure to the city
the satisfactory construction, installation and dedication of the uncompleted
portion of required improvements. The performance bond shall also secure all
lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision as required in these
subdivision regulations.
         (b)   Such performance bond shall comply with all statutory
requirements and shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to form
sufficiency and manner of execution as set forth in these subdivision
regulations. The period within which required improvements must be completed
shall be specified by the Planning Commission in the resolution approving the
final subdivision plat and shall be incorporated in the bond and shall not in
any event exceed two years from date of final approval. Such bond shall be
approved by the city as to the amount and surety and conditions satisfactory to
the governing body. The Commission may, upon proof of difficulty, recommend to
the governing body extension of the completion date set forth in such bond for
a maximum period of one additional year. The city may at any time during the
period of such bond accept a substitution of principal or sureties on the bond
upon recommendation of the Commission.
      (4)   Temporary improvement. The applicant shall build and pay for all
costs of temporary improvements required by the Commission and shall maintain
the same for the period specified by the Commission. Prior to construction of
any temporary facility or improvements, the developer shall file with the city
a separate suitable escrow deposit or bond for temporary facilities, which
escrow deposit or bond shall insure that the temporary facilities will be
properly constructed, maintained and removed.
      (5)   Cost of improvements. All required improvements shall be made by
the applicant, at his or her expense, without reimbursement by the city or any
improvement district therein.
      (6)   Governmental units. Governmental units to which these bonds and
contract provisions apply may file in lieu of such contract or bond a certified
resolution or from officers or agencies authorized to act in their behalf,
agreeing to comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (7)   Failure to complete improvement. For subdivisions for which no
escrow deposit or performance bond has been posted, if the improvements are not
completed within the period specified by the Commission in the resolution
approving the plat, the approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those
cases where an escrow deposit or performance bond has been posted and required
improvements have not been installed within the terms of such performance bond,
the city may thereupon declare the escrow deposit or bond to be in default and
require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the
building development at the time the escrow deposit or bond is declared to be
in default.
      (8)   Acceptance of dedication offers. Acceptance of formal offers of
dedication of streets, public areas, easements and parks shall be by the city.
The approval by the Commission of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to
constitute or imply the acceptance by the city of any street, easement or park
shown on such plat. The Commission may require the plat to be endorsed with
appropriate notes to this effect.
   (B)   Inspection of improvements.
      (1)   General procedure and fees. The Commission shall provide for
inspection of required improvements during construction and ensure their
satisfactory completion. The applicant shall pay to the city an inspection fee
of 2% of the amount of the performance bond or the estimated cost of required
improvements, and the subdivision plat shall not be signed by the Chairperson
of the Commission unless such fee has been paid at the time of application.
These fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the city and no building
permits or certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. If
the City Engineer finds upon inspection that any of the required improvements
have not been constructed in accordance with the city’s construction standards
and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for completing the
improvements. Wherever the cost of improvements is covered by an escrow deposit
or performance bond, the applicant and the bonding company shall be severally
and jointly liable for completing the improvements according to specifications.
      (2)   Release or reduction of performance bond.
         (a)   Certificate of satisfactory completion. The city shall not
accept dedication of required improvements, nor release nor reduce a
performance bond, until the City Engineer has submitted a certificate stating
that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until the
applicant’s engineer or surveyor has certified to the City Engineer, through
submission of detailed “as-built” survey plat of the subdivision, indicating
location, dimensions, materials and other information required by the
Commission or City Engineer, that the layout of the line and grade of all
public improvements is in accordance with construction plans for the
subdivision and that a title insurance policy has been furnished to and
approved by the City Attorney indicating that the improvements shall have been
completed, are ready for dedication to the city and are free and clear of any
and all liens and encumbrances. Upon such approval and recommendation, the
governing body shall thereafter accept the improvements for dedication in
accordance with the established procedure.
         (b)   Reduction of escrow deposit or performance bond. An escrow
deposit or performance bond shall be reduced upon actual dedication of public
improvements and then only to the ratio that the public improvement dedicated
bears to the total public improvements for the plat. In no event shall the
escrow deposit or performance bond be so reduced below 25% of the principal
amount.
   (C)   Maintenance of improvements.
      (1)   The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements on the
individual subdivided lots and provide for snow removal on streets and
sidewalks, if required, until acceptance of such improvements by the city. If
there are any certificates of occupancy on a street not dedicated to the city,
the city may on 12 hours’ notice plow the street or effect emergency repairs
and charge the same to applicant.
      (2)   The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance bond with the
city, prior to dedication, in an amount considered adequate by the City
Engineer and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, in order to assure
the satisfactory condition of the required improvements, including all lot
improvements on the individual subdivided lots for a period of one year after
the date of their acceptance by the city and dedication of same to the local
government.
   (D)   Deferral or waiver of required improvements.
      (1)   The Planning Commission may defer or waive at the time of final
approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all such
improvements as, in its judgment, are not requisite in the interests of the
public health, safety and general welfare, or which are inappropriate because
of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities.
      (2)   Whenever it is deemed necessary by the Commission to defer the
construction of any improvement required herein because of incompatible grades,
future planning, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities, or for other
reasons, the applicant shall pay his or her share of the costs of the future
improvements to the city prior to signing of the final subdivision plat, or the
applicant may post a bond insuring completion of such improvements upon demand
of the local government.
   (E)   Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy.
      (1)   Where an escrow deposit or performance bond has been required for a
subdivision, no certificate of occupancy for any building in the subdivision
shall be issued prior to the completion of the improvements and dedication of
same to the local government, as required in the Commission’s final approval of
the subdivision plat.
      (2)   The extent of street improvement shall be adequate for vehicular
access by the prospective occupant and by police and fire equipment, prior to
the issuance of an occupancy permit. The developer shall at the time of the
dedication submit moneys in escrow to the city in a sum determined by the City
Engineer for the necessary final improvement of the street.
      (3)   No building permit shall be issued for the final 10% of lots in a
subdivision, or if 10% is less than two, for the final two lots of a
subdivision, until all public improvements required by the Commission for the
plat have been fully completed and dedicated to the city.
   (F)   Consumer protection legislation and conflicts of interest statutes.
      (1)   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be granted or
issued if a developer or his or her authorized agent has violated any federal,
state or local law pertaining to consumer protection of real estate land sales,
promotion or practices, or any applicable conflicts of interest legislation
with respect to the lot or parcel of land which is the subject of the permit or
certificate, until so ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (2)   With respect to such lot or parcel of land, in the event a building
permit or certificate of occupancy has been granted or issued, it shall be
subject to revocation by the city until so ordered otherwise by a court of
competent jurisdiction, provided that in no event shall the rights of
intervening innocent third parties in possession of a certificate of occupancy
be prejudiced by any such revocation.
      (3)   Any violation of a federal, state or local consumer protection law,
including, but not limited to: the Postal Reorganization Act of 1970, being 39
U.S.C. §§ 410 et seq.; the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1970, being 15
U.S.C. §§ 41 to 58; Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act, being 15 U.S.C.
§§ 1701 et seq.; the Truth in Lending Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1601 et seq.; the
Uniform Commercial Credit Code; appropriate and applicable state laws, or
conflicts of interest statute, law or regulation shall be deemed a violation of
these subdivision regulations and subject to all of the penalties and
proceedings as set forth herein.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS AND DESIGN
§ 150.045 GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdivision plats
shall comply with the following laws, rules and regulations:
   (A)   All applicable statutory provisions;
   (B)   The city government zoning ordinance, Building and Housing Codes, and
all other applicable laws of the city;
   (C)   The special requirements of these subdivision regulations and any
rules of the Health Department and/or appropriate state agencies;
   (D)   The rules and the State Highway Department if the subdivision or any
lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting street;
   (E)   The standards and regulations adopted by the City Engineer and all
boards, commissions, agencies and officials of the city; and
   (F)   Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity
with the above guides or policy and purposes of these subdivision regulations.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.046 SELF-IMPOSED RESTRICTIONS.
   If the owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the
subdivision greater than those required by the zoning regulations or these
subdivision regulations, such restrictions or references thereto are required
to be indicated on the subdivision plat, or the Planning Commission shall
require that restrictive covenants be recorded with the County Clerk in a form
to be approved by the City Attorney.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.047 MONUMENTS.
   The applicant shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision
as required herein and as approved by a registered land surveyor.
   (A)   Monuments shall be located on street right-of-way lines, at street
intersections, angle points of curve and block corners. They shall be spaced so
as to be within sight of each other, the sight lines being contained wholly
within the street limits.
   (B)   The external boundaries of a subdivision shall be monumented in the
field by monuments of stone or concrete, not less than 30 inches in length, not
less than four inches square or five inches in diameter, and marked on top with
a cross, brass plug, iron rod or other durable material securely embedded; or
by iron rods or pipes at least 30 inches long and two inches in diameter. These
monuments shall be placed not more than 1,400 feet apart in any straight line
and at all corners, at each end of all curves, at the point where a curve
changes its radius, at all angle points in any line and at all angle points
along the meander line, such points to be not less than 20 feet back from the
bank of any river or stream, except that when such corners or points fall
within a street, or proposed future street, the monuments shall be placed in
the side line of the street.
   (C)   All internal boundaries and those corners and points not referred to
in division (B) above shall be monumented in the field by like monuments as
described above. These monuments shall be placed at all block corners, at each
end of all curves, at a point where a river changes its radius and at all angle
points in any line.
   (D)   The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be monumented
in the field by iron pipes at least 30 inches long and seven-eighths inch in
diameter or by round or square iron bars at least 30 inches long. These
monuments shall be placed at the point of intersection of the river or stream
lot line, with a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the
bank of the river or stream.
   (E)   All such monuments shall be set flush with the ground and planted in
such manner that they will not be removed by frost.
   (F)   All monuments shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a
registered land surveyor prior to the time the Commission recommends approval
of the final plat.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.048 CHARACTER OF THE LAND.
   Land which the Commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or
development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations,
adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements or other features
which will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health and general welfare of
the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding
areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are
formulated by the developer and approved by the Commission, upon recommendation
of the City Engineer, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land
conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not involve such a
danger.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.049 SUBDIVISION NAME.
   The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too closely
approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the area covered
by these subdivision regulations. The Commission shall have final authority to
designate the name of the subdivision which shall be determined at sketch plat
approval.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.050 LOT IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be
no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in
securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the zoning
regulations and health regulations and in providing driveway access to
buildings on such lots from an approved street.
   (B)   Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards
of the zoning regulations. Where lots are more than double the minimum required
area for the zoning district, the Commission may require that such lots be
arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets
where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all in compliance
with the zoning regulations and these subdivision regulations. In general, side
lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street
lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan.
Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of
buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from both streets. Depth
and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial or
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and
loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated,
as established in the zoning regulations.
   (C)   Double frontage lots and access to lots.
      (1)   Double frontage lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots
shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential
development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation.
      (2)   Access from major and secondary arterials. Lots shall not, in
general, derive access exclusively from a major or secondary street. Where
driveway access from a major or secondary street may be necessary for several
adjoining lots, the Commission may require that such lots be served by a
combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards on such
street. Where possible, driveways should be designed and arranged so as to
avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on major or secondary arterials.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.051 SOIL PRESERVATION, GRADING AND SEEDING.
   (A)   Soil preservation and final grading. No certificate of occupancy shall
be issued until final grading has been completed in accordance with the
approved final subdivision plat and the lot precovered with soil with an
average depth of at least six inches which shall contain no particles over two
inches in diameter over the entire area of the lot, except that portion covered
by buildings or included in streets, or where the grade has not been changed or
natural vegetation seriously damaged. Topsoil shall not be removed from
residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide
at least six inches of cover on the lots and at least four inches of cover
between the sidewalks and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting.
   (B)   Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive
drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be
coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage
shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from
each lot to adjacent lots.
   (C)   Lawn-grass seed and sod. Lawn-grass seed shall be sown at not less
than four pounds to each 1,000 square feet of land area. In the spring, the
seed shall be sown between March 15 and May 15; and in the fall, the seed shall
be sown between August 15 and September 30. The seed shall consist of a maximum
of 10% rye grass by weight and a minimum of 90% of permanent bluegrass and/or
fescue grass by weight. All seed shall have been tested for germination within
one year of the date of seeding, and the date of testing shall be on the label
containing the seed analysis. All lots shall be seeded from the roadside edge
of the unpaved right-of-way back to a distance of 25 feet behind the principal
residence on the lot. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until
respreading of soil and seeding of lawn has been completed; except that between
October 1 and March 15, and between May 15 and August 15, the applicant shall
submit an agreement in writing signed by the developer and the property owner,
with a copy to the Zoning Officer, that respreading of soil and seeding of lawn
will be done during the immediate following planting season as set forth in
this section, and leave a cash escrow for performance in such amount as shall
be determined by the Zoning Inspector. Sod may be used to comply with any
requirement of seeding set forth herein.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.052 DEBRIS AND WASTE.
   No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish or
other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or left or
deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, and removal of the same shall be required prior to issuance of any
certificate of occupancy on a subdivision. Nor shall any be left or deposited
in any area of the subdivision at the time of expiration of the performance
bond or dedication of public improvements, whichever is sooner.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.053 FENCING.
   Each subdivider and/or developer shall be required to furnish and install
fences wherever the Commission determines that a hazardous condition may exist.
The fences shall be constructed according to standards established by the City
Engineer and shall be noted as to height and material on the final plat. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the fence improvements have been
duly installed.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.054 WATER BODIES AND WATERCOURSES.
   If a tract being subdivided contains a water body or portion thereof, lot
lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the water body
among the fees to adjacent lots. The Commission may approve an alternative plan
whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water
body is so placed that it will not become a city responsibility. No more than
25% of the minimum area of a lot required under the zoning regulations may be
satisfied by land which is under water. Where a watercourse separates the
buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions
shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure, of design
approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.055 PERFORMANCE BOND TO INCLUDE LOT IMPROVEMENT.
   (A)   The performance bond shall include an amount to guarantee completion
of all requirements contained in §
150.030 including, but not limited to, soil preservation, final grading, lot
drainage, lawn-grass seeding, removal of debris and waste, fencing and all
other lot improvements required by the Commission.
   (B)   Whether or not a certificate of occupancy has been issued, at the
expiration of escrow deposit or the performance bond, the city may enforce the
provisions of the bond where the provisions of this section or any other
applicable law, ordinance or regulation have not been complied with.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.056 STREETS AND ROADS.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Frontage on improved roads. No subdivision shall be approved unless
the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access from an existing
street or:
         (a)   An existing state highway; or
         (b)   A street shown upon a plat approved by the Commission and
recorded in the County Clerk’s office. Such street or highway shall be suitably
improved as required by the highway rules, regulations, specifications or
orders, or be secured by a performance bond required under these subdivision
regulations, with the width and right-of-way required by these subdivision
regulations.
      (2)   Grading and improvement plan. Roads shall be graded and improved
and conform to the city construction standards and specifications and shall be
approved as to design and specifications by the City Engineer, in accordance
with the construction plans required to be submitted prior to final plat
approval.
      (3)   Topography and arrangement.
         (a)   Roads shall be related appropriately to the topography. Local
roads shall be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity of lot appearance.
All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the
building sites at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall
conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of
steep grades and curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in
the design standards of these subdivision regulations.
         (b)   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way.
         (c)   All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic
generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches and
shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and
proposed land uses.
         (d)   Minor and local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as
possible to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit
efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of
streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property.
         (e)   The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern need not
necessarily be adhered to, and the use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs or
V-shaped streets shall be encouraged where such use will result in a more
desirable layout.
         (f)   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the
tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical
conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Commission such extension is not
necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision
with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of
adjacent tracts.
         (g)   In business and industrial developments, the streets and other
accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings,
location of rail facilities and the provision of alleys, truck loading and
maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of
movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian.
      (4)   Blocks.
         (a)   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of
lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be
permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads or waterways.
         (b)   The lengths, width and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but
block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 2,200 feet or 12 times the
minimum lot width required in the zoning district, nor be less than 400 feet in
length. Wherever practicable, blocks along major arterials and collector
streets shall be not less than 1,000 feet in length.
         (c)   In long blocks, the Commission may require the reservation of an
easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities or
pedestrian traffic. Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide,
may be required by the Commission through the center of blocks more than 800
feet long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities.
Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and width as may be
determined suitable by the Commission for prospective use.
      (5)   Access to primary arterials. Where a subdivision borders on or
contains an existing or proposed primary arterial, the Commission may require
that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means:
         (a)   The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the primary arterial
and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be provided from the
primary arterial, and screening shall be provided in a strip of land along the
rear property line of such lots;
         (b)   A series of cul-de-sacs, V-shaped streets or short loops entered
from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the
rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the major arterial; and/or
         (c)   A marginal access or service road (separated from the primary
arterial by a planning or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable
points).
      (6)   Road names. The sketch plat as submitted shall not indicate any
names upon proposed streets. The Commission shall approve the name of all roads
at the time of preliminary approval. The local postmaster shall be consulted by
the Commission prior to rendering its request to the Commission. Names shall be
sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from other road names in the
city so as not to cause confusion. A road which is or is planned as a
continuation of an existing road shall bear the same name.
      (7)   Road regulatory signs. The applicant shall deposit with the city at
the time of final subdivision approval the sum of $50 for each road sign
required by the City Engineer at all road intersections. The city shall install
all road signs before issuance of certificates of occupancy for any residence
on the streets approved. Street name signs are to be placed at all
intersections within or abutting the subdivision, the type and location of
which to be approved by the City Engineer.
      (8)   Street lights. Installation of street lights shall be required in
accordance with design and specification standards approved by the City
Engineer.
      (9)   Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be
permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from
adjacent property to such street.
      (10)   Construction of roads and dead-end roads.
         (a)   Construction of roads. The arrangement of streets shall provide
for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such
continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire
protection or efficient provision of utilities. If the adjacent property is
undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-
way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary T - or L- shaped
turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets, with the
notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right-of-
way shall revert to abuttors whenever the street is continued. The Commission
may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the
design standards of these subdivision regulations.
         (b)   Dead-end road (permanent). Where a road does not extend the
boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the
Commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be
nearer to such boundary that 50 feet. However, the Commission may require the
reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities,
pedestrian traffic or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at
the end of a permanent dead-end street in accordance with city construction
standards and specifications. For greater convenience to traffic and more
effective police and fire protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in
general, be limited in length in accordance with the design standards of these
subdivision regulations.
   (B)   Design standards.
      (1)   General. In order to provide for roads of suitable location, width
and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory
access to police, firefighting, snow removal, sanitation and road-maintenance
equipment, and to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and
avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, design standards for roads are
hereby required. Road classification shall be determined by the Commission.
      (2)   Road surfacing and improvements. After sewer and water utilities
have been installed by the developer, the applicant shall construct curbs and
gutters and shall surface or cause to be surfaced roadways to the widths
prescribed in these subdivision regulations. All local and minor streets shall
be paved with a concrete pavement of a minimum thickness of seven inches or of
asphaltic concrete or other material of equivalent quality and shall be
provided with an adequate base as determined by accepted engineering practice.
Such surfacing shall be of such character as is suitable for the expected
traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the surrounding areas.
Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains and bridges. All road
pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds
and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and specifications
adopted by the Commission, City Engineer or city and shall be incorporated into
the construction plans required to be submitted by the developer for plat
approval.
      (3)   Excess right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards
designated in these subdivision regulations shall be required whenever, due to
topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes.
Such slopes shall not be in excess of three to one.
      (4)   Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad rights-of-way and
limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of
adjoining lands shall be treated as follows.
         (a)   In residential districts, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in
depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall
be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway.
This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the
plat: “This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structure hereon
is prohibited.”
         (b)   In districts zoned for business, commercial or industrial uses,
the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad
shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure
suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.
         (c)   Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting a street
which crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a
distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance
shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for
future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.
      (5)   Intersections.
         (a)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as
possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an
angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should
be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right
angles for at least 100 feet therefrom. Not more than two streets shall
intersect at anyone point unless specifically approved by the Commission.
         (b)   Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street
shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the
opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than
150 feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected street has
separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where
streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous.
Intersections of major streets shall be at least 800 feet apart.
         (c)   Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local streets
shall be at least 20 feet; and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving
a collector street shall be at least 25 feet. Alley intersections and abrupt
changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in
accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular
movement.
         (d)   Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a
leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a 2% rate at a distance
of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting
street.
         (e)   Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or
existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by
limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation
(including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to
the extent deemed necessary to provide an adequate sight distance.
         (f)   The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall
be 3% or less.
      (6)   Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined
by the Commission, shall be constructed at the full expense of the applicant
without reimbursement from the city. The sharing expense for the construction
of bridges not of primary benefit to the applicant as determined by the
Commission, shall be fixed by special agreement between the city and the
applicant. Such cost shall be charged to the applicant pro rata as the
percentage of his or her land developed and so served.
   (C)   Road dedications and reservations.
      (1)   New perimeter streets. Street systems in new subdivisions shall be
laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an
existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the
street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The Commission may
authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates
the entire required street right-of-way width within his own subdivision
boundaries.
      (2)   Widening and realignment of existing roads. Where a subdivision
borders an existing narrow road or when the comprehensive plan, or zoning
setback regulations indicate plans for realignment or widening a road that
would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall
be required to improve and dedicate at his or her expense such areas for
widening or realignment of such roads. Such frontage roads and streets shall be
improved and dedicated by the applicant at his or her own expense to the full
width as required by these subdivision regulations. Land reserved for any road
purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of the
zoning regulations whether the land is to be dedicated to the municipality fee
simple or an easement is granted to the city.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.057 DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   General requirements. The Commission shall not recommend for approval
any plat of subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm or
flood water runoff channels or basins. The stormwater drainage system shall be
separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where
required, shall be designed by the Rational Method, or other methods as
approved by the Commission, and a copy of design computations shall be
submitted along with plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is
not carried across or around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than
600 feet in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are
exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that
point, and basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water
drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block.
   (B)   Nature of stormwater facilities.
      (1)   Location. The applicant may be required by the Commission to carry
away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either
previously to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities
shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual
unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in
accordance with the construction standards and specifications.
      (2)   Accessibility to public storm sewers.
         (a)   Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall
install stormwater facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable
distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of stormwaters,
subject to the specifications of the City Engineer. However, in subdivisions
containing lots less than 15,000 square feet in area and in business and
industrial districts, underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed
throughout the subdivisions and be conducted to an approved outfall. Inspection
of facilities shall be conducted by the City Engineer.
         (b)   If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided
eventually, as determined by the City Engineer and the Commission, the
developer shall make arrangements for future stormwater disposal by a public
utility system at the time the plat receives final approval. Provisions for
such connection shall be incorporated by inclusion in the performance bond
required for the subdivision plat.
      (3)   Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other
drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential
runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the
subdivision. The City Engineer shall determine the necessary size of the
facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and
specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development
permitted by the subdivision regulations.
      (4)   Effect on downstream drainage areas. The City Engineer shall also
study the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities
outside the area of the subdivision. City drainage studies together with such
other studies as shall be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed
improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to
the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream
drainage facility, the Commission may withhold approval of the subdivision
until provision has been made for the improvement of such potential condition
in such sum as the Commission determines. No subdivision shall be approved
unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse
or facility.
      (5)   Areas of poor drainage. Whenever a plat is submitted for an area
which is subject to flooding, the Commission may approve such subdivision
provided that the applicant fills the affected area of such subdivision to an
elevation sufficient to place the elevation of streets and lots at a minimum of
12 inches above the elevation of the maximum probable flood, as determined by
the City Engineer. The plat of such subdivision shall provide for an overflow
zone along the bank of any stream or watercourse, in a width which shall be
sufficient in times of high water to contain or move the water, and no fill
shall be placed in the overflow zone nor shall any structure be erected or
placed therein. The boundaries of the overflow zone shall be subject to
approval by the City Engineer. Areas of extremely poor drainage should be
discouraged.
      (6)   Floodplain areas. The applicant shall comply with all requirements
of the floodplain regulations of the city.
   (C)   Dedication of drainage easements.
      (1)   General requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the
lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction or both as will
be adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the
drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate
width for maximum potential volume of flow.
      (2)   Drainage easements.
         (a)   Where topography or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way,
perpetual unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for such drainage
facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with
satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat.
Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or
to other drainage facilities.
         (b)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private
land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights shall be secured and
indicated on the plat.
         (c)   The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or
conservation easement of land on both sides of existing watercourses, to a
distance to be determined by the Commission.
         (d)   Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or
overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for
dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage
ways. Such lands or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be computed in
determining the number of lots to be utilized for average density procedure nor
for computing the area requirement of any lot.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.058 WATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or
create a water supply district for the purpose of providing a water supply
system capable of providing domestic water use and fire protection.
      (2)   Where a public water main is accessible, the subdivider shall
install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the
specifications of the West Virginia Water Company. All water mains shall be at
least six inches in diameter.
      (3)   Water facilities shall be installed in accordance with the rules
and regulations of the West Virginia Water Company and shall conform to the
Design Systems for Public Water Supply Systems (Bulletin EW-99 West Virginia
Department of Health).
      (4)   To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, all
water supply improvements and the boundary lines of proposed districts,
indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the
preliminary plat, and the cost of installing same shall be included in the
performance bond to be furnished by the developer.
   (B)   Individual wells and central water systems.
      (1)   In low-density zoning districts, in the discretion of the
Commission, if a public water system is not available, individual wells may be
used or a central water system provided in such a manner that an adequate
supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision.
Water samples shall be submitted to the Health Department for its approval, and
individual wells and central water systems shall be approved by the appropriate
health authorities. Orders of approval shall be submitted to the Commission.
      (2)   If the Commission requires that a connection to a public water main
be eventually provided as a condition to approval of an individual well or
central water system, the applicant shall make arrangements for future water
service at the time the plat received final approval. Performance of cash bonds
may be required to insure compliance.
   (C)   Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions.
Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 1,000 feet apart and within 500
feet of any structure and shall be approved by the applicable protection unit.
To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire
hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves and all other supply
improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on
the subdivision plat.
   (D)   Separate water systems. Where the public water system of the city is
not accessible to the subdivider, the subdivider shall install adequate
separate water facilities. In those cases where a separate water facility has
been installed and where such system has been approved by the Commission and
the Municipal Utility Commission of the city, such system shall be dedicated to
the Municipal Utility Commission of the city who shall be responsible for its
continued maintenance and operation.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.059 SEWERAGE RATES.
   (A)   General requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer
facilities in a manner prescribed by the city construction standards and
specifications. All plans shall be designed in accordance with the rules,
regulations and standards of the Municipal Utility Commission of the City
Health Department and other appropriate agency. Plans shall be approved by the
above agencies. Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or
create a sanitary sewer district for the purpose of providing sewerage
facilities to the subdivision, where no district exists for the land to be
subdivided.
   (B)   Residential and nonresidential districts. Sanitary sewerage facilities
shall connect with public sanitary sewerage systems. Sewers shall be installed
to serve each lot and to grades and sizes required by approving officials and
agencies. No individual disposal system or treatment plants (private or group
disposal systems) shall be permitted. Sanitary sewerage facilities (including
the installation of arterials in the right-of-way) shall be subject to the
specifications, rules, regulations and guidelines of the Health Officer, City
Engineer and appropriate state agency.
   (C)   Residential districts. Sanitary sewerage systems shall be constructed
as follows:
      (1)   Where a public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably accessible,
the applicant shall connect with same and provide sewers accessible to each lot
in the subdivision;
      (2)   Where public sanitary sewerage systems are not reasonably
accessible but will become available within a reasonable time (not to exceed 15
years), the applicant may choose the following alternative: central sewerage
system, the maintenance cost to be assessed against each property benefitted.
Where plans for future public sanitary sewerage systems exist, the applicant
shall install the sewer lines, laterals and mains to be in permanent
conformance with such plans and ready for connection to such public sewer
mains; or
      (3)   Where sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible and will
not become available for a period in excess of 15 years, the applicant may
install sewerage systems as follows.
         (a)   Residential districts. A central sewerage system only. No
individual disposal system shall be permitted. Where plans exist for a public
sewer system to be built, for a period in excess of 15 years, the applicant
shall install all sewer lines, laterals and mains to be in permanent
conformance with such plans and ready for connection to such public sewer main.
         (b)   Residential district. Individual disposal systems or central
sewerage systems shall be used.
   (D)   Dedication to Municipal Utility Commission. In those cases where
individual or separate sewerage systems are allowed, the system once approved
by the Commission and Municipal Utility Commission of the city shall be
dedicated to the Municipal Utility Commission of the city who shall be
responsible for its continued maintenance and operation. Such system shall
become a part of the sanitary sewerage system of the city.
   (E)   Mandatory connection to public sewer system. If a public sanitary
sewer is accessible and a sanitary sewer is placed in a street or alley
abutting upon property, the owner thereof shall be required to connect to such
sewer for the purpose of disposing of waste, and no owner or occupant shall
maintain upon any such property an individual sewage disposal system.
   (F)   Design criteria for sanitary sewers.
      (1)   Deviations. These design criteria are not intended to cover
extraordinary situations. Deviations shall be allowed and may be required in
those instances where considered justified by the Municipal Utility Commission
of the city.
      (2)   Design factors. Sanitary sewer systems should be designed for the
ultimate tributary population. Due consideration should be given to current
zoning regulations and approved planning and zoning reports where applicable.
   (G)   Design standards for sanitary sewers.
      (1)   Sanitary sewers systems shall be installed according to the rules
and regulations of the Municipal Utility Commission of the city as found in the
following design manuals:
         (a)   Permit Procedures and Design Requirements for Small Sewage and
Water Systems, West Virginia Department of Health; and
         (b)   Recommended Standards for Sewage Works (Policies for the Review
and Approval of Plans and Specifications for Sewage Collection and Treatment; a
Report of the Committee of the Great Lakes Upper Mississippi River Board of
State Sanitary Engineers), commonly known as “10 State Standard”.
      (2)   All construction plans for sanitary sewer installation shall be
reviewed and approved by the Municipal Utility Commission of the city.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.060 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Required improvements.
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated nonpavement right-
of-way of all roads as shown in the table below.
   Development Density
               Residential Nonresidential
Nature of Road R-1 R-2 R-3 Commercial/
                           Highway
   Development Density
                 Residential                                 Nonresidential
Nature of Road   R-1          R-2          R-3               Commercial/
                                                             Highway
Local road       Optional*    Both sides 4 Both sides 5 feet Both sides 6 feet
                              feet wide    wide              wide
Collector road   Optional**   Both sides 5 Both sides 5 feet Both sides 5 feet
                              feet wide    wide              wide
Secondary        Optional**   Both sides 5 Both sides 5 feet Both sides 5 feet
arterial                      feet wide    wide              wide
Primary arterial Both sides 5 Both sides 5 Both sides 5 feet Both sides 6 feet
                 feet wide    feet wide    wide              wide
*Optional, but where provided 4 feet minimum on either side of road with
concrete curbs.
**Optional, but where provided 5 feet minimum on either side of road with
concrete curbs.
 
      (2)   Concrete curbs are required for all roads where sidewalks are
required by these subdivision regulations or where required in the discretion
of the Commission.
      (3)   Sidewalks shall be improved as required in these subdivision
regulations. A median strip of grassy or landscaped areas at least two feet
wide shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs.
   (B)   Pedestrian accesses. The Commission may require, in order to
facilitate pedestrian access from the roads to schools, parks, playgrounds or
other nearby roads, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width.
Easements shall be indicated on the plat.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.061 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Location. All utility facilities, including, but not limited to, gas,
electric, power, telephone and CATV cables, shall be located underground
throughout the subdivision. Wherever existing utility facilities are located
aboveground, except where existing on public roads and rights-of-way, they
shall be removed and placed underground. All utility facilities existing and
proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
Underground service connections to the street property line of each platted lot
shall be installed at the subdivider’s expense. At the discretion of the
Commission, the requirement for service connections to each lot may be waived
in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single ownership and intended
to be developed for the same primary use.
   (B)   Easements.
      (1) Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for utilities
(private and municipal); such easements shall be at least ten feet wide. Proper
coordination shall be established between the subdivider and the applicable
utility companies for the establishment of utility easements established in
adjoining properties.
      (2)   Where topographical or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines, perpetual
unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided along side
lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines. Easements
shall be indicated on the plat.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.062 PUBLIC USES.
   (A)   Parks, playgrounds and recreation areas.
      (1)   Recreation standards. The Commission shall require that land be
reserved for parks and playgrounds or other recreation purposes in locations
designated on the comprehensive plan or otherwise where such reservations would
be appropriate. Each reservation shall be of suitable size, dimension,
topography and general character and shall have adequate road access, for the
particular purposes envisioned by the Commission. The area shall be shown and
marked on the plat, “Reserved for Park and/or Recreation Purposes”. When
recreation areas are required, the Commission shall determine the number of
acres to be reserved on the basis of providing three acres of recreation area
for every 100 dwelling units. The Commission may refer such proposed
reservations to the city official or department in charge of parks and
recreation for recommendation.
         (a)   The developer shall dedicate all such recreation areas to the
local government as a condition of final subdivision plat approval.
         (b)   Multi-family and high-density residential: the Planning
Commission shall determine the acreage for reservation based on the number of
dwelling units per acre to occupy the site as permitted by the zoning
regulations.
      (2)   Minimum size of park and playground reservations. In no case shall
an area of less than two acres be reserved for recreation purposes if it will
be impractical or impossible to secure additional lands in order to increase
its area.
      (3)   Recreation sites. Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of
a character and location suitable for use as a playground, playfield or for
other recreation purposes, and shall be relatively level and dry; and shall be
improved by the developer to the standards required by the Commission, which
improvements shall be included in the performance bond. A recreation site shall
have a total frontage on one or more streets of at least 200 feet, and no other
dimension of the site shall be less than 200 feet in depth. The Commission may
refer any subdivision proposed to contain a dedicated park to the city official
or department in charge of parks and recreation for a recommendation. All lands
to be reserved for dedication to the city for park purposes shall have prior
approval of the city and shall be shown marked on the plat “Reserved for Park
and/or Recreation Purposes”.
      (4)   Alternative procedure; money in lieu of land. Where, with respect
to a particular subdivision, the reservation of land required pursuant to this
section does not equal the minimum requirement of this section, the Commission
shall require, prior to final approval of the subdivision plat, that the
applicant deposit with the city a cash payment in lieu of land reservation.
Such deposit shall be placed in a Neighborhood Park and Recreation Improvement
Fund to be established by the city. Such deposit shall be used by the City for
improvement of a neighborhood park, playground or recreation area including the
acquisition of property. Such deposit shall be used for facilities that will be
actually available to and benefit the persons in such subdivision and be
located in the general neighborhood of the subdivision. The Commission shall
determine the amount to be deposited, based on the following formula: $200
multiplied by the number of times the total area of the subdivision is
divisible by the required minimum lot size of the zoning district in which it
is located, less a credit for the amount of land actually reserved for
recreation purposes, if any, as the land reserved bears in proportion to the
land required for reservation in division (A)(1) above, but not including any
lands reserved through density zoning.
      (5)   Other recreation reservations. The provisions of this section are
minimum standards. Divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5) above shall be construed as
prohibiting a developer from reserving other land for recreation purposes in
addition to the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Other public uses.
      (1)   Plat to provide for public uses. Except when an applicant utilizes
planned unit development in which land is set aside by the developer as
required by the provision of the zoning regulations, whenever a tract to be
subdivided includes a school, recreation uses (in excess of the requirements of
division (A)(1) hereof), or other public use as indicated on the master plan or
any portion thereof, such space shall be suitably incorporated by the applicant
into his or her sketch plat. After proper determination of its necessity by the
Commission and the appropriate city official or other public agency involved in
the acquisition and use of each such site and a determination has been made to
acquire the site by the public agency, the site shall be suitably incorporated
by the applicant into the preliminary and final plats.
      (2)   Referral to public body. The Commission shall refer the sketch plat
to the public body concerned with acquisition for its consideration and report.
The Commission may propose alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow
the public body or agency 30 days for reply. The agency’s recommendation, if
affirmative, shall include a map showing the boundaries and area of the parcel
to be acquired and an estimate of the time required to complete the
acquisition.
      (3)   Notice of property owner. Upon a receipt of an affirmative report,
the Commission shall notify the property owner and shall designate on the
preliminary and final plats that area proposed to be acquired by the public
body.
      (4)   Duration of land reservation. The acquisition of land reserved by a
public agency on the final plat shall be initiated within 12 months of
notification, in writing, from the owner that he or she intends to develop the
land. Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a sketch plat of the
proposed development and a tentative schedule of construction. Failure on the
part of the public agency to initiate acquisition within the prescribed 12
months shall result in the removal of the “reserved” designation from the
property involved and the freeing of the property for development in accordance
with these subdivision regulations.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.063 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES.
   (A)   General. Existing features which would add value to residential
development or to the local government as a whole, such as trees, as herein
defined, watercourses and falls, historic spots and similar irreplaceable
assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision. No trees shall be
removed from any subdivision nor any change of grade of the land effected until
approval of the preliminary plat has been granted. All trees on the plat
required to be retained shall be preserved, and all trees where required shall
be welled and protected against change of grade. The sketch plat shall show the
number and location of existing trees, as required by these subdivision
regulations and shall further indicate all those marked for retention, and the
location of all proposed shade trees required along the street side of each lot
as required by these subdivision regulations.
   (B)   Shade trees planted by developer.
      (1)   As a requirement of subdivision approval, the applicant shall plant
shade trees on the property of the subdivision. Such trees are to be planted
within five feet of the right-of-way of the road or roads within and abutting
the subdivision, or, at the discretion of the Commission, within the right-of-
way of such roads. One tree shall be planted for every 40 feet of frontage
along each road unless the Commission, upon recommendation of the City
Engineer, shall grant a waiver. Such waiver shall be granted only if there are
trees growing along such right-of-way or on the abutting property which in the
opinion of the Commission comply with these subdivision regulations.
      (2)   New trees to be provided pursuant to these subdivision regulations
shall be approved by the City Engineer and shall be planted in accordance with
the regulations of the City Engineer. Such trees shall have a minimum trunk
diameter (measured 12 inches above ground level) of not less than two inches.
Only oak, honey locust, hard maples, ginkgo or other long-lived shade trees,
acceptable to the City Engineer and to the Commission, shall be planted.
   (C)   Shade tree easement and dedication. The preliminary plat and final
plat shall reserve an easement authorizing the city to plant shade trees within
five feet of the required right-of-way of the city. No street shall be accepted
for dedication until the City Engineer shall inform the Commission and the city
that compliance, where necessary, has been made with these subdivision
regulations.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.064 NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for
commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect
to such land shall make such provision as the Commission may require.
      (2)   A nonresidential subdivision shall also be subject to all the
requirements of site plan approval set forth in the zoning regulations. Site
plan approval and nonresidential subdivision plat approval may proceed
simultaneously at the discretion of the Commission. A nonresidential
subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these subdivision
regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the Commission.
   (B)   Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in these
subdivision regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all
subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Commission that the street, parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically
adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the
vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed.
      (1)   Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and
dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated.
      (2)   Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate
the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon.
      (3)   Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to
street, curb, gutter and sidewalk design and construction.
      (4)   Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to the
installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and stormwater
drainage.
      (5)   Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas
from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision,
including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or
potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped
buffer strip when necessary.
      (6)   Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic,
shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or
potential residential areas.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
SPECIFICATIONS AND DOCUMENTS
§ 150.075 SKETCH PLAT.
   Sketch plats submitted to the Commission, prepared in pen or pencil, shall
be drawn to a convenient scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch and shall
show the following information:
   (A)   Name.
      (1)   Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision;
      (2)   Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The
proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded; and
      (3)   Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen. (This is
commonly the name by which the property is locally known.)
   (B)   Ownership.
      (1)   Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner or
agent of property, and citation of last instrument conveying title to each
parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantor,
grantee, date and land records reference;
      (2)   Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting
the property;
      (3)   Existing covenants on the property, if any; and
      (4)   Name and address, including telephone number, of the professional
person responsible for subdivision design, for the design of public
improvements and for surveys.
   (C)   Description. Location of property by government lot, section,
township, range and county, graphic scale, north arrow and date;
   (D)   Features.
      (1)   Location of property lines, existing easements, burial grounds,
railroad rights-of- way, watercourses and existing wooded areas or trees eight
inches or more in diameter, measured four feet above ground level; location,
width and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within
or immediately adjacent to the tract; names of adjoining property owners from
the latest assessment rolls within 500 feet of any perimeter boundary of the
subdivision;
      (2)   Location, sizes, elevations and slopes of existing sewers, water
mains, culverts and other underground structures within the tract and
immediately adjacent thereto; existing permanent building and utility poles on
or immediately adjacent to the site and utility rights-of-way;
      (3)   Approximate topography, at the same scale as the sketch plat;
      (4)   The approximate location and widths of proposed streets;
      (5)   Preliminary proposals for connection with existing water supply and
sanitary sewage systems, or alternative means of providing water supply and
sanitary waste treatment and disposal; preliminary provisions for collecting
and discharging surface water drainage;
      (6)   The approximate location, dimensions and areas of all proposed or
existing lots;
      (7)   The approximate location, dimensions and area of all parcels of
land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public use,
or for the use of property owners in the proposed subdivision;
      (8)   The location of temporary stakes to enable the Commission to find
and appraise features of the sketch plat in the field;
      (9)   Whenever the sketch plat covers only a part of an applicant’s
contiguous holdings, the applicant shall submit, at the scale of no more than
200 feet to the inch, a sketch in pen or pencil of the proposed subdivision
areas, together with its proposed street system, and an indication of the
probable future street and drainage system of the remaining portion of the
tract; and
      (10)   A vicinity map showing streets and other general development of
the surrounding area. The sketch plat shall show all school and improvement
district lines with the zones properly designated.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.076 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   General. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed land
surveyor at a convenient scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet, may
be prepared in pen or pencil, and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence if
more than one sheet is used and shall be of such size as is acceptable for
filing in the office of the County Clerk, but shall not be 34 by 44 inches or
larger. It should be noted that the map prepared for the preliminary plat may
also be used for the final subdivision plat and, therefore, should be drawn on
tracing cloth or reproducible Mylar; preparation in pencil shall make required
changes and additions easier.
   (B)   Features. The preliminary plat shall show the following:
      (1)   The location of property with respect to surrounding property and
streets, the names of all adjoining property owners of record or the names of
adjoining developments; the names of adjoining streets;
      (2)   The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property
to be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot;
      (3)   The location of existing streets, easements, water bodies, streams
and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings, parks,
cemeteries, drainage ditches and bridges, as determined by the Commission;
      (4)   The location and width of all existing and proposed streets and
easements, alleys and other public ways, and easements and proposed street
rights-of-way and building setback lines;
      (5)   The locations, dimensions and areas of all proposed or existing
lots;
      (6)   The location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set
aside for park or playground use, or other public or private reservation, with
designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication
or reservation;
      (7)   The name and address of the owner or owners of land to be
subdivided, the name and address of the subdivider if other than the owner, and
the name of the land surveyor;
      (8)   The date of the map, approximate true north point, scale and title
of the subdivision;
      (9)   Sufficient data acceptable to the City Engineer to determine
readily the location, bearing and length of all lines, and to reproduce such
lines upon the ground; the location of all proposed monuments;
      (10)   Names of the subdivision and all new streets as approved by the
Commission;
      (11)   Indication of the use of any lot (single-family, two-family,
multi-family, townhouse) and all uses other than residential proposed by the
subdivider;
      (12)   Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical
order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name
shall be numbered or lettered consecutively throughout the several additions;
      (13)   All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered; outlots
shall be lettered in alphabetical order. If blocks are numbered or lettered,
outlots shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each block;
      (14)   All information required on the sketch plat should also be shown
on the preliminary plat, and the following notation shall also be shown:
         (a)   Explanation of drainage easements, if any;
         (b)   Explanation of site easements, if any;
         (c)   Explanation of reservations, if any; and
         (d)   Endorsement of owner, as follows:
         _____________
         Owner
      (15)   Form of endorsements by Commission Chairperson as follows:
         Approved by Resolution of the Nitro Municipal Planning Commission.
         ___________         ___________
         Owner               Date
      (16)   The lack of information under any item specified herein, or
improper information supplied by the applicant, shall be cause of disapproval
of a preliminary plat.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.077 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   (A)   General. Construction plans shall be prepared for all required
improvements. Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than one inch equals
50 feet, and map sheets shall be of the same size as the preliminary plat.
   (B)   To be shown. The following shall be shown:
      (1)   Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along centerlines
of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or roads, the
elevation along the centerline of the existing road or roads within 100 feet of
the intersection, shall be shown. Approximate radii of all curves, lengths of
tangents, and central angles on all streets;
      (2)   The Commission may require, where steep slopes exist, that cross-
sections of all proposed streets at 100-foot stations shall be shown at five
points as follows: on a line at right angles to the centerline of the street,
and such elevation points shall be at the centerline of the street, each
property line, and points twenty-five feet inside each property line;
      (3)   Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross-section
of street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements,
servitudes, rights-of-way, manholes and catch basins; the locations of street
trees, street lighting standards and street signs; the location, size and
invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, stormwater drains
and fire hydrants, showing connection to any existing or proposed utility
systems; and exact location and size of all water, gas or other underground
utilities or structures;
      (4)   Location, size, elevation and other appropriate description of any
existing facilities or utilities, including, but not limited to, existing
streets, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water bodies, streams and
other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings and utilities
within the subdivision, and each tree with a diameter of eight inches or more,
measured 12 inches above ground level. The water elevations of adjoining lakes
or streams at the date of the survey, and the approximate high- and low-water
elevations of such lakes or streams. All elevations shall be referred to the
U.S.G.S. datum plane. If the subdivision borders a lake, river or stream, the
distances and bearings of a meander line established not less than 20 feet back
from the ordinary high-water mark of such waterways;
      (5)   Topography at the same scale as the sketch plat with a contour
interval; of two feet, referred to sea-level datum. All datum provided shall be
latest applicable U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey datum and should be so noted
on the plat;
      (6)   All specifications and references required by the city’s
construction standards and specifications, including a site-grading plan for
the entire subdivision; and
      (7)   Notation of approval as follows:
         (a)   Title, name, address and signature of professional engineer and
surveyor; and
         (b)   Date, including revision dates.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 150.078 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT.
   (A)   General. The final subdivision plat shall be presented in India ink on
tracing cloth or reproducible Mylar at the same scale and shall contain the
same information, except for any changes or additions required by resolution of
the Commission, as shown on the preliminary plat. The preliminary plat may be
used as the final subdivision plat if it meets these requirements and is
revised in accordance with the Planning Commission’s resolution. All revision
dates shall be shown as well as the following:
      (1)   Notation of any self-imposed restrictions, and locations of any
building lines proposed to be established in this manner, if required by the
Commission in accordance with these subdivision regulations;
      (2)   Endorsement of the Health Department;
      (3)   Lots numbered as approved by the City Assessor; and
      (4)   All monuments erected, corners, and other points established in the
field in their proper places. The material of which the monuments, corners or
other points are made shall be noted at the representation thereof or by
legend, except that lot corners need not be shown. The legend for metal
monuments shall indicate the kind of metal, the diameter, length and weight per
lineal foot of the monuments.
   (B)   Preparation. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a land
surveyor licensed by the state.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
State Building Code
   
151.01   Adoption
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Conflicts
Standard Excavation and Grading Code
   
151.15   Adoption; copies
Administration and Enforcement
   
151.30   Office of Building Inspector established; appointment
   
151.31   Building Inspector’s powers and duties
   
151.32   Duty of other officers to cooperate
   
151.33   Liability of violator
   
151.34   Removal of debris and litter
   
151.35   Permit fees
   
151.36   Building Department Administrative Manual adopted
Erosion Prevention
   
151.50   Definitions
   
151.51   Grading permit required
   
151.52   Requirements for grading permit
   
151.53   Issuance of grading permit, condition
   
151.54   Term of permit; renewal
   
151.55   Permit fee
 
   
151.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Adoption by reference, see W. Va. Code 8-11-4
   Building permits, see W. Va. Code 8-12-14
   Building regulation, see W. Va. Code 8-12-13
   Erosion control, see W. Va. Code 19-21A-1 et seq.
   Municipal inspection, see W. Va. Code 8-12-15
STATE BUILDING CODE
§ 151.01 ADOPTION.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, as if set out
at length herein, for the purpose of safeguarding life and property and to
ensure the quality of construction of all structures erected or removed
throughout the city that certain code known as the State Building Code as
promulgated by the Fire Marshal under W. Va. Code 15A-11-5.
   (B)   The standards and requirements as set out and as published by the
International Code Council, and NFPA as listed below, shall have the same force
and effect as if set out verbatim in this section:
      (1)   2015 International Building Code, with the following exceptions:
         (a)   Section 101.4.5 Fire Prevention: DELETE ENTIRE SECTION;
         (b)   Section 113.3 Qualifications: DELETE Section 113.3 of the 2015
International Building Code and replace with the following paragraph 1301.7:
Board of Zoning Appeals Subsection 1301.7(f) Duties & Powers. The Board of
Zoning Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide on appeals where it is
alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision,
determination or interpretation by the Code Official, or by any administrative
official of the city charged with enforcement of this Title XV; provided, that
this authority to hear and decide the specified appeals shall apply to
applicable determinations under each code used under the authority of the State
Building Code; and
         (c)   Appendices: A; C; D; E; G; H; I; and Commentary
      (2)   2015 International Residential Code, with the following exceptions:
         (a)   Section R303.5.1 Light Activation: delete and replace with: The
control for activation of the required interior stairway lighting shall be
accessible at the top and bottom of each stairway without traversing any steps.
The illumination of exterior stairways shall be controlled from inside the
dwelling unit. EXCEPTIONS: 1. Lights that are continuously illuminated or
automatically controlled. 2. Interior stairways consisting of less than three
steps;
         (b)   Section R311.3.1 Floor Elevations at Required Egress Doors:
DELETE & REPLACE WITH: Where a stairway of two or fewer risers is located on
the exterior side of a door, other than the required exit door, a landing is
not required for the exterior side of the door;
         (c)   Section R311.7.4.1 Riser Height: DELETE & REPLACE WITH: The
maximum riser height shall be eight and one-quarter (8 1/4) inches;
         (d)   Section R311.7.4.2 Tread Depth: DELETE & REPLACE WITH: The
minimum tread depth shall be nine inches;
         (e)   Section R311.7.5 Stair Treads and Risers.
            1.   311.7.5.1 Riser Heights – The maximum riser height shall be
eight and one-quarter (8 1/4) inches.
            2.   311.7.5.2 Tread Depth – The minimum tread depth shall be nine
inches.
         (f)   Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems: DELETE ENTIRE
SECTION, NO REPLACEMENT SEE 2018 NFPA 101;
         (g)   Section R403.1.7.1 Building Clearances from Ascending Slopes:
DELETE, NO REPLACEMENT;
         (h)   Section R403.1.7.2 Footing Setbacks from Descending Slopes:
DELETE, NO REPLACEMENT; and
         (i)   Appendices: A; B; C; D; E; G; H; J; M; N; T; U; and Commentary.
      (3)   87 C.S.R. 4. Section 6.1.a. EXCEPTIONS: The following structures
are not subject to inspection by Local Jurisdictions: Group U Utility
Structures comprising in area of not more than 200 square feet which have no
plumbing or electrical connections and are used only for residential storage
purposes. (Examples include sheds that are for residential storage of
lawnmowers, tools, bicycles or furniture.) Not included are those utility
structures and storage units which have plumbing or electrical connections, are
on non-residential use or for storage of explosives or other hazardous or
explosive materials: Appendices: A; B; Resource A;
      (4)   2015 International Existing Building Code, with the following
exception: Section 101.4.2 Buildings Previously Occupied: DELETE “International
Fire Code”. REPLACE WITH: 2018 NFPA 101- Life Safety Code;
      (5)   2015 International Plumbing Code - Appendices: B; C; D; E;
      (6)   2015 International Mechanical Code - Appendices: A;
      (7)   2015 International Fuel Gas Code, with the following exception:
         (a)   Section 404.10 Underground piping systems shall be installed a
minimum depth of 12 inches (305 mm) below grade. If the minimum depth cannot be
maintained, the piping system shall be installed in conduit or shielded in an
approved manner; and
         (b)   Appendices: A; B; C; D.
      (8)   2009 International Residential Energy Conservation Code for
residential buildings: Appendix: 1 and COMMENTARY;
      (9)   2009 ICC/ANSI A117.1 Accessible & Usable Buildings & Facilities;
and
      (10)   2017 National Electric Code, NFPA 70:
         (a)   Annex: A; B; C; D; E; F; G; and H;
         (b)   4.1 .k.1. ADD, For renovations in one- and two-family homes
where no new square footage is involved, arc-fault circuit interrupter (AFCI)
protection shall not be required, except for in bedrooms. For renovations in
one- and two- family homes where square footage is added but no electrical
service is installed, arc-fault interrupter (AFCI) protection shall not be
required;
         (c)   5.1 New One and Two Family Dwellings over one level in height,
New One and Two Family Dwellings containing a basement, and New One and Two
Family Dwellings containing a crawl space containing a fuel burning appliance
below the first floor, shall provide one of the following methods for fire
protection of floors: (1) A 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard membrane, 5/
8 inch (16 mm) wood structural panel membrane, or equivalent on the underside
of the floor framing member; (2) Wood floor assemblies using dimension lumber
or structural composite lumber equal or greater than two inch by ten inch (50.8
mm by 254 mm) nominal dimension, or other approved floor assemblies
demonstrating equivalent fire performance; or (3) An Automatic Fire Sprinkler
System as set forth in section R313.2 of the 2009 edition of the international
Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings; provided, that floor
assemblies located directly over a space protected by an automatic sprinkler
system as set forth in section R313.2 of the 2009 edition of the International
Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings are exempt from this
requirement;
         (d)   Appendices:
            1.   2007 ANSI/ASHRAE Commercial Energy Conservation;
            2.   2010 ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1 for commercial buildings;
            3.   2015 International Property Maintenance Code as currently
included in Part Eighteen, Property Maintenance Ordinance, or the current
Codified Ordinances of the City of Nitro, West Virginia;
            4.   2018 NFPA 101, Life Safety Code Annex A & B; and
            5.   2018 NFPA 1, Fire Code Annex I & R.
   (C)   Wherever referenced in the several ICC codes adopted above, OMIT any
reference to the International Fire Code; SUBSTITUTE the NFPA Life Safety Code
2018 edition.
   (D)   Whenever a certificate of occupancy is required of a commercial
structure greater in size than 7,600 feet, the project documents shall be
designed by an architect licensed by the state’s Board of Architects, or a
professional engineer licensed by the state’s Board of Registration for
Professional Engineers.
(Prior Code, § 1711.01) (Ord. 20-6, passed 10-6-2020)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING CODE. Includes all aspects of safe building construction and
mechanical operations and all safety aspects related thereto.
   FIRE MARSHAL. The West Virginia State Fire Marshal and/or his or her
designated representative.
   ICC or INTERNATIONAL. Refers to International Code Council
   LOCAL JURISDICTION. Municipal or county level government.
   NFPA. National Fire Protection Association.
   STATE BUILDING CODE. Refers to the entire contents of this chapter and the
referenced national standards and codes.
   STATE FIRE CODE. Refers to the entire contents of the State Fire Commission,
State Fire Code, 87 C.S.R. 1, and the referenced standards and codes
(Prior Code, § 1711.02) (Ord. 20-6, passed 10-6-2020)
§ 151.03 CONFLICTS.
   (A)   Whenever there is a conflict between the State Fire Code and the State
Building Code, the State Fire Code takes precedence.
   (B)   Whenever there is a conflict between the International Plumbing Code
requirements of the State Building Code and the rules of the state’s Department
of Health and Human Resources, the rules of the Department of Health and Human
Resources take precedence.
   (C)   Whenever there is a conflict between the State Building Code and state
laws, the laws of the state take precedence.
(Prior Code, § 1711.03) (Ord. 20-6, passed 10-6-2020)
STANDARD EXCAVATION AND GRADING CODE
§ 151.15 ADOPTION; COPIES.
   (A)   The 1975 edition of the Standard Excavation and Grading Code, as
adopted by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., is hereby
enacted and adopted as law for the city to the same extent as if the same were
duly set out and printed herein.
   (B)   Copies of such Code shall be on file in the office of the City
Recorder for the inspection and use of the general public and sufficient
additional copies of such Code shall be kept for distribution to the public on
demand.
(Prior Code, § 1725.01) (Ord. 186, passed 3-15-1977)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.30 OFFICE OF BUILDING INSPECTOR ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   The office of Building Inspector is hereby established, which shall be
headed by the Building Inspector and shall have such other personnel as may
from time to time be authorized by Council.
   (B)   The Building Inspector shall be appointed or designated by the Mayor,
and he or she shall have the powers and perform the duties prescribed for him
or her or for his or her office by the codified ordinances or other ordinances,
resolutions or orders of Council, and as prescribed by the State Code for
municipal officers charged with the administration and enforcement of building,
plumbing, gas, electrical and other technical codes which municipalities are
authorized to adopt pursuant to W. Va. Code 8-11-4.
   (C)   The Building Inspector may delegate powers to and require performance
of duties by such deputies, assistants and other personnel as may from time to
time be assigned or detailed to his or her office by the Mayor or Council.
(Prior Code, § 1705.01)
§ 151.31 BUILDING INSPECTOR’S POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Building Inspector or his or her authorized representative shall
receive all applications required to be submitted to him or her; make or cause
to be made all inspections required to be made by him or her; and issue all
permits and certificates required to be issued by him or her by the codified
ordinances or by any technical code adopted by this Building Code. He or she
shall examine premises for which permits have been issued and make necessary
inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that
construction and other work is prosecuted safely. He or she shall enforce all
provisions of the technical codes. He or she shall, when requested by proper
authority, or when the public interest so requires, make investigations in
connection with matters referred to in the technical codes and render written
reports thereon. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe
conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction, or to
require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he or she shall
issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
   (B)   Inspections required under the provisions of the technical codes shall
be made by the Building Inspector or his or her duly authorized agents. The
Building Inspector may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection
services, after investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No
certificate called for by any provision of any technical code shall be issued
on such reports unless they are in writing and certified to by a responsible
officer of such service.
   (C)   The Building Inspector shall keep comprehensive records of
applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made,
of reports rendered and of notices or orders issued. He or she shall retain on
file copies of required plans and all documents relating to building work so
long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in
existence.
   (D)   All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and
sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from
the office of the Building Inspector without his or her written consent.
   (E)   The Building Inspector shall make written reports to his or her
immediate superior once each month, or more often if requested, including
statements of permits and certificates issued, and orders promulgated.
(Prior Code, § 1705.02)
§ 151.32 DUTY OF OTHER OFFICERS TO COOPERATE.
   The Building Inspector may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and cooperation
of the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief and other city officers and employees.
(Prior Code, § 1705.03)
§ 151.33 LIABILITY OF VIOLATOR.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, including the technical
codes which constitute part of this chapter, shall, in addition to either or
both any fine or imprisonment which may be adjudged by reason of such
violation, be liable to the city for any costs or expenses incurred by reason
of such violation or by reason of abatement of any nuisance or hazard thereby
created or by reason of rectifying any condition on any premises found to be in
violation of this chapter. Any liability so incurred shall be enforceable in
the same manner as the collection of other debts and taxes due the city.
(Prior Code, § 1705.04)
§ 151.34 REMOVAL OF DEBRIS AND LITTER.
   (A)   In every case where a building permit is required, such permit shall
provide that all rubbish, waste materials and substances, debris and litter
shall be disposed of or removed from the premises upon the substantial
completion of such work. SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION, for the purpose of this
section, is defined to mean 90% of the actual work to be done and performed as
contemplated by the valuation set forth in the building permit.
   (B)   To secure compliance herewith, such applicant for a building permit
shall post with the Building Official a cash bond in the form of a cashier or
certified check payable to the city in an amount not greater than 10% of the
amount designated on the building permit submitted to the Building Inspector
relative to the work to be performed thereunder, the amount assessed hereunder
to be determined by the reasonable discretion of the Building Inspector.
   (C)   After the work has been completed and all rubbish, waste materials and
substances, debris and other litter have been satisfactorily disposed of or
removed from the premises, the certified or cashier check shall be returned to
the holder of the permit; however, should the holder of the permit fail to
comply with the provisions hereof and fail to remove all rubbish, waste
materials and substances, debris and other litter so as to leave the premises
clear thereof, then the Mayor or City Recorder may, upon recommendation of the
Building Inspector, order such bond forfeited and such certified or cashier
check cashed by the City Recorder, and shall direct and order that such
premises be cleared of any rubbish, waste materials and substances, debris or
other litter and the cost thereof to be paid out of such fund so provided.
After deducting the cost of any removal and other expenses related thereto to
the city, the remainder of any of the money shall be returned to the holder of
the permit.
(Prior Code, § 1705.05) (Ord. 79-6, passed 7-17-1979)
§ 151.35 PERMIT FEES.
   The following permit fees shall be collected by the Building Inspector prior
to the issuance of a building permit for any construction within the city.
   (A)   Permit fees.
Total Valuation Fee
Total Valuation      Fee
$100 and less        No fee, unless inspection required, in which case a $10
                     fee for each inspection shall be charged.
$101 to $2,000       $10 per thousand or fraction thereof.
$2,001 to $15,000    $18 for the first $2,000 plus $6 for each additional
                     thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $15,000.
$15,001 to $50,000   $101 for the first $15,000 plus $5 for each additional
                     thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.
$50,001 to $100,000  $271 for the first $50,000 plus $4 for each additional
                     thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.
$100,001 to $500,000 $471 for the first $100,000 plus $3 for each additional
                     thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.
$500,001 and up      $1,671 for the first $500,000 plus $2 for each additional
                     thousand or fraction thereof.
 
   (B)   Moving of buildings or structures. For the moving of any building or
structure, the fee shall be $100.
   (C)   Demolition of buildings or structures. For the demolition of any
building or structure, the fee shall be $50.
   (D)   Double fees. Where work for which a permit is required by this code is
started or proceeded with prior to obtaining the required permit, the fees
herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not
relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this code in
the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.
   (E)   Plan-checking fee. When the valuation of the proposed construction
exceeds $1,000 and a plan is required to be submitted by the city, a plan-
checking fee shall be paid to the Building Inspector at the time of submitting
plans and specifications for checking. Such plan-checking fee shall be equal to
one-half of the building permit fee as hereinabove set forth.
(Prior Code, § 1705.06) (Ord. 01-06, passed 4-3-2001)
§ 151.36 BUILDING DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL ADOPTED.
   The City Building Department Administrative Manual, attached to Ordinance
91-8, shall be adopted and the Building Department shall hereby enforce the
State Building Code as provided for in W. Va. Code 15A-11-5, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 1705.07) (Ord. 91-8, passed 8-20-1991)
EROSION PREVENTION
§ 151.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAPITOL CONSERVATION DISTRICT. The subdivision of the state created and
organized to include Kanawha County pursuant to the provisions of the Soil
Conservation Districts Law of West Virginia, being W. Va. Code Art. 19- 21A.
   CUT or EXCAVATION. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has
been removed will be removed by excavation: the depth below original ground
surface to excavated surface.
   DIVERSION. A channel with or without a supporting ridge on the lower side
constructed across or at the bottom of a slope.
   EROSION. The wearing away of the land surface by action of wind, water or
gravity.
   EXISTING GRADE. The vertical location of the ground surface prior to cutting
or filling.
   FILL. A human-made deposit of soil, rock or other material.
   FINISHED GRADE. The final grade or elevation of the ground surface
conforming to the proposed design.
   GRADING. Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling or any combination
thereof, and includes the land in its cut or filled condition.
   GRADING PERMIT. A permit issued to authorize work performed under this
subchapter.
   GRASSED WATERWAY. A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and
shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct surface water
from a field, diversion or other feature.
   MULCHING. The application of plant or other suitable materials on the soil
surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place and aid in establishing plant
cover.
   PERMANENT COVER. Perennial seedlings and plants used as a permanent cover
for critical areas to minimize soil erosion.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit is issued in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
   PERSON. A firm, partnership, association, bodies politic or corporate, or
any other body acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
   SEDIMENT. Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin, by air, water
or gravity byproduct of erosion.
   SEDIMENT BASIN. A barrier or dam built across a drain or waterway or at
another suitable location to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material.
   SEDIMENT POOL. The reservoir space allotted to the accumulation of submerged
sediment during the life of the structure.
   SITE. Any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or
parcels or land where grading is performed or permitted.
   SLOPE. The degree of deviation of feet surface from the horizontal plane,
usually expressed in percent or degree.
   SOIL. All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin
that overlies bedrock which can be readily excavated.
   STRIPPING. Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the
vegetative surface cover, including clearing and grubbing operations.
   TEMPORARY COVER. Straw, hay, mulch or annual seedlings used for critical
areas to minimize soil erosion for no more than one season.
   WESTERN CONSERVATION DISTRICT. The subdivision of the state created and
organized to include Putnam County pursuant to the provisions of the “Soil
Conservation Districts Law of West Virginia”.
(Ord. 04-05, passed - -)
§ 151.51 GRADING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall do or cause to be done any grading, stripping or cutting
upon any site within the city unless and until he or she has obtained a grading
permit approved by the Building Inspector; however, no grading permit shall be
required for the tilling or cultivating of any plot of ground within the city
for the purpose of growing flowers, vegetables or other plants.
(Ord. 04-05, passed - -) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.52 REQUIREMENTS FOR GRADING PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person desiring a grading permit shall submit the following
information for the entire site upon which any grading, stripping or cutting is
to be done.
      (1)   A plat or boundary line survey of the entire site on which the
grading, stripping or cutting is to be done;
      (2)   Description of the features, existing and proposed, surrounding the
site of importance to the proposed development;
      (3)   Description of general topographic and general soil conditions on
the site. Information as to soil conditions is available from the Conservation
Districts;
            (4)   The location and description of existing and future human-
made features of importance to the proposed development;
      (5)   The plans and specifications for a grading permit shall contain
needed and necessary soil erosion and sedimentation and control techniques
using one or more of the appropriate soil erosion control measures in
accordance with the standards and specifications of the Conservation Districts
if the proposed grading, stripping or cutting will result in soil erosion and/
or situation of adjoining property or property in the area; and
      (6)   A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and
completion dates of the development sequence and the time of exposure of each
area prior to completion of effective erosion and sediment control measures.
   (B)   All applications for grading permits shall be made in writing upon a
form provided by the City Building Inspector and shall be made under oath and
signed by the owner of the site, the owner by the contractor proposing to do
the work or another authorized person.
(Ord. 04-05, passed - -)
§ 151.53 ISSUANCE OF GRADING PERMIT, CONDITION.
   (A)   Upon any person filing an application for a grading permit, the
Building Inspector shall, within three days of the date of the application,
make or cause to be made an inspection of the site to be graded, and if he or
she finds the erosion or sediment control measures are not necessary or that
the planned and specified measures contained in the application are adequate to
control and prevent erosion and/or situation of adjoining property or property
in the area, he or she shall immediately approve the issuance of the grading
permit. In the event that the Building Inspector finds that the proposed
grading as planned will result in erosion and/or situation of adjoining
property or property in the area, he or she shall not approve the issuance of
the grading permit.
   (B)   Grading permits upon tracts of land smaller than one-fifth acre shall
be approved by the Building Inspector if the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The proposed grading, stripping or cutting will not result in soil
erosion and/or situation upon adjoining property or property in the area; or
      (2)   No disturbed soil shall be exposed for more than 30 days without
temporary or permanent cover.
   (C)   Grading permits upon tracts of land larger than one-fifth acre shall
be approved by the Building Inspector if the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The proposed grading, stripping or cutting will not result in soil
erosion and/or situation upon adjoining property or property in the area;
      (2)   No disturbed soil shall be exposed for more than 30 days without
temporary or permanent cover; and
      (3)   If needed to prevent excessive soil erosion and/or situation, the
plans shall contain appropriate soil erosion and sedimentation control
techniques using one or more of the soil erosion control measures in accordance
with the standards and specifications of the Conservation Districts.
(Ord. 04-05, passed - -)
§ 151.54 TERM OF PERMIT; RENEWAL.
   Any grading permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
valid for a period of six months from and after the date of the permit. If the
grading or the site has not been completed within six months from the date of
the permit, the permit may be renewed for an additional period of six months
without assessment of any fee therefor. If any grading is not started and the
work not actually begun within six months after the date of the original
permit, no renewal permit will be granted, but a new application shall be made
and an additional fee paid. The additional fee shall be on the same schedule as
any other permit.
(Ord. 04-05, passed - -)
§ 151.55 PERMIT FEE.
   Upon being granted a grading permit, the permitee shall pay $5 for each
$1,000 of the estimated cost of grading as shown on the application, but in any
event a minimum fee of $5, and the payment of such fee shall be a prerequisite
to granting of a grading permit.
(Ord. 04-05, passed - -)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any provision of §§
151.30 to
151.36, the Building and Housing Code or of a technical code adopted hereunder
or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who
builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply
with such order as affirmed by the appellate body or by a court of competent
jurisdiction within the time fixed therein, shall, severally and for every such
violation and noncompliance respectively, be fined an amount not to exceed
state law or imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law, or both, the
imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or
permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not
otherwise specified, each day that any prohibited condition is maintained shall
constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
   (C)   Until an application is made and approved in the manner prescribed in
§§
151.50 to
151.55 and the grading permit issued, no grading, stripping or cutting of any
site within the city shall be done and no grading, stripping or cutting of any
site within the city shall be done without strict compliance with soil erosion
and situation control measures set forth in the grading permit. Any owner or
contractor and any workers who perform any work or labor, or cause, permit or
allow the same to be performed in the grading, stripping or cutting of any site
within the city without obtaining a permit therefor or without complying with
the soil erosion and control measures set forth in the grading permit shall be
fined an amount not to exceed state law until in compliance.
(Prior Code, § 1705.99) (Ord. 04-05, passed - -)
CHAPTER 152: PLANNING AND ZONING CODE
Section
Purpose and Interpretation
   
152.001   Title, purpose and scope
   
152.002   Fees
   
152.003   Existing buildings and uses
   
152.004   Powers and duties of the Zoning Code Official
   
152.005   Planning Commission
   
152.006   Compliance required
   
152.007   Board of Zoning Appeals
   
152.008   Violations
   
152.009   Permits and approvals
   
152.010   Interpretation
   
152.011   Definitions
Zoning Districts
   
152.025   District classifications
   
152.026   Minimum areas for zoning districts
   
152.027   Zoning map
   
152.028   Annexed territory
   
152.029   Conditional uses
Agricultural Zones
   
152.040   Agricultural zones defined
   
152.041   Bulk regulations
Residential Zones
   
152.055   R-1 Single-Family Residence Zone
   
152.056   R-2 General Residential Zones
   
152.057   R-3 General Residential, Factory-Built Home, Mobile Home and Mobile
Home Parks
Business Zones
   
152.070   B-1 Local or Neighborhood Business Zones
   
152.071   B-2 Central Business Zone
Heavy Commercial Zone
   
152.085   C-1 Heavy Commercial Zone
Industrial Zone
   
152.100   I-1 Light Industrial Zone
Destination Tourism Zone
   
152.115   D-1 Destination Tourism Zone
Restricted Use District
   
152.125   RU Restricted Use District
General Provisions
   
152.130   Off-street parking
   
152.131   Fence heights
   
152.132   Location of accessory buildings, storage buildings and private
garages
   
152.133   Allowable projections into yards
   
152.134   Landscaping requirements
   
152.135   Loading spaces
   
152.136   Passageways
   
152.137   Approval for and availability of essential services
Special Regulations
   
152.150   Home-based occupations; home-based business
   
152.151   Private clubs
Sign Regulations
   
152.165   Purpose
   
152.166   General provisions
   
152.167   Exempt signs
   
152.168   Prohibited signs
   
152.169   Permits
   
152.170   Specific sign requirements
Nonconforming Structures and Uses
   
152.185   General; continuance
   
152.186   Discontinuance
   
152.187   Additions and modifications
Conditional Uses
   
152.200   Conditional use permit
   
152.201   Public hearing
   
152.202   Determination; authorization
   
152.203   Expiration and revocation
   
152.204   Amendments
   
152.205   Conditional use review criteria
Planned Unit Development
   
152.220   General provisions
   
152.221   Conditions
   
152.222   Planning Commission determination
   
152.223   Required contributions
   
152.224   Planning Commission action
PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
§ 152.001 TITLE, PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known as the “City of Nitro, West
Virginia Planning and Zoning Ordinance”.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the health,
property and public welfare by controlling the design, location, use or
occupancy of all buildings and structures through the regulated and orderly
development of land and land uses within this jurisdiction.
   (C)   Scope. This chapter shall apply to the construction, addition,
alteration, moving, repair and use of any building, structure, parcel of land
or sign within the city, unless otherwise excepted.
      (1)   Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter
specify different requirements, the more restrictive shall govern. Where there
is conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the
specific requirement shall govern.
      (2)   In fulfilling these purposes, this chapter is intended to benefit
the public as a whole and not any specific person or class of persons. Although
through the implementation, administration and enforcement of this chapter,
benefits and detriments will be enjoyed or suffered by specific individuals,
those results are merely a by-product of the overall benefit to the whole
community. Therefore, unintentional breaches of the obligations of
administration and enforcement imposed on the city by this chapter shall not be
enforceable in tort.
      (3)   If any portion of this chapter is held invalid for any reason, the
remaining herein shall not be affected.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.002 FEES.
   A fee for services shall be charged. All fees shall be set by the City
Council and schedules shall be available at the office of the Code Official.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.003 EXISTING BUILDINGS AND USES.
   (A)   General. Lawfully established buildings and uses in existence at the
time of the adoption of this chapter shall be permitted to have their existing
use or occupancy continued, provided such continued use is not dangerous to
life.
   (B)   Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions, alterations or repairs
shall be permitted to be made to any building or use without requiring the
existing building or use to comply with the requirements of this chapter;
provided, that the addition, alteration or repair conforms to that required for
a new building or use.
   (C)   Moved and temporary buildings, structures, and uses.
      (1)   Buildings or structures moved into or within the city shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter for new buildings and structures.
      (2)   Temporary buildings, structures and uses such as reviewing stands
and other miscellaneous structures, sheds, canopies or fences used for the
protection of the public shall be permitted to be erected, provided a special
approval is received from the Code Official for a limited period of time.
Temporary buildings or structures shall be completely removed upon the
expiration of the time limit stated in the permit.
   (D)   Illegal uses. Illegal uses are uses of property that were
nonconforming uses prior to the adoption of this chapter that shall remain
nonconforming uses unless through the adoption of this chapter the use is
determined by the Planning Commission to be conforming, and uses of property
commenced subsequent to the adoption of this chapter that are not in compliance
with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.004 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE ZONING CODE OFFICIAL.
   (A)   General. The Code Official shall be responsible for the enforcement of
the requirements established by this chapter.
   (B)   Deputies. The Code Official may from time to time authorize the
appointment of other city employees to assist the Code Official in carrying out
the functions of this chapter.
   (C)   Comprehensive plan. The Code Official shall assist the Planning
Commission in the development and implementation of the comprehensive plan.
   (D)   Administrative reviews and permits.
      (1)   Review of building permits. All applications for building permits
and amendments thereto shall be submitted to the Code Official for review and
shall be approved prior to permit issuance. Each application shall include a
set of building plans, site plans and all data necessary to show that the
requirements of this chapter are satisfied.
      (2)   Conditional-use permits and variances. The Code Official shall
receive and review for completeness all applications for conditional uses and
variances or other plans as shall be permitted or approved as required by this
chapter, and prepare submittals for review by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Amendments. All requests for amendments or changes to the
comprehensive plan, or this chapter or map shall be submitted to the Code
Official for processing.
   (E)   Interpretations. The Code Official shall interpret and apply the
provisions of this chapter. Any appeal of an interpretation by the Code
Official shall be submitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with
the procedures provided in §
152.007 of this chapter. The Board of Zoning Appeals is authorized to interpret
this chapter, and such interpretation shall be considered final.
      (1)   Uses are permitted within the various zones as described in this
chapter and as otherwise provided herein.
      (2)   It is recognized that all possible uses and variations of uses
which might arise cannot reasonably be listed or categorized. Mixed uses/sites
or any use not specifically mentioned or about which there is any question
shall be administratively classified by comparison with other uses identified
in the zones described in this chapter. If the proposed use resembles
identified uses in terms of intensity and character, and is consistent with the
purpose of this chapter, and the individual zone’s classification, it shall be
considered as a permitted/non-permitted use, as applicable, within a general
zone classification, subject to the regulations for the use it most nearly
resembles. If a use does not resemble other identified allowable uses within a
zone, it may be permitted as determined by the Planning Commission after public
hearing as an amendment to this chapter pursuant to the procedures provided in
§
152.005 of this chapter.
   (F)   Liability. This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or
lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any
building or parcel of land for any damages to persons or property caused by
defects, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of
the reviews or permits issued under this chapter.
   (G)   Cooperation of other officials and officers. The Code Official may
request, and shall receive so far as is required in the discharge of the duties
described in this chapter, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of
the city.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.005 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   General. Article 149 of the prior code of ordinances is hereby
repealed and the Planning Commission, including its rights, duties and
responsibilities, are stated to be as follows.
   (B)   Establishment of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission
existing at the time this chapter is enacted shall be continued. The Planning
Commission so established shall operate in accordance with W. Va. Code Chapter
8A, Article 2, as amended. The Planning Commission shall consist of ten
members, one of whom shall be the Mayor, or his or her designee, and one of
whom shall be a member of the City Council.
   (C)   Terms for members. The terms of office for the Mayor, or his or her
designee, and the member of the City Council shall be the same as their
respective term in office. The terms of office for the remaining members of the
Planning Commission shall be three years with the terms being staggered so that
approximately one-third of the terms expire every year. Members may be removed
for cause upon written charges and after a public hearing before the City
Council, if such a hearing is requested.
   (D)   Selection of members. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the City Council. The terms of office for the Planning Commission
members shall be staggered at intervals so as to provide continuity in policy
and personnel. Members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of the
city, and at least three-fifths of the members shall have been residents of the
city for at least three years prior to appointment. Members of the Planning
Commission shall serve without compensation. Any vacancy for the unexpired term
of any member whose term is not completed shall be filled by the City Council.
A member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed and
approved by the City Council for the remainder of the unexpired term.
   (E)   Chairperson election and rules adoption. The Planning Commission shall
elect from its membership a Chairperson. It shall also establish and adopt
rules for its organization and transaction of business and shall keep a public
record of its proceedings.
   (F)   Planning Commission Secretary. A Secretary to assist the Planning
Commission may be appointed by the Code Official, with the advice and consent
of the City Council. The Secretary, if appointed, shall keep minutes of the
Planning Commission meetings for public record, conduct all correspondence,
including the notification of decisions, certify records, and prepare and
submit the minutes of Planning Commission meetings to the Chairperson and the
Planning Commission.
   (G)   Duties and powers of the Planning Commission.
      (1)   Comprehensive plan.
         (a)   It shall be the duty of the Planning Commission, after holding
public hearings, to create and recommend to the City Council a comprehensive
plan for the physical development of the city, which shall be permitted to
include areas outside its boundaries which bear consideration to the planning
of the city. The comprehensive plan shall include at least the following
elements:
            1.   Official maps;
            2.   Growth and land use;
            3.   Commercial/industrial uses;
            4.   Transportation and utilities;
            5.   Community facilities;
            6.   Housing;
            7.   Environmental; and
            8.   Geologic/natural hazards.
         (b)   The Planning Commission shall be permitted also to recommend
amendments to the comprehensive plan regarding the administration or
maintenance of this zoning chapter.
      (2)   Zoning regulations. It shall be the duty of the Planning Commission
to develop and recommend to the City Council a zoning chapter, in accordance
with the guidelines of the comprehensive plan, establishing zones within the
city. The zoning regulations shall demonstrate an understanding of the
character of each district and the most appropriate use of land within the
city.
         (a)   Amendments. This chapter may be amended, but all proposed
amendments shall be submitted to the Code Official for review and
recommendation to the Planning Commission.
         (b)   The Planning Commission shall make periodic reports and
recommendations to the City Council.
      (3)   Division of land regulations. It shall be the duty of the Planning
Commission to develop and certify procedures governing the division of land.
All divisions of land shall be in accordance with the adopted procedures.
      (4)   Official zoning map. The City Council shall adopt an official
zoning map for all areas included within the city.
      (5)   Abandonment of city real property. The Planning Commission shall
hear all applications relating to the use or abandonment of the city’s real
property.
   (H)   Procedures.
      (1)   Hearings. Upon receipt of an application in proper form, the Code
Official shall either affirm or deny the application.
      (2)   Petitions. Any person with standing, seeking a decision by the
Planning Commission on matters specified in divisions (G)(1) through (G)(5)
above shall be permitted to petition to the Planning Commission by written
request filed with the Code Official. Upon furnishing the proper information,
the Code Official shall transmit to the Planning Commission all papers and
pertinent data related to the appeal.
         (a)   Time limit. A petition shall only be considered if filed within
30 working days after the cause arises or the petition shall not be considered.
If a petition is not made within the 30- day time period, the decision of the
Code Official shall be considered final.
         (b)   Stays of proceedings. A petition stays all proceedings relating
to the property in issue or any similarly situated property from further action
unless there is immediate danger to public health and safety.
         (c)   Notice. The Planning Commission shall publish a notice of the
time and place of the public hearing. Such notice shall be given by publishing
said notice as a Class II legal advertisement in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city and in accordance with W. Va. Code Article 59-3, as
amended; provided, that the notice shall be published two times, with seven
days elapsing between the two publications and the second publication being no
more than five days before the public hearing. The public hearing notice shall
state the nature of the request, the location of the property, and the time and
place of hearing. Reasonable effort shall also be made to give notice by
regular mail of the time and place of hearing to each surrounding property
owner; the extent of the area to be notified shall be determined by the Code
Official. A notice of the public hearing shall also be posted in a conspicuous
manner on the subject property.
         (d)   Evidence. The Planning Commission shall hear all parties to the
issue presented. The Planning Commission may require the party or parties to
provide certain information in the form of maps relevant to the issue
presented, blueprints, specific written statements explaining the application,
and any other information deemed to be relevant to decision. The Planning
Commission may also visit the property in issue and use any other information
that it feels to be appropriate.
         (e)   Voting and notice of decision. A majority of the Planning
Commission, in attendance at the hearing, shall decide any matter under
consideration. Each decision shall be entered in the minutes by the Secretary,
if appointed, or by the Chairperson if no Secretary is appointed. All petitions
shall be shall be open to the public.
         (f)   Notice to be given to Code Official. Notice in writing of the
decision and the disposition of each petition shall be given to the Code
Official and each petitioner by mail or otherwise.
         (g)   Copy. The Planning Commission shall provide a copy of its
decision to the City Council.
      (3)   Appeals and hearings. Any person with standing aggrieved by any
decision of the Planning Commission shall have the right to appeal the decision
to the City Council. Such appeals shall be filed with the City Recorder within
30 days after the decision was made by the Planning Commission and shall be
based on the record.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.006 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Upon adoption of this chapter by the City Council, no use, building or
structure, whether publicly or privately owned, shall be constructed or
authorized until the location and extent thereof conforms to this chapter.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.007 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   (a)   Establishment of the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning
Appeals existing at the time this chapter is enacted shall be continued. The
Board of Zoning Appeals so established shall operate in accordance with the
procedures and policies set forth in W. Va. Code Chapter 8A, Article 8, as
amended. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of the five members.
Additionally, one member of the Planning Commission shall be appointed as
liaison to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The member of the Planning Commission
so appointed shall have the right to attend all meetings and take part in all
discussions, but shall not vote on Board of Zoning Appeals decisions.
   (B)   Terms for members. The terms of office for the members of the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall be three years with the terms being staggered so that
approximately one-third of the terms expire every year. Members shall be
permitted to be removed for cause upon written charges and after a public
hearing before the City Council, if such hearing is requested.
   (C)   Selection of members. All members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
be appointed and approved by the City Council. The terms of office shall be
staggered at intervals, so as to provide continuity in policy and personnel.
Members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be residents of the city. Members
of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall serve without compensation. Any vacancy
for the unexpired term of any member whose term is not completed shall be
filled by the City Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. A member
shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed and approved by
the City Council.
   (D)   Chairperson election and rules adoption. The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall elect from its membership a Chairperson. It shall also establish and
adopt rules for its organization and the transaction of business and shall keep
a public record of its proceedings.
   (E)   Board of Zoning Appeals Secretary. A Secretary to assist the Board of
Zoning Appeals may be appointed by the Code Official, with the advice and
consent of the City Council. The Secretary, if appointed, shall keep minutes of
the Board of Zoning Appeals meetings for public record, conduct all
correspondence, including the notification of decisions, certify records, and
prepare and submit the minutes of Board of Zoning Appeals meetings to the
Chairperson and the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (F)   Duties and powers.
      (1)   Errors. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to hear
and decide on appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, determination or interpretation by the Code Official, or
by any administrative official of the city charged with enforcement of this
chapter.
      (2)   Variances. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to hear
and decide on appeals wherein a variance to the terms of this chapter is
proposed. Limitations as to the Board of Zoning Appeals authorization shall be
as set forth in this chapter.
      (3)   Variance review criteria. The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve,
approve with conditions or deny a request for a variance. Each request for a
variance shall be consistent with the criteria listed below:
         (a)   The use of the property may be limited due to physical,
topographic and geologic features;
         (b)   The grant of the variance will not grant any special privilege
to the property owner;
         (c)   The applicant can demonstrate that without a variance there can
be no reasonable use of the property;
         (d)   The grant of the variance is not based solely on economic
reasons;
         (e)   The necessity for the variance was not created by the property
owner;
         (f)   The variance requested is the minimum variance necessary to
allow reasonable use of the property;
         (g)   The grant of the variance will not be injurious to the public
health, safety or welfare; and
         (h)   The property subject to the variance request possesses one or
more unique characteristics generally not applicable to similarly situated
properties.
      (4)   Conditional use permits. It shall also be the duty of the Board of
Zoning Appeals to review conditional use permit applications. The application
shall be accompanied by maps, drawings or other documentation in support of the
request. The granting of a conditional use permit shall not exempt the
applicant from compliance with other relevant provisions of related section of
this chapter.
   (G)   Use variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not grant a variance
to allow the establishment of a use in a zoning district when such use is
prohibited by the provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   Decisions.
      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be permitted to decide an appeal
in any manner it sees fit; however, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not have
the authority to alter or change this chapter or zoning map, or to allow as a
use that which would be inconsistent with the requirements of this chapter;
provided, that any interpretation or application of this chapter shall not
constitute the granting of a special privilege.
      (2)   The procedure to be utilized when seeking a decision by the Board
of Zoning Appeals shall be as follows and shall be governed by the provisions
the Code of West Virginia, as amended, and such rules not inconsistent
therewith, as the Board of Zoning Appeals may adopt. In general, the procedure
for appeal from action of the Code Official shall be as follows.
         (a)   Any appeal from the requirements of this chapter shall be on the
form provided by the Code Official and shall be taken by filing with the Code
Official a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The Code Official
shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals all of the documents
constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken.
         (b)   The appellant shall, at the time of filing his or her appeal,
pay to the Code Official the fee required by this chapter.
         (c)   Each appeal shall be tried on its merits at a public hearing.
Notice of such appeal shall be given by publishing said notice as a Class II
legal advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and in
accordance with W. Va. Code Article 59-3, as amended; provided, that the notice
shall be published two times, with seven days elapsing between the two
publications and the second publication being no more than five days before the
public hearing. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall give additional notice
required by law to all parties in interest.
         (d)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may adjourn any hearing for the
purpose of reviewing such data as may be pertinent to the problem involved and
to request interpretations of said data by a representative of the Planning
Commission.
         (e)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall sit and decide each appeal
within a reasonable time, and notice thereof shall be given to all parties
interested. Each decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be in writing,
shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall be immediately
filed in its office. If the Board of Zoning Appeals grants a variance, it must
be entered in the minutes of the City Council so as to be of public record. In
the exercise of its functions upon such appeals or upon exceptions, the Board
of Zoning Appeals may in conformity with law, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or discrimination as in its
opinion ought to be made; provided, that the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not
have the authority to alter or change this chapter or zoning map, or to allow
as a use that which would be inconsistent with the requirements of this
chapter.
         (f)   Any person or any city official aggrieved by any decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal therefrom, within 30 days from the date of
the decision, to the appropriate Circuit Court as provided by the laws of the
state.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.008 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or
maintain any building or land or cause or permit the same to be done in
violation of this chapter. When any building or parcel of land regulated by
this chapter is being used contrary to this chapter, the Code Official shall he
permitted to order such use discontinued and the structure, parcel of land, or
portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be
continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by
the Code Official after receipt of such notice to make the structure, parcel of
land, or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.009 PERMITS AND APPROVALS.
   (A)   General. All departments, officials and employees charged with the
duty or authority to issue permits or approvals shall issue no permit or
approval for uses or purposes where the same would be in conflict with this
chapter. Any permit or approval, if issued in conflict with this chapter, shall
be null and void.
   (B)   Expiration or cancellation.
      (1)   Each license, permit or approval issued shall expire after 180 days
if no work is undertaken or such use or activity is not established, unless a
different time of issuance of the license or permit is allowed in this chapter,
or unless an extension is granted by the issuing agency prior to expiration.
      (2)   Failure to comply fully with the terms of any permit, license or
approval shall be permitted to be grounds for cancellation or revocation.
Action to cancel any license, permit or approval shall be permitted to be taken
on proper grounds by the Code Official. Cancellation of a permit or approval by
the Planning Commission or Board shall be permitted to be appealed in the same
manner as its original action.
   (C)   Validity of licenses, permits and approvals. For the issuance of any
license, permit or approval for which the Planning Commission or Board is
responsible, the Code Official shall require that the development or use in
question proceed only in accordance with the terms of such license, permit or
approval, including any requirements or conditions established as a condition
of issuance. Except as specifically provided for in this chapter and conditions
of approval, the securing of one required review or approval shall not exempt
the recipient from the necessity of securing any other required review or
approval.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.010 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall,
for the purposes of this chapter of this code, have the meanings ascribed.
   (B)   Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter;
the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
   (C)   Terms defined in other ordinances. Where terms are not defined in this
chapter and are defined in the building or mechanical ordinances, such terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those ordinances.
   (D)   Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
herein authorized, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as
the context implies.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. passed 8-16-2019)
§ 152.011 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT. The relinquishment of property or a cessation of the use of the
property by the owner or lessee without any intention of transferring rights to
the property to another owner or resuming the nonconforming use of the property
for a period of one year.
   ABOVE-GROUND/ON GROUND POOL. See PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. An incidental subordinate building customarily
incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by the main use or building,
such as a detached garage.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use conducted on the same lot as the primary use of the
structure to which it is related; a use which is clearly incidental to, and
customarily found in connection with, such primary use.
   ADDICTION TREATMENT CENTER. Any outpatient or inpatient service providing
diagnostic or therapeutic services for alcoholism, drug abuse or similar
conditions. Clinics and professional offices or similar uses that provide
addiction treatment counseling to individuals as part of a larger practice are
not ADDICTION TREATMENT CENTERS.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. Any commercial establishment in which is offered for sale
as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade cassettes,
movies, books, magazines or other periodicals or other media which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on nudity or sexual conduct or
on activities which if presented in live presentation would constitute adult
entertainment.
   ADULT BUSINESS. An adult bookstore, commercial movie theater or movie house,
or other adult entertainment as defined herein. In the event that an activity
or business which might fall under a use category other than adult business is
combined with and/or includes activities which constitute an adult bookstore,
adult movie or movie house or adult entertainment as defined herein, then such
activity or business shall constitute an ADULT BUSINESS and shall be governed
by those provisions in this chapter applicable to any other use category.
   ADULT DAY CARE CENTER. A use providing supervised care and assistance
primarily to persons who are over age 60, mentally retarded or physically
handicapped who need such daily assistance because of their limited physical
abilities, Alzheimer disease or mental retardation. This use shall not include
persons who need oversight because of behavior that is criminal or violent.
This use may involve occasional overnight stays, but shall not primarily be a
residential use. The use shall involve typical stays of less than a total of 60
hours per week.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. A commercial establishment providing, either as a sole
use or in connection with or in addition to other uses, entertainment
consisting of any exhibition, display or dance which involves the exposure to
view of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, male
genitals, female genitals or the pubic hair, anus or cleft of the buttocks of
any person or male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely
and opaquely covered.
   ADULT MOVIE THEATER or ADULT MOVIE HOUSE (INCLUDING ADULT MINI- THEATERS OR
ADULT ARCADES). Any commercial establishment to which the public is permitted
or invited, where for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photograph reproductions are regularly shown
depicting actual acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
sodomy or displaying human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal,
or tumescence or depicting excretory functions as part of or in connection with
an of the activities set forth in this definition.
   AGGRIEVED or AGGRIEVED PERSON. A person who:
      (1)   Is denied by the Planning Commission or the Board of Zoning
Appeals, in whole or in part, the relief sought in any application or appeal;
or
      (2)   Has demonstrated that he or she will suffer a peculiar injury,
prejudice or inconvenience beyond that which other residents of the county or
municipality may suffer.
   AGRICULTURE. The tilling of the soil, raising of crops, animals,
horticulture, gardening, beekeeping and aquaculture.
   ALLEY. Any public way or thoroughfare more than ten feet, but less than 16
feet, in width which has been dedicated to the public for public use and
designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties
whose principal frontage is on some other street.
   ALTERATION. Any change, addition or modification in construction, occupancy
or use.
   AMUSEMENT ATTRACTION. Any building, structure or open area around, over or
through which people may move or walk without the aid of any moving device
integral to the building, structure or open area that provides amusement,
pleasure, thrills or excitement by use of stationary amusement rides and kiddie
rides. The term may include any concession stand or booth for the selling of
food or drink or souvenirs that is located within the building, structure or
open area.
   AMUSEMENT CENTER. An establishment offering five or more amusement devices,
including, but not limited to, coin-operated electronic games, shooting
gallery, table games and similar recreational diversions within an enclosed
building.
   AMUSEMENT RIDE. A mechanical device which carries or conveys passengers
along, around or over a fixed or restricted route or course for the purpose of
giving its passengers amusement, pleasure, thrills or excitement. The term
includes an amusement ride or amusement attraction that is erected in a single
physical location for a period of more than 12 consecutive months, but may not
be construed to mean of include any mechanical device which is coin operated.
   ANIMATED SIGN. A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion.
animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable signs as defined and
regulated by this chapter, include the following types.
      (1)   ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs producing the illusion of
movement by means of electronic, electrical or electro-mechanical input and/or
illumination of movement by simulating movement through employment of the
characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below.
         (a)   FLASHING. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of
illumination is either the same as or less than the period of non-illumination.
For the purposes of this chapter, FLASHING will not be defined as occurring if
the cyclical period between on-off phases of illumination exceeds four seconds.
         (b)   PATTERNED ILLUSIONARY MOVEMENT. Animated signs or animated
portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated movement
through alternate or sequential activation of various illuminated elements for
the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some
form of constant motion.
      (2)   ENVIRONMENTALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs or devices motivated by
wind, thermal changes or other natural environmental input, and includes
spinners, pinwheels, pennant strings and/or other devices or displays that
respond to naturally occurring external motivation.
      (3)   MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs characterized by repetitive
motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by electric
motors or other mechanically induced means.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. A residential building designed or used for three or more
dwelling units.
   APPLICANT or DEVELOPER. The owner of the land proposed to be subdivided or
his or her representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of
the premises.
   ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION. Any projection that is not intended for occupancy
and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, but that
does not include signs as defined herein. See also AWNING; BACKLIT AWNING; and
CANOPY, ATTACHED and FREESTANDING.
   AUTOMOBILE PARKING SPACE. A space within a building or private or public
parking lot, exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, office and work areas, for
the parking of an automobile.
   AUTOMOTIVE SELF-SERVICE STATION. That portion of property where flammable or
combustible liquids or gases used as fuel are stored and dispersed from fixed
equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles. Such an establishment shall be
permitted to offer for sale at retail other convenience items as a clearly
secondary activity and shall be permitted also to include a freestanding
automatic car wash.
   AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION. That portion of property where flammable or
combustible liquids or gases used as fuel are stored and dispersed from fixed
equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles. Accessory activities shall be
permitted to include automotive repair and maintenance, car wash service and
food sales.
   AWNING. An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and supported
by the exterior wall of a building and comprised of a covering of rigid or
nonrigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be either
permanent or retractable, including such structures that are internally
illuminated by fluorescent or other light sources.
   AWNING SIGNS. A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or
surfaces of an awning. See also WALL OR FASCIA SIGN.
   BACKLIT AWNING. An awning with a translucent covering material and a source
of illumination contained within its framework.
   BANNER. A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed.
   BANNER SIGN. A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
   BARRIER. A fence, a wall, a building wall, the wall of an above-ground
swimming pool or a combination thereof, which completely surrounds the swimming
pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.
   BASEMENT. Any floor level below the first story in a building, except that a
floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be classified as a
BASEMENT unless such floor level qualifies as a first story as defined herein.
   BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY. A limited commercial activity, conducted within
a structure, which includes dining and bathroom facilities with sleeping rooms
for short-term guest lodging.
   BILLBOARD. See OFF-PREMISES SIGN and OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN.
   BLOCK. Land, or a group of lots, bounded by streets or other rights-of-way,
or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-
of-way, shorelines or waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities other than
an alley, or land which is designated as a block on any recorded subdivision
tract.
   BOARD. The Zoning Board of Appeals created in §
152.007 of this chapter.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling containing a single dwelling unit and not more
than ten guest rooms or suites of rooms, where lodging is provided with or
without meals, for compensation for more than 30 days.
   BOND. Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory
to the governing body.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and includes any
structure.
   BUILDING CODE. The International Building Code promulgated by the
International Code Council, as adopted by the city.
   BUILDING ELEVATION. The entire side of a building, from ground level to the
roofline, as viewed perpendicular to the walls on that side of the building.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance above the average existing grade
measured to the highest point of the building, The height of a stepped or
terraced building shall be the maximum height of any segment of the building.
   BUILDING LINE. The perimeter of that portion of a building or structure
nearest a property line, but excluding open steps, terraces, cornices and other
ornamental features projecting from the walls of the building or structure.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by a municipality or county, in accordance
with this chapter, for the construction, erection, installation, placement,
rehabilitation or renovation of a structure or development of land, and for the
purpose of regulating development within flood-prone areas.
   BUSINESS OR FINANCIAL SERVICES. An establishment intended for the conduct or
service or administration by a commercial enterprise, or offices for the
conduct of professional or business service.
   CANOPY (ATTACHED). A multisided overhead structure or architectural
projection supported by attachments to a building on one or more sides and
either cantilevered from such building or also supported by columns as
additional points. The surface(s) and/or soffit of an attached canopy may be
illuminated by means of internal or external sources of lights. See also
MARQUEE.
   CANOPY (FREESTANDING). A multisided overhead structure supported by columns,
but not enclosed by walls. The surface(s) and or soffit of a freestanding
canopy may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light.
   CANOPY SIGN. A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached or
freestanding canopy.
   CARPORT. A roofed structure open on at least two sides and used for the
storage of private or pleasure-type vehicles.
   CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery
purposes, including columbariums, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in
conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
   CENTRAL SEWERAGE SYSTEM. A community sewer system including collection and
treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a new subdivision in
an outlying area.
   CENTRAL WATER SYSTEM. A private water company formed by a developer to serve
a new community development in an outlying area. It includes water treatment
and distribution facilities.
   CHANGEABLE SIGN. A sign with the capability of content change by means of
manual or remote input, including signs which are:
      (1)   ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED. Changeable sign whose message copy or
content can be changed by means of remote electrically energized on-off
switching combinations or alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on a
display surface. Illumination may be integral to the components, such as
characterized by lamps or other light-emitting devices; or it may be from an
external light source designed to reflect off the changeable component display.
See ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN OR CENTER.
      (2)   MANUALLY ACTIVATED. Changeable sign whose message copy or content
can be changed manually.
   CHANGE OF USE. The change within the classified use of a structure or
premises.
   CITY. The City of Nitro, West Virginia.
   CITY ATTORNEY. The licensed attorney designated by Council to furnish legal
assistance for the administration of these regulations.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the city.
   CITY ENGINEER. The licensed engineer designated by Council to furnish
engineering assistance for the administration of these regulations.
   CLUB. Buildings or lands owned or operated by a corporation, association,
fraternal organizations or persons for a social, education or recreational
purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service that is
customarily carried out as a business.
   CODE or THIS CODE. The codified ordinances of the City of Nitro, West
Virginia.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The building inspector authorized in §§
151.30 to
151.36 of this code of ordinances, and includes his or her designee.
   COLLECTOR ROAD. A road intended to move traffic from local roads to
secondary arterials. A COLLECTOR ROAD serves a neighborhood or large
subdivision and should be designed so that no residential properties face onto
it.
   COLUMBARIUM. A place for the respectful and usually public storage of urns
holding the deceased’s cremated remains.
   COMBINATION SIGN. A sign that is supported partly by a pole and partly by a
building structure.
   COMMERCIAL. Engaging in a business, commerce, enterprise, activity or other
undertaking for a profit.
   COMMERCIAL PARKING GARAGE. A building, other than a private garage, used for
the parking of automobiles with or without a fee.
   COMMERCIAL RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES. Establishments which engage in the
sale of general retail goods and accessory services. Businesses within this
definition include those which conduct sales and storage entirely within an
enclosed structure (with the exception of occasional outdoor “sidewalk”
promotions); businesses specializing in sale of either general merchandise or
convenience goods.
   COMMERCIAL SCHOOL. A school establishment to provide for the teaching of
industrial, clerical, managerial or artistic skills. This definition applies to
schools that are owned and operated privately for profit and that do not offer
a complete educational curriculum (e.g., beauty school, modeling school).
   COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL CENTER. A completely planned and designed commercial
development providing for the sale of general merchandise and/or convenience
goods and services. A COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL CENTER shall provide for the sale of
general merchandise, and may include a variety store, discount store or
supermarket.
   COMMUNITY SIGN. Temporary, on- or off-premises signs, generally made of a
woven material or durable synthetic materials primarily attached to or hung
from light poles or on buildings. These signs are solely of a decorative,
festive and/or informative nature announcing activities, promotions or events
with seasonal or traditional themes having broad community interest, and which
are sponsored or supported by a jurisdiction-based nonprofit organization.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A plan for physical development, including land use,
adopted by the City Council, setting forth guidelines, goals and objectives for
all activities that affect growth and development in the governing body’s
jurisdiction.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use which because of special requirements or
characteristics may be permitted in a particular zoning district only after
review by the Board of Zoning Appeals and upon issuance of a conditional use
permit, and subject to the limitations and conditions specified in the zoning
regulations.
   CONDOMINIUM. A common interest community in which portions of the real
estate are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of the real
estate is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those
portions. A common interest community is not a CONDOMINIUM unless the undivided
interest in the common elements are vested in the owners.
   CONSTRUCTION PLAN. The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and
showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the
subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the Planning Commission as a
condition of the approval of the plat.
   CONTIGUOUS. Lots, parcels, municipal boundaries or county boundaries that
are next to, abutting and having a boundary, or portion thereof, that is
coterminous. Streets, highways, roads or other traffic or utility easements,
streams, rivers and other natural topography are not to be used to determine
lots, parcels, municipal boundaries or county boundaries as CONTIGUOUS.
   CONVALESCENT CENTER. A facility which is publicly or privately operated and
intended for long-term patient care due to human illness or infirmity,
including the elderly and developmentally disabled, normally employing the
services of skilled and licensed practitioners, excluding hospitals.
   CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL CENTER. A completely planned and designed commercial
development providing for the sale of general merchandise and/or convenience
goods and services. A CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL CENTER shall provide a small
cluster of convenience shops or services.
   COPY. Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic elements
comprising the content or message of a sign, excluding numerals identifying a
street address only.
   CORNER LOT. A lot abutting on two intersecting or intercepting streets,
where the interior angle of intersection or intercept on does not exceed 135
degrees.
   COURT. A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade
level on a lot and bounded on three or more sides by walls of a building.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate
terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
   DANCE HALL or DISCOTHEQUE. An establishment intended primarily for dancing
and entertaining within an enclosed building, using either live or
electronically produced music, either open to the public or operated as a
private club open to members only.
   DENSITY. The number of dwelling units which are allowed on an area of land,
which area of land shall be permitted to include dedicated streets contained
within the development.
   DESTINATION TOURISM CENTER. An area containing a minimum of 200,000 square
feet of buildable space adjacent or complementary to a tourism attraction, and
which provides a variety of entertainment and leisure options.
   DEVELOPMENT COMPLEX SIGN. A freestanding sign identifying a multiple-
occupancy development, such as a shopping center or planned industrial park,
which is controlled by a single owner or landlord, approved in accordance with
this chapter.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. Any sign that is designed and erected for the purpose of
providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   DOG RACING. The activity licensed under the authority of W. Va. Code Chapter
19, Article 23, as amended.
   DOUBLE FACED SIGN. A sign with two faces, back to back.
   DRIVEWAY. A private access road, the use of which is limited to persons
residing, employed or otherwise using or visiting the parcel in which it is
located.
   DUPLEX DWELLING. A building designed or arranged to be occupied by two
families living independently, the structure having only two dwelling units.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof which contains living
facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation,
as required by this chapter, for not more than one family, or a congregate
residence for six or less persons.
   EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future
use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property.
The EASEMENT shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lot or
lots.
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. Public or parochial pre-primary, primary, grade,
high, prepatory school or academy, junior college, college or university, if
public or founded or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a religious or
charitable organization.
   ELECTRIC SIGN. Any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical
energy.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN OR CENTER. An electrically activated changeable sign
whose variable message capability can be electronically programmed.
   ESCROW. A deposit of cash with the city in lieu of an amount required and
still in force on a performance or maintenance bond. Such escrow funds shall be
deposited by the Commission in a separate account.
   ESSENTIAL UTILITIES AND EQUIPMENT. Underground or overhead electrical, gas,
communications not regulated by the Federal Communications Commission, water
and sewage systems, including pole structures, towers, wires, lines, mains,
drains, sewers, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, public telephone
structures, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, regulating and
measuring devices and the structures in which they are housed, and other
similar equipment accessories in connection therewith. ESSENTIAL UTILITY
EQUIPMENT is recognized in three categories:
      (1)   Local serving;
      (2)   Nonlocal or transmission through the county or municipality; and
      (3)   Water and sewer systems, the activities of which are regulated, in
whole or in part, by one or more of the following state agencies:
         (a)   Public Service Commission;
         (b)   Department of Environmental Protection; or
         (c)   The Department of Health and Human Resources.
   EXISTING USE. Use of land, buildings or activity permitted or in existence
prior to the adoption of a zoning map or ordinances by the county or
municipality. If the use is nonconforming to this chapter and lawfully existed
prior to the adoption of this chapter, the use may continue to exist as a
nonconforming use until abandoned for a period of one year; provided, that in
the case of natural resources, the absence of natural resources extraction or
harvesting is not abandonment of the use.
   EXTERIOR SIGN. Any sign placed outside a building.
   FACTORY-BUILT HOME. See MODULAR AND MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption, or a group not to exceed six unrelated persons living together as a
single housekeeping unit.
   FAMILY DAY CARE. The keeping for part-time care and /or instruction, whether
or not for compensation, of six or less children at any time within a dwelling,
not including members of the family residing on the premises.
   FARM ANIMALS. Animals other than household pets that shall be permitted to,
where permitted, be kept and maintained for commercial production and sale and/
or family food production, education or recreation. FARM ANIMALS are identified
by these categories: large animals, e.g., horses and cattle; medium animals,
e.g., sheep, goats; or small animals, e.g., rabbits, chinchillas, chickens,
turkeys, pheasants, geese, ducks and pigeons; provided, that the term FARM
ANIMALS shall not include any animals prohibited by state law or this code from
being kept and maintained.
   FASCIA SIGN. See WALL OR FASCIA SIGN.
   FINAL PLAT. The map or plan or record of a subdivision and any accompanying
material, as described in the subdivision regulations.
   FLAG LOT. A lot so shaped and designed that the main building site is set
back from the street on which it fronts and includes an access strip connecting
the main building site with the frontage street.
   FLASHING SIGN. See ANIMATED SIGN, ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED.
   FLEA MARKET. An occasional or periodic sales activity held within a
building, structure or open area where groups of individual sellers offer
goods, new and used, for sale to the public, not to include private garage
sales.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to repeated inundation by water
from any source.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The numerical value obtained by dividing the gross floor
area of a building by the area of the lot on which the building is constructed.
   FOOD DISTRIBUTION CENTER. Any location or site used to prepare and/or
furnish meals to members of the public without cost or at a very low cost as a
social service as defined herein; a FOOD DISTRIBUTION CENTER may perform its
activities wholly within a structure, wholly outside of a structure, or any
combination thereof. A FOOD DISTRIBUTION CENTER shall not be considered a
restaurant.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign principally supported by a structure affixed to
the ground, and not supported by a building, including signs supported by one
or more columns, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground.
   FRONT YARD. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line
parallel thereto.
   FRONTAGE (BUILDING). The length of an exterior building or structure of a
single premises oriented to the public way or other properties that it faces.
   FRONTAGE (PROPERTY). The length of the property line(s) of any single
premises along either a public way or other properties on which it borders.
   FRONTAGE STREET. Any street to be constructed by the developer or any
existing street in which development shall take place on both sides.
   GAMBLING ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment that offers any form of gambling or
games of chance that is regulated under the provisions of the Limited Video
Lottery Act codified in W. Va. Code 29-22-101, as amended.
   GENERAL PLAN. The declaration of purposes, policies and programs for the
development of the city.
   GRADE (ADJACENT GROUND ELEVATION). The lowest point of elevation of the
existing surface of the ground, within the area between the building and a line
five feet (1,524 mm) from the building.
   GRAFFITI. Unauthorized marking on a structure.
   GROSS ACREAGE. The overall total area of real property.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The sum of the horizontal areas of floors of a building
measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or, if appropriate, from the
centerline of dividing walls; this includes courts and decks or porches when
covered by a roof.
   GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA). The total floor area of a commercial building
designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements,
mezzanines and upper floors, expressed in square feet as measured from the
centerline of joint partitions and from outside wall faces.
   GROUND SIGN. See FREESTANDING SIGN.
   GROUP CARE FACILITY. A facility, required to be licensed by the state, which
provides training, care, supervision, treatment and/or rehabilitation to the
aged, disabled, those convicted of crimes or those suffering the effects of
drugs or alcohol; this does not include day care centers, family day care
homes, foster homes, schools, hospitals, jails or prisons.
   GROUP DAY CARE. An establishment for the care and/or instruction, whether or
not for compensation, of seven or more persons at any one time. Child
nurseries, preschools and adult care facilities are included in this
definition.
   GUEST ROOM. Any room or rooms used or intended to be used by a guest for
sleeping purposes. Every 100 square feet of superficial floor area in a
dormitory shall be considered to be a GUEST ROOM.
   HABITABLE SPACE (ROOM). Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility
space, and similar areas are not considered HABITABLE SPACE.
   HEAVY COMMERCIAL. An establishment or business which generally uses open
sales yards, outside equipment storage or outside activities that generate
noise or other impacts considered incompatible with less-intense uses. Typical
businesses in this definition are lumber yards, construction specialty
services, heavy equipment suppliers or building contractors.
   HEAVY MANUFACTURING. All other types of manufacturing not included in the
definitions of light manufacturing and medium manufacturing.
   HELIPORT. An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure,
licensed or approved for the landing, unloading, loading and takeoff of
helicopters, and including auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room
and maintenance equipment.
   HIGHWAY, LIMITED ACCESS. A freeway or expressway, providing a trafficway for
through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property
on lands and other persons have no legal right to access to or from the same,
except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public
authority having jurisdiction over such trafficway.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A geographically definable area, designated as historic
on a national, state or local register, possessing a significant concentration,
linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united
historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development.
   HISTORIC LANDMARK. A site, building, structure or object designated as
historic on a national, state or local register.
   HISTORIC SITE. The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or
historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure whether standing,
ruined or vanished, where the location itself possesses historical, cultural or
archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure and
designated as historic on a national, state or local register.
   HOME OCCUPATION. The partial use of a dwelling unit for commercial or
nonresidential uses by a resident thereof which is subordinate and incidental
to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes.
   HOMELESS PERSON. An individual who, or family which, lacks a fixed, regular
and/or adequate nighttime residence.
   HOMELESS SHELTER. A facility providing emergency housing with minimal
supportive services for homeless persons whether they be individuals or
families, that is intended for occupancy by the respective homeless person of
30 days or less in a given 12-month period.
   HOSPITAL. An institution designed for the diagnosis, treatment and care of
human illness or infirmity and providing health services, primarily for
inpatients, and including as related facilities, laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities and staff offices.
   HOT TUB. See PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL.
   HOUSE TRAILER. Any licensed or unlicensed trailer or other vehicle designed
or used for living or sleeping purposes regardless of whether the wheels are
attached or unattached, or a permanent or semi-permanent foundation is
constructed underneath or any structures of a permanent nature are attached
thereto.
   HOUSEHOLD PETS. Dogs, cats, rabbits, birds, and other animals, maintained
for family use only (noncommercial) with cages, pens and the like.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign characterized by the use of artificial light,
either projecting through its surface(s) (internally illuminated), or
reflecting off its surface(s) (externally illuminated).
   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A septic tank, seepage tile sewage
disposal system or any other approved sewage treatment device.
   INDOOR PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL. Any private swimming pool that is totally
contained within a private structure and surrounded on all four sides by walls
of said structure.
   INDOOR RECREATION. An establishment providing completely enclosed recreation
activities. Accessory uses shall be permitted to include the preparation and
serving of food and/or the sale of equipment related to the enclosed uses.
Included in this definition shall be bowling, roller skating or ice skating,
billiards, pool, motion picture theatres and related amusements.
   INDUSTRIAL OR RESEARCH PARK. A tract of land developed according to a master
site plan for the use of a family of industries and their related commercial
uses, and that is of sufficient size and physical improvement to protect
surrounding areas and the general community and to assure a harmonious
integration into the neighborhood.
   INFILL DEVELOPMENT. To fill in vacant or underused land in existing
communities with new development that blends in with its surroundings.
   IN-GROUND POOL. See PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL.
   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a comer lot.
   INTERIOR SIGN. Any sign placed within a building, but not including window
signs. INTERIOR SIGNS, with the exception of window signs, are not regulated by
this chapter.
   IRREGULAR LOT. A lot whose opposing property lines are generally not
parallel, such as a pie-shaped lot on a cul-de-sac, or where the side property
lines are not parallel to each other.
   JOINT OWNERSHIP. Among persons, the same owner; CONSTRUCTIVE OWNERSHIP for
the purpose of imposing subdivision regulations.
   KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which five or more dogs or cats over four
months of age are kept, for compensation or not.
   KIDDIE RIDE. An amusement ride or amusement attraction that is expressly
designed for or offered to:
      (1)   Children age 12 or less;
      (2)   Persons who are 42 inches in height or less; and
      (3)   Persons who are 90 pounds in weight or less.
   KITCHEN. Any room or portion of a room within a building designed and
intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food.
   LANDSCAPING. The finishing and adornment of unpaved yard areas. Materials
and treatment generally include naturally growing elements such as grass,
trees, shrubs and flowers. This treatment shall be permitted also to include
the use of logs, rocks, fountains, water features and contouring of the earth.
   LIGHT COMMERCIAL. An establishment or business which generally has retail or
wholesale sales, office uses or services that do not generate noise, or other
impacts considered incompatible with less-intense uses. Typical businesses in
this definition are retail stores, offices, catering services or restaurants.
   LIGHT MANUFACTURING. The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling,
packaging or testing of goods; or equipment, including research activities,
conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, with no outside storage,
serviced by a modest volume of trucks or vans and imposing a negligible impact
on the surrounding environment by noise, vibration, smoke, dust or pollutants.
   LIMITED VIDEO LOTTERY/KENO. The lottery activity licensed under the
authority of W. Va. Code Chapter 29, Article 22B, as amended.
   LIVESTOCK. Means, but is not limited to, horses, bovine animals, sheep,
goats, swine, reindeer, donkeys, mules and any other hoofed animals.
   LOCAL ROAD. A road intended to provide access to other roads from individual
properties and to provide right-of-way beneath it for sewer, water and storm
drainage pipes.
   LOT. A single parcel of land.
   LOT AREA. The horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the interior
angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT IMPROVEMENT. Any building, structure, place, work of art or other
object, or improvement of the land on which it is situated constituting a
physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. Certain
LOT IMPROVEMENTS shall be properly bonded as provided in the subdivision
regulations.
   LOT WIDTH. The mean horizontal distance across the lot between the side lot
lines measured at right angles to the depth.
   MAIN BUILDING. A structure in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot on which it is situated.
   MAJOR AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR. An establishment primarily engaged in the repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and similar large mechanical equipment,
including paint, body and fender and major engine and engine part overhaul,
which is conducted within a completely enclosed building.
   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions,
including, but not limited to, the subdivision of four or more lots, or any
size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the local
governmental facilities, or the creation of any public improvements.
   MANSARD. An inclined decorative roof-like projection that is attached to an
exterior building facade.
   MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME). A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet (2,438 mm) or more in
width or 40 body feet (1,2192 mm) in length, or when erected on site is 320
square feet (29.7 m2) or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-
conditioning and electrical systems contained therein.
   MARINA. A facility for storing, servicing, fueling, berthing and securing
and launching of private pleasure craft, including tour boats and river boats,
that may include the sale of fuel, food and incidental supplies for the boat
owners, crews, passengers and guests.
   MARQUEE. See CANOPY (ATTACHED).
   MARQUEE SIGN. See CANOPY SIGN.
   MEDIUM MANUFACTURING. The manufacturing, compounding, processing,
assembling, packaging or testing of good: or equipment within an enclosed
structure or an open yard that is capable of being screened from neighboring
properties, serviced by a modest volume of trucks or other vehicles.
   MENU BOARD. A freestanding sign oriented to the drive-through lane for a
restaurant that advertises the menu items available from the drive-through
window, and which has no more that 20% of the total area for such a sign
utilized for business identification.
   MINOR AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR. An establishment primarily engaged in the repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and similar mechanical equipment,
including brake, muffler, upholstery work, tire repair and change, lubrication,
tune ups and transmission work, which is conducted within a completely enclosed
building, but not including activities specified under AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR,
MAJOR.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision containing not more than three lots
fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road, or the
extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of any public improvements,
and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property,
and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the comprehensive plan or
this chapter of this code.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A tract of land developed and operated as a unit with
individual sites and facilities to accommodate two or more mobile homes.
   MODEL HOME. A dwelling temporarily used as a sales office for a residential
development under construction; said home being used for on-site sales and not
for general real estate business.
   MODULAR HOME. A factory-built home, other than a manufactured home, which
meets all of the following requirements:
      (1)   Is designed only for erection or installation on a site-built
permanent foundation;
      (2)   Is not designed to be moved once so erected or installed;
      (3)   Is designed and manufactured to comply with a nationally recognized
model Building Code or an equivalent local ordinance, or with a state or local
modular building ordinances recognized as generally equivalent to building
ordinances for site-built housing; or
      (4)   To the manufacturer’s knowledge, is not intended to be used other
than on a site-built permanent foundation.
   MORTUARY, FUNERAL HOME. An establishment in which the dead are prepared for
burial or cremation. The facility shall be permitted to include a chapel for
the conduct of funeral services and spaces for funeral services and informal
gatherings, and/or display of funeral equipment.
   MOTEL, HOTEL or INN. A building or buildings including rooms rented out to
persons as clearly transient and temporary living quarters. Any such use that
customarily involves the housing of persons for periods of time longer than 30
days shall be considered a BOARDING HOUSE and shall meet the requirements of
that use. A HOTEL, MOTEL or INN may include a restaurant, nightclub, newsstand
or tavern, provided that such uses are clearly accessory to the principal use
of overnight accommodations.
   MULTIPLE FACED SIGN. A sign containing three or more faces.
   MULTIPLE UNIT DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy
by three or more families living independently in which they may or may not
share common entrances and/or other spaces. Individual dwelling units may be
owned as condominiums, townhouses, or offered for rent.
   NATURAL WATERWAYS. Those areas, varying in width along streams, creeks,
springs, gullies or washes, which are natural drainage channels as determined
and identified by the city.
   NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL CENTER. A completely planned and designed commercial
development providing for the sale of general merchandise and/or convenience
goods and services. A NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL CENTER shall provide for the
sales of convenience goods and services, with a supermarket as the principal
tenant.
   NEIGHBORHOOD PARK AND RECREATION IMPROVEMENT FUND. A special fund
established by the City Council to retain moneys contributed by developers in
accordance with the “money in lieu of land” provisions of the subdivision
regulations within reasonable proximity of the land to be subdivided so as to
be of local use to the future residents of the subdivision.
   NET ACREAGE. The remaining area after all deductions are made; with
deductions including streets, easements for access, street dedications and
similar areas.
   NET FLOOR AREA. The gross floor area exclusive of vents, shafts, courts,
elevators, stairways, exterior walls and similar facilities.
   NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot whose width, area or other dimension did not
conform to the regulations when this chapter became effective.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign or sign structure or portion thereof lawfully
existing at the time this chapter became effective, which does not now conform.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A building or structure or portion thereof lawfully
existing at the time this chapter became effective, which was designed, erected
or structurally altered for a use that does not conform to the zoning
regulations of the zone in which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the
time this chapter became effective, which has been lawfully continued and which
does not now conform with the use requirements of this chapter.
   NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. A subdivision whose intended use is other than
residential, such as commercial or industrial. Such subdivision shall comply
with the applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. See OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN.
   OFF-SITE. Any premises not located within the area of the property to be
subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for
subdivision approval.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN. A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor
environment for the purpose of the display of messages appurtenant to the use
of products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is
displayed.
   OPEN SPACE. Land areas that are not occupied by buildings, structures,
parking areas, streets, alleys or required yards. OPEN SPACE shall be permitted
to be devoted to landscaping, preservation of natural features, patios, and
recreational areas and facilities.
   ORDINANCE or THIS CHAPTER. The City of Nitro planning and zoning ordinance.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN. A permanent sign erected, maintained or used in
the outdoor environment for the purpose of the display of commercial or
noncommercial messages not appurtenant to the use of products sold on, or the
sale of lease of the property on which it is displayed.
   OUTDOOR PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL. Any private swimming pool that is not an
indoor swimming pool.
   OUTDOOR RECREATION. An area free of buildings except for restrooms, dressing
rooms, equipment storage, maintenance buildings, open-air pavilions and similar
structures used primarily for recreational activities.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or corporation, or any other legal
entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land
sought to be subdivided under the subdivision regulations.
   PARAPET. The extension of a building facade above the line of the structural
roof.
   PARI-MUTUAL WAGERING. The system of wagering occurring at a racing
association licensed under the authority of W. Va. Code Chapter 19, Article 23,
as amended, and includes pari-mutuel wagering on interstate and intrastate
horse and dog racing as authorized in the said W. Va. Code Chapter 19, Article
23.
   PARK. A public or private area of land, with or without buildings, intended
for outdoor active or passive recreational uses.
   PARK AND RIDE FACILITIES. Parking lots or structures located along public
transit routes designed to encourage transfer from private automobile to mass
transit or to encourage carpooling for purposes of commuting, or for access to
recreation areas.
   PARKING LOT. An open area, other than a street, used for the parking of
automobiles.
   PERIMETER STREET. Any existing street to which the parcel of land to be
subdivided abuts on only one side.
   PERMITTED USE. Any use allowed within a zoning district, subject to the
restrictions applicable to that zoning district and is not a conditional use.
   PERSON. A natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and
includes a firm, partnership or corporation, limited liability company, limited
liability partnership, S-corporation, or any other form of business
organization, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the
aforesaid.
   PLAN. A written description for the development of land.
   PLANNED GROUP DWELLING. Two or more detached buildings used as dwelling
units located on a lot that is in single ownership having yards, courts or
facilities in common.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A residential or commercial development
guided by a total design plan in which one or more of the zoning or subdivision
regulations, other than use regulations, shall be permitted to be waived or
varied to allow flexibility and creativity in site and building design and
location, in accordance with general guidelines.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Nitro Planning Commission for the City of Nitro,
West Virginia.
   PLAT. A map of the land development.
   PLOT MAP. A plat of a lot, drawn to scale, showing the actual measurements,
the size and location of any existing buildings or buildings to be erected, the
location of the lot in relation to abutting streets, and other such
information.
   POLE SIGN. See FREESTANDING SIGN.
   POLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign intended to advance a political statement,
cause or candidate for office. A legally permitted outdoor sign shall not be
considered a POLITICAL SIGN.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a
building or building surface.
   POWER SAFETY COVER. A pool cover which is placed over the water area, and is
opened and closed with a motorized mechanism activated by a control switch.
   PREFERRED DEVELOPMENT AREA. A geographically defined area where incentives
may be used to encourage development, infill development or redevelopment in
order to promote well designed and coordinated communities.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these
regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be
submitted to the Commission for approval.
   PRIMARY ARTERIAL. A road intended to move through traffic to and from such
major attractors as central business districts, regional shopping centers,
colleges and/or universities, military installations, major industrial areas,
and similar traffic generators within the governmental unit; and/or as a route
for traffic between communities or large areas.
   PRIMARY FACE OF BUILDING. The wall of a building fronting on a street or
right-of-way, excluding any appurtenances such as projecting fins, columns,
pilasters, canopies, marquees, showcases or decorations.
   PRINCIPAL USE. A use which fulfills a primary function of a household,
establishment, institution or other entity.
   PRIVATE CLUB. A business activity licensed under the authority of W. Va.
Code Article 60-7, as amended, where alcoholic beverages are dispensed for
consumption on the premises and in which dancing or other forms of
entertainment, excluding adult entertainment, are permitted and includes the
term CABARET.
   PRIVATE GARAGE. A building or a portion of a building not more than 1,000
square feet in area, in which only private or pleasure-type motor vehicles used
by the tenants of the building or buildings on the premises are stored or kept.
   PRIVATE STREET. A right-of-way or easement in private ownership, not
dedicated or maintained as a public street, which affords the principal means
of access to two or more sites.
   PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL. Any structure that contains water over 24 inches in
depth and which is used, or intended to be used, for swimming or recreational
bathing in connection with an occupancy in Use Group R-3 and which is available
only to the family and guests of the householder. This includes in-ground,
above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. Any office or business conducted that has been
determined by the West Virginia Legislature to provide professional services.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign other that a wall sign that is attached to or
projects more than 18 inches from a building or wall or from a structure whose
primary purpose is other than the support of a sign.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk,
pedestrianway, treelawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other
facility for which the city may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which city
responsibility is established. All such improvements shall be properly bonded.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any lots, tracts or parcels of land, structures, buildings or
parts thereof owned or leased by a governing body or unit of government.
   PUBLIC SERVICES. Uses operated by a unit of government to serve public
needs, such as police (with or without jail), fire service, ambulance, judicial
court or government offices, but not including public utility stations or
maintenance facilities.
   PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL. Any swimming pool other than a private swimming pool.
   PUBLIC UTILITY STATION. A structure or facility used by a public or quasi-
public utility agency to store, distribute or generate electricity, gas,
telecommunications and related equipment, or to pump or chemically treat water.
This does not include storage or treatment of sewage, solid waste or hazardous
waste.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise
permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
   QUASI-PUBLIC. Essentially a public use, although under private ownership or
control.
   QUORUM. A majority of the authorized members.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease or rental of
the property or premises upon which it is located.
   REAR YARD. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line or ordinary
high water line and a line parallel thereto.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicular unit as defined in W. Va. Code Chapter
17A, other than a mobile home, whose gross floor area is less than 320 square
feet, which is designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation use, and which is either self-propelled, mounted on or pulled by
another vehicle. Examples include, but are not limited to, a travel trailer,
camping trailer, truck camper, motor home, fifth-wheel trailer or van.
   RECYCLING FACILITY. Any location whose primary use is where waste or scrap
materials are stored, bought, sold, accumulated, exchanged, packaged,
disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap metals, paper,
rags, tires and bottles, and other such materials.
   REGIONAL COMMERCIAL CENTER. A completely planned and designed commercial
development providing for the sale of general merchandise and/or convenience
goods and services. A regional center shall provide for the sale of general
merchandise, apparel, furniture, home furnishings, and other retail sales and
services, in full depth and variety.
   REGISTERED ENGINEER. An engineer properly licensed and registered in the
state.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor properly licensed and registered
in the state.
   REHABILITATION CENTER (HALFWAY HOUSE). An establishment whose primary
purpose is the rehabilitation of persons. Such services include drug and
alcohol rehabilitation, assistance to emotionally and mentally disturbed
persons, and halfway houses for prison parolees and juveniles. Customary uses
and customary accessory uses for rehabilitation center activity do not include
medical clinic, homeless shelter, food distribution or social services.
   RELIGIOUS, CULTURAL AND FRATERNAL ACTIVITY. A use or building owned or
maintained by an organized religious organization or nonprofit association
determined by the Internal Revenue Service as qualified under § 501(c)(3) or
(4) of the Internal Revenue Code, and used for social, civic or philanthropic
purposes, or the purpose for which persons regularly assemble for worship.
Customary uses and customary accessory uses for RELIGIOUS, CULTURAL AND
FRATERNAL ACTIVITY do not include medical clinic, homeless shelter, food
distribution, rehabilitation center or social services.
   RENOVATION. Interior or exterior remodeling of a structure, other than
ordinary repair.
   REQUIRED YARD. The minimum setback from the property line as stated within
this chapter.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment which sells prepared food for consumption.
RESTAURANTS shall be classified as follows:
      (1)   FAST FOOD RESTAURANT which is an establishment which sells food
already prepared for consumption, packaged in paper, Styrofoam or similar
materials, and may include drive-in or drive-up facilities for ordering;
      (2)   GENERAL RESTAURANT which is an establishment which is used
primarily for the on-site preparation, sale, serving and consumption of food
and non-alcoholic beverages, and, if also licensed as a private club, where
alcoholic beverages by the drink may also be served for consumption on the
premises as an accessory to the principal use as a restaurant; and
      (3)   TAKE-OUT RESTAURANT which is an establishment which sells food only
for consumption off the premises.
   RESUBDIVISION. A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat
if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon
for public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any map or plan legally
recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
   REVOLVING SIGN. A sign that revolves 360 degrees about an axis. See also
ANIMATED SIGN, MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees or for another
special use. RIGHT-OF-WAY for landplatting purposes means that every right-of-
way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and
distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included
within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. RIGHTS-OF-WAY intended
for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, shade
trees or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be
dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such RIGHT-OF-WAY is
established.
   ROAD, CLASSIFICATIONS. The classification of each street, highway, road and
right-of-way, based upon its location in the respective zoning districts of the
city and its present and estimated future traffic volume and its relative
importance and function as specified in the comprehensive plan of the city.
   ROAD, DEAD-END. A road or a portion of a street with only one vehicular
traffic outlet.
   ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH. The distance between property lines measured at
right angles to the centerline of the street.
   ROOF LINE. The top edge of a peaked roof or, in the case of an extended
facade or parapet, the uppermost point of said facade or parapet.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign mounted on, and supported by, the main roof portion of a
building, or above the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and which
is wholly or partially supported by such a building. Signs mounted on mansard
facades, pent eaves and architectural projections such as canopies or marquees
shall not be considered to be ROOF SIGNS.
   SALE or LEASE. Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or any
possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, device,
interstate succession, or transfer, of an interest in a subdivision of part
thereof, whether by metes and bound, deed, contract, plat, map, lease, devise,
interstate succession or other written instrument.
   SALVAGE YARD. Any location whose primary use is where waste or scrap
materials are stored, bought, sold, accumulated, exchanged, packaged,
disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, materials such as scrap
metals, paper, rags, tires and bottles.
   SAME OWNERSHIP. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm entity,
partnership or unincorporated association; or ownership by different
corporations, firms, partnerships, entities or unincorporated associations, in
which a stockholder, partner or associate, or a member of his or her family
owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity or
unincorporated association.
   SECONDARY ARTERIAL. A road intended to collect and distribute traffic in a
manner similar to primary arterials, except that these roads service minor
traffic-generating areas such as community-commercial areas, primary and
secondary educational plants, hospitals, major recreational areas, churches and
offices, and/or are designed to carry traffic from collector streets to the
system of primary arterials.
   SECONDARY SOCIAL SERVICES. Social services such as counseling, education and
referral, training, indoor recreational facilities and similar services
supportive to the primary social services offered at a social service facility.
SECONDARY SOCIAL SERVICES may only be provided during day and evening hours and
shall not include overnight accommodations.
   SETBACK. The minimum required distance between the property line and the
building line.
   SHADE TREE. A tree in a public place, street, special easement or right-of-
way adjoining a street as provided in the subdivision regulations.
   SHELTER or MISSION. A facility whose general purpose is to provide temporary
food, clothing or sleeping accommodations to persons, families or parts of
families on a temporary occupancy who are homeless or displaced. Short term
counseling during stay may also be provided. The SHELTER shall have appropriate
supervisory personnel. Such facility must meet all applicable standards of the
Department of Health, State Fire Marshal and any other federal, state, county
or city agency which has regulatory power over said facility.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A group of three or more retail business and service uses
on a single site with common parking facilities.
   SIDE YARD. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building and
between the building line and the side lot line, or to the ordinary high water
line.
   SIGHTLINE. A three and one-half foot vertical zone, eye level of the driver
of a vehicle, above the finished grade level of the cartway at the centerline
of the right-of-way.
   SIGHT TRIANGLE AREA. A triangle, two sides of which are formed by the
intersection of street centerlines and the third side by the sight line.
   SIGN. Any device visible from a public place that displays either commercial
or noncommercial messages by means of graphic presentation of alphabetic or
pictorial symbols or representations. Noncommercial flags or any flags
displayed from flagpoles or staffs will not be considered to be SIGNS.
   SIGN AREA. The area of the smallest geometric figure, or the sum of the
combination of regular geometric figures, which comprise the sign face. The
area of any double-sided or “V” shaped sign shall be the area of the largest
single face only. The area shall be computed as the area of the circle. The
area of all other multiple-sided signs shall be computed as 50% of the sum of
the area of all faces of the sign.
   SIGN COPY. Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, exclusive of numerals
identifying a street address only.
   SIGN FACE. The surface upon, against or through which the sign copy is
displayed or illustrated, not including structural supports, architectural
features of a building or sign structure, nonstructural or decorative trim, or
any areas that are separated from the background surface upon which the sign
copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a reveal or border.
      (1)   In the case of panel or cabinet type signs, the SIGN FACE shall
include the entire area of the sign panel, cabinet or face substrate upon which
the sign copy is displayed or illustrated, but not open space between separate
panels or cabinets.
      (2)   In the case of sign structures with routed areas of sign copy, the
SIGN FACE shall include the entire area of the surface that is routed, except
where interrupted by a reveal, border or a contrasting surface or color.
      (3)   In the case of signs painted on a building, or individual letters
or graphic elements affixed to a building or structure, the sign face shall
comprise the sum of the geometric figures or combination of regular geometric
figures drawn closest to the edge of the letters or separate graphic elements
comprising the sign copy, but not the open space between separate groupings of
sign copy with the color of the building or structure.
      (4)   In the case of sign copy enclosed within a painted or illuminated
border, or displayed on a background contrasting in color with the color of the
building or structure, the SIGN FACE shall comprise the area within the
contrasting background, or within the painted or illuminated border.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure supporting a sign.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. Detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping
facilities, designed for occupancy by one family.
   SITE PLAN. A plan which outlines the use and development of any tract of
land.
   SKETCH PLAT. A sketch preparatory to the preparation of the preliminary plat
(or subdivision plat in the case of minor subdivisions) to enable the
subdivider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the
Commission as to the form of the plat and the objectives of the subdivision
regulations.
   SOCIAL SERVICES. Any service regularly provided to the public to address
public welfare and health such as, but not limited to, the provision of food
and hygiene care.
   SOCIAL SERVICE FACILITY (SSF). A facility, whether operated by a charitable
organization or a church, that regularly provides social services and secondary
social services as defined herein, and includes those services provided by an
addiction treatment center, and/or a food distribution center. Medical uses
such as physical therapy or similar uses are not provided by a SOCIAL SERVICE
FACILITY.
   SPA. See PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL.
   SPECIAL CARE MANUFACTURED HOME. A home used as a temporary dwelling for a
family member who is in need of special, frequent and routine care by reason of
advanced age or ill health.
   SPORTING EVENT. Any event licensed under the authority of the State Athletic
Commission in W. Va. Code Chapter 29, Article 5A, as amended, or licensed under
the authority of another agency of the state.
   SPRAWL. Poorly planned or uncontrolled growth, usually of a low-density
nature, within previously rural areas, that is land consumptive, auto-
dependent, designed without respect to its surroundings, and some distance from
existing development and infrastructure.
   STORY. The portion of building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost
story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of
the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a usable or unused under-floor space is more than six feet above
grade as defined herein for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is more
than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such usable or unused
underfloor space shall be considered as a STORY.
   STREET. A dedicated thoroughfare or public way such as a street, avenue,
boulevard, highway, road, lane, alley and is not less than 16 feet in width.
   STREET LINE. The line defining the edge of the legal width of a dedicated
street right-of-way.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person who:
      (1)   Having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to
be divided into a subdivision;
      (2)   Directly or indirectly, sells, leases or develops, or offers to
sell, lease or develop, or advertises for sale, lease or development, any
interest, lot, parcel site, unit or plat in a subdivision;
      (3)   Engages directly or through an agent in the business of selling,
leasing, developing or offering for sale, lease or development a subdivision or
any interest, lot, parcel site, unit or plat in a subdivision; and
      (4)   Is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct or
indirect common control with any of the foregoing.
   SUBDIVISION. Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to
be divided into two or more lots, parcels, sites, unit, plots or interests for
the purpose of offer, sale, lease or development, either on the installment
plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and conditions, including
resubdivision. SUBDIVISION includes the division or development of residential
and nonresidential zoned land, whether by deed, metes and bounds description,
devise, intestacy, lease, map, plat or other recorded instrument.
   SUBDIVISION AGENT. Any person who represents, or acts for or on behalf of, a
subdivider or developer, in selling, leasing or developing, or offering to
sell, lease or develop any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site or plat in a
subdivision, except an attorney-at-law whose representation of another person
consists solely of rendering legal services.
   SUBDIVISION PLAT. The final map or drawing, described in the subdivision
regulations, on which the subdivider’s plan of subdivision is presented to the
Planning Commission for approval and which, if approved, may be submitted to
the County Clerk for filing.
   SWIMMING POOL. See PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL or PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL.
   TEMPORARY BUILDING. A building used temporarily for the storage of
construction materials and equipment incidental and necessary to on-site
permitted construction of utilities, or other community facilities, or used
temporarily in conjunction with the sale of property within a subdivision under
construction.
   TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT. Improvements built and maintained by a subdivider
during construction of the subdivision and prior to release of the performance
bond.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign intended to display either commercial or
noncommercial messages of a transitory or temporary nature. Portable signs or
any sign not permanently embedded in the ground, or not permanently affixed to
a building or sign structure that is permanently embedded in the ground, are
not considered TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   TEMPORARY USE. A use that is authorized by this chapter to be conducted for
a fixed period of time. TEMPORARY USES are characterized by such activities as
the sale of agricultural products, contractors’ offices and equipment sheds,
fireworks, carnivals, flea markets and garage sales.
   THEATER. A building used primarily for the presentation of live stage
productions, performances or motion pictures.
   TINY HOUSE or TINY HOME. A single-family residential structure that
satisfies the following requirements.
      (1)   Site requirements:
         (a)   If newly constructed, construction shall be in accordance with
construction drawings and a site plan (drawn to scale or dimensioned to all lot
lines to other structures on the same lot) indicating how the TINY HOUSE will
be constructed and how it will be located on the building site, such drawings
and site plan to first be submitted for approval to the City Building Official;
TINY HOMES that are constructed shall be constructed upon permanent foundations
meeting the 2015 International Residential Code Ch. 4; or
         (b)   If a factory built tiny home, it shall be installed in
accordance with a site plan (drawn to scale or dimensioned to all lot lines and
other structures on the same lot) indicating how the TINY HOUSE will be located
on the building site, such site plan to first be submitted for approval to the
City Building Inspector; provided, that, structures built to ANSI A119.5: Park
Model Recreational Vehicle Standard shall not be acceptable as a TINY HOUSE. A
factory built tiny house shall be permanently installed upon a permanent
foundation meeting the 2015 International Residential Code Ch. 4.
      (2)   No TINY HOUSE unit shall be less than 13 feet in width.
      (3)   Minimum square footage shall not account for the required cooking
facilities and toilet facility areas, which are required in addition to the
minimum clear floor area of 120 square feet for a single occupant and 220
square feet for two occupants and 300 square feet for three occupants. The
maximum number of occupants shall not exceed three.
      (4)   TINY HOMES must have at least one habitable room with not less than
120 square feet of clear floor area.
      (5)   Other habitable rooms must have not less than 70 square feet of
floor area (except for kitchens).
      (6)   Habitable rooms must not be less than seven feet in any horizontal
dimension.
      (7)   Ceiling heights must be a minimum seven feet in habitable spaces,
hallways, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
      (8)   Ceiling height effect on floor area: portions of a sloped ceiling
measuring less than five feet or a furred ceiling measuring less than seven
feet from the finished floor; floor areas below these ceilings shall not be
permitted to contribute to the minimum required habitable area or that room.
      (9)   TINY HOMES shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking
appliances and refrigeration facilities each providing the minimum clear
working space of 30 inches in front.
      (10)   Habitable rooms shall be provided with light and ventilation via
operable glazing not less than 8% of floor area.
      (11)   TINY HOMES shall provide a heating facility capable of maintaining
a minimum 68°F.
      (12)   TINY HOMES shall be provided with connection to an approved method
of sewage disposal and an approved water supply to facilitate providing hot and
cold water.
      (13)   Units shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a
water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
      (14)   Units shall meet the means of egress requirements of IRC R311.1
and the Emergency Escape and Rescue opening provisions of R310.1.1: Minimum
opening area, height, width and operational constraints.
      (15)   Stairways shall not be less than 36 inches wide, have a maximum
eight inch riser and nine inch tread unless built as a spiral stairway in
accordance with R311.7.9.1. Ladders/”Ship ladders” are not approved.
      (16)   Electrical systems shall be in accordance with the 2014 National
Electrical Code (as amended).
      (17)   TINY HOMES shall meet all zoning requirements: setbacks, lot
sizes, off-street parking and the like in addition to any community protective
covenant requirements where applicable.
      (18)   TINY HOMES shall meet all building thermal envelope requirements
(as amended) of the 2009 ICC Energy Conservation Code.
      (19)   TINY HOMES are not a manufactured home as defined by West Virginia
Code, and no regulation addressing a TINY HOME will apply to a manufactured
home.
   TOURISM ATTRACTION. A cultural or historical site, a recreation or
entertainment facility, an area of natural phenomena or scenic beauty, a state
crafts or products center or a tourism destination center, but shall not
include only a lodging facility unless the lodging facility constitutes a
portion of a tourism destination center.
   TOWN HOUSE. A type of dwelling unit normally having two, but sometimes
three, stories, usually connected to a similar structure by a common wall, and
commonly sharing and owning in common the surrounding grounds.
   TRAILER. A licensed or unlicensed piece of mobile equipment designed or
constructed to be towed by a motor vehicle, on or off the public highways.
   TRAILER PARK. A lot or premises occupied or designed for occupancy by two or
more mobile homes.
   UNDER CANOPY SIGN or UNDER MARQUEE SIGN. A sign attached to the underside of
a canopy or marquee.
   URBAN AREA. All lands or lots within the jurisdiction of a the Planning
Commission.
   USE. The activity occurring on a lot or parcel for which land or a building
is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be
occupied, including all accessory uses.
   UTILITY. A public or private distribution service to the public that is
regulated by the state’s Public Service Commission.
   V SIGN. A signs containing two faces of approximately equal size, erected
upon common or separate structures, positioned in a “V” shape with an interior
angle between faces of not more than 90 degrees with the distance between the
sign faces not exceeding five feet at their closest point.
   VARIANCE. A deviation from the height, bulk, setback, parking or other
dimensional requirements established by this chapter.
   VOCATION SCHOOL or TRADE SCHOOL. A secretarial or business school or college
when not publicly owned or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a
religious, charitable or non-profit organization, or a school conducted as a
business enterprise for teaching instrumental music, dancing, barbering or hair
styling, drafting, or for the teaching of industrial or technical arts.
   WALL SIGN or FASCIA SIGN. A sign that is in any manner affixed to any
exterior wall of a building or structure and that projects not more than 18
inches from the building or structure wall, including signs affixed to
architectural projections from a building provided the copy area of such signs
remains on a parallel plane to the face of the building facade or to the face
or faces of the architectural projection to which it is affixed.
   WHOLESALE WAREHOUSE or STORAGE WAREHOUSE. A building or premises in which
goods, merchandise or equipment are stored for eventual distribution.
   WEST VIRGINIA LOTTERY TABLE GAMES. The games authorized under W. Va. Code
Chapter 29, Article 22C, as amended.
   WINDOW SIGN. A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its message
intended to be visible to and readable from the public way or from adjacent
property.
   WRECKING YARD. Any place where damaged, inoperable or obsolete machinery
such as cars, trucks and trailers, or parts thereof, are stored, bought, sold,
accumulated, exchanged, disassembled or handled.
   YARD. An open, unoccupied space on a lot, other than a court, which is
unobstructed from the ground upward by buildings or structures, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
   ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT. Single-family dwellings arranged on individual
lots as either detached structures with one or more side walls on a side
property line.
   ZONING. The division of a municipality into districts which specify
permitted and conditional uses and development standards for real property
within the districts.
   ZONING MAP. A map that geographically illustrates all zoning district
boundaries within the city, as described within the zoning regulations, and
which is certified as the official zoning map for the municipality or county.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. passed 8-7-2018; Ord.
passed 8-16-2019)
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 152.025 DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS.
   In order to classify, regulate and restrict the locations of uses and
locations of buildings designated for specific areas, and to regulate and
determine the areas of yards, courts and other open spaces within or
surrounding such buildings, property is classified into zoning districts.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.026 MINIMUM AREAS FOR ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Minimum areas. The minimum areas that may constitute a separate or
detached part of any of the following zoning districts on the zoning map or
subsequent amendments to said zoning map shall be as shown in table below.
   (B)   Inclusion in calculations. When a nonresidential district is directly
across the street from or abuts the district with the same or less restrictive
classification, the area of the land directly across the street or abutting the
property may be included in the calculations in meeting the minimum district
size requirements.
Area, Yard Requirements, and Building Heights
Minimum Yard Requirement
                             Minimum Lot Size                Principal Building
                             Width        Depth
         Permitted Area      Front  Rear  Front  Rear  Side          Maximum
Category Uses      (Sq. Ft.) (Ft.)  (Ft.) (Ft.)  (Ft.) (Ft.) Stories Height
                                                                     (Ft.)
Area, Yard Requirements, and Building Heights
Minimum Yard Requirement
                                Minimum Lot Size                Principal
                                                                Building
                                Width        Depth
                         Area   Front  Rear  Front  Rear  Side          Maximum
Category Permitted Uses  (Sq.   (Ft.)  (Ft.) (Ft.)  (Ft.) (Ft.) Stories Height
                         Ft.)                                           (Ft.)
         Single-family
R-1      dwelling,       5,000  50     50    20     5     5     2-1/2   30
         public quasi
         public
R-2      Same as R-1 and 3,000  50     50    20     5     5     2-1/2   30
         multi-family
         Same as R-1 and
R-3      R-2 plus mobile 5,000  50     50    20     5     5     2-1/2   30
         home
         Retail and
         service
B-1      establishments, 0      50     20    Non e  20    None  3       40
         offices,
         shopping
         centers
         Same as B-1,
B-2      commercial      0      50     20    Non e  20    None  3       40
         oriented
         activity
         Same as B-1 and
         heavy
         commercial,
C-1      wholesale,      7,200  50     20    Non e  20    None  N/A     None
         warehouses,
         distribution
         centers
D-1      Destination     10,000 None   None  None   None  None  N/A     None
         Tourism
         Light
         Industrial,
I-1      same as C-1 and 10,000 25     20    25     20    None  N/A     None
         activities of
         an industrial
         nature
 
   (C)   From 4th Street to 40th Street along First Avenue, the combined width
of lots to be included in either the B-1 or B-2 category, as applicable, and
extending from the street line of First Avenue shall be the greater of 200 feet
or four lots; provided, that any lots within the four lot restriction that is
in the Class-1, Class-2 or Class-3 category and is not used and occupied for
residential purposes for a period of six consecutive months shall be eligible
to be reclassified as either Class B-1 or Class B-2, as appropriate.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 152.027 ZONING MAP.
   The boundaries of each zoning district are to be indicated upon the official
zoning map as approved by the City Council. Said map and subsequent amendments
thereto shall be considered as a part of this chapter and incorporated herein
by reference.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.028 ANNEXED TERRITORY.
    Any territory hereafter annexed shall automatically, upon such annexation,
be classified as R-l, Residential District and be subject to all conditions and
regulations applicable to property in such district; provided, that the R-
1 residential classification may be changed by the Planning Commission at some
time subsequent to annexation.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.029 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The principal objective of this subchapter is to provide for an orderly
arrangement of compatible buildings and land uses, and for the property
location of all types of uses required for the social and economic welfare of
the community. To accomplish this objective, each type and kind of use is
classified as permitted in one or more of the various use districts established
by this chapter. However, in addition to those uses specifically classified and
permitted in each district, there are certain additional uses which it may be
necessary to allow because of the unusual characteristics of the service they
provide the public. These conditional uses require particular considerations as
to their proper location to adjacent, established or intended uses, or to the
planned growth of the community. The conditions controlling the locations and
operation of such special uses are established by the applicable sections of
this chapter.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
AGRICULTURAL ZONES
§ 152.040 AGRICULTURAL ZONES DEFINED.
   Allowable agricultural (A) zone uses shall be:
 
A-1 Any designated open space as set forth in this chapter
    Any agricultural use, including, but not limited to, dwellings,
A-2 maintenance/storage buildings and other such uses necessary for the
    principal use
    Any public parkland or other similar recreational use, including, but not
A-3 limited to, playground rides and equipment, office buildings, retail
    buildings and dwellings necessary for the maintenance of the principal use
 
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.041 BULK REGULATIONS.
   The minimum area, setbacks, density and maximum height shall be as
prescribed in the table below.
Agricultural (A) Zone Bulk Regulations
(in feet, unless noted otherwise)
         Minimum  Maximum Minimum Minimum Minimu  Minimum   Minimum   Maximu m
Zone     Lot Area Density Lot     Lot     Setback Setback   Setback   Building
Division (acres)  Units/  Width   Depth   Front   Side Yard Rear Yard Height
                  Acres                   Yard
Agricultural (A) Zone Bulk Regulations
(in feet, unless noted otherwise)
         Minimum  Maximum Minimum Minimum Minimu  Minimum   Minimum   Maximu m
Zone     Lot Area Density Lot     Lot     Setback Setback   Setback   Building
Division (acres)  Units/  Width   Depth   Front   Side Yard Rear Yard Height
                  Acres                   Yard
A-1      20 acres 1 DU/20 600     600     30      15        60        35
                  acres
A-2      10 acres 1 DU/10 400     400     30      15        60        35
                  acres
A-3      5 acres  1 DU/   250     250     30      15        60        35
                  5 acres
Notes:
a.   Open spaces and parks can be of a reduced size, if approved
b.   Access storage structures, windmills and similar structures shall be
permitted to exceed maximum height when approved by the Code Official
 
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
§ 152.055 R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE ZONE.
   (A)   Permitted uses. In R-1 Single-Family Residential Zones, the following
uses of buildings may be permitted:
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;
      (2)   Educational, religious and philanthropic uses when not conducted as
a gainful business;
      (3)   Public parks, playgrounds, play lots and community centers not
conducted as a gainful business;
      (4)   City administrative buildings or public service buildings, except
storage yard or sidings, equipment storage or warehouses;
      (5)   Existing railroad rights-of-way, not including switching yards,
storage yards or sidings;
      (6)   Home gardening without sale of products; and
      (7)   A bed and breakfast facility; provided, that the parking for a bed
and breakfast facility shall provide vehicle parking as required in the table
in §
152.130 of this chapter.
   (B)   Permitted uses when authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals. In R-
1 Single-Family Residential Zones, the following uses of buildings may be
permitted when authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a special
exception:
      (1)   Group care facility if adjacent to R-2 District or if part of such
project if in R-1 and R-2 Districts;
      (2)   Single-family residences on lots that do not otherwise satisfy the
area requirements for R-1 single family residences;
      (3)   Home occupation; provided, that any home-based occupation and any
home-based business shall be licensed as required by §§
38.070 et seq.;
      (4)   Cemeteries;
      (5)   Kindergartens or nursery schools provided the play lots are
suitably fenced or screened in accordance with requirements of the Board;
      (6)   Essential utilities and equipment; and
      (7)   Private non-profit recreational facilities in the nature of
swimming clubs, tennis clubs and other similar activities, when not located
less than 50 feet from any other lot in an R District and when the facility
meets with the parking and fencing requirements of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses. In R-1 Single Family Residential Zones, the
following accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   Any accessory building 150 square feet or greater in size or that
has any utility service installed shall be separated from the main building by
ten feet and shall also be in compliance with all setback regulations;
provided, that any accessory building less than 150 square feet in size that is
used for storage or other similar use shall be permitted to be located in any
portion of the rear yard or side yard. No storage building shall be located in
the front yard;
      (2)   All signs within an R-1 Single Family Residential Zone shall be
subject to the restrictions in §§
152.165 through
152.170 of this chapter; and
      (3)   Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted
principal use.
   (D)   Lot areas. In any R-1 Single-Family Residential Zones, the area of
lots of record at the time of enactment of this chapter shall be considered
adequate for the erection of permitted buildings and uses, provided that they
are not less than 2,400 square feet.
   (E)   Lot widths. In any R-1 Single-Family Residential Zones, the width of
lots of record at the time of enactment of this chapter shall be considered
adequate, provided that they are not less than 40 feet in width.
Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter,
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall permit erection of a dwelling or structure on
any lot shown upon a platted record in a R-1 Single Family Residential Zone
separately owned or under contract of sale and containing, at the time of
passage of this chapter, an area or width smaller than that required by this
chapter; provided, that the Board of Zoning Appeals shall require yard areas
and other restrictions governed by this chapter equal to the average of those
contained on existing built-upon lots along the street on which is located the
lot in question.
   (F)   Front yards. In any R-1 Single-Family Residential Zones, the front
yard of any lot of record at the time of enactment of this chapter shall be
equal to the average front yards of existing developed lots on the street on
which it is located. In the absence of developed lots along any such streets,
the minimum front yard shall be 20 feet.
   (G)   Side yards. In any R-1 Single Family Residential Zones, the side yards
of lots of record at the enactment of this chapter shall be equal to the
average side yards of developed lots on the street on which they are located,
but in no case less than five feet; provided, that no accessory building or
structure shall be closer than three feet from the side yard lot line. This
accessory building or structure side yard exception shall not apply to corner
lots.
   (H)   Rear yards. In R-1 Single-Family Residential Zones rear yards shall
not be less than 40 feet in width; provided, that no accessory building or
structure shall be closer than five feet from the rear lot line. This accessory
building or structure rear yard exception shall not apply to corner lots.
   (I)   Residential structure requirements.
      (1)   Building height. In R-1 Single-Family Residential Zones, single-
family detached dwelling shall not exceed two and one-half stories or 30 feet
in height. Structures associated with other permissive or excepted uses shall
not exceed three stories or 50 feet in height.
      (2)   Roof overhang. In R-1 Single-Family Residential Zones, single-
family detached dwelling, roof overhang and eaves shall be designed for a
minimum of six inches as measured from the vertical side of the building and
not including rain gutters, which are required.
      (3)   Building width. In R-1 Single-Family Residential Zones, single-
family detached dwelling, no housing unit shall be less than 24 feet in width.
   (J)   Factory built housing units. The value of any factory built home sited
in a R-1 Single-Family Residential Zone shall be equal to or greater than the
average value of all existing homes located within 350 feet in each direction
from the factory built home site; provided, that the burden of establishing the
value of existing homes located within 350 feet of the factory built home site
shall be upon the owner of the factory built home.
   (K)   Tiny home housing units. The value of any tiny home, as defined in §
152.011, sited in a R-1 Single-Family Residential Zone shall be equal to or
greater than the average value of all existing homes located within 350 feet in
each direction from tiny home site; provided, that the burden of establishing
the value of existing homes located within 350 feet of the tiny home site shall
be upon the owner of the tiny home.
   (L)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. In R-1 Single-Family
Residential Zones, off-street parking and loading requirements be scheduled
according to the provisions of §
152.130 of this chapter.
   (M)   Prohibited uses. On and after August 8, 2018, rehabilitation center
activities, addiction treatment center activities, food distribution center
activities, social service activities, secondary social service activities or
homeless shelter activities may not be provided at any structure, whether
operated as a social services facility, church or similar charity, within 1,000
feet of a school, playground, library, athletic field or park, senior citizen
living facility, public swimming pool or city park.
   (N)   Location. On and after August 8, 2018, structures providing
rehabilitation center activities, addiction treatment center activities, food
distribution center activities, social service activities, secondary social
service activities or homeless shelter activities may not be located within
1,000 feet of each other.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. passed 8-7-2018; Ord.
passed 8-16-2019; Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 152.056 R-2 GENERAL RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   All uses permitted in R-l Single-Family Residential Zones;
      (2)   Duplex and multi-family dwellings;
      (3)   Rooming house;
      (4)   Bed and breakfast, if located adjacent to a state road;
      (5)   Congregate residence;
      (6)   General hospital, or a sanitarium or nursing home not for
contagious diseases; provided, that such buildings shall be not less than 50
feet from any other lot in any R District;
      (7)   Public library;
      (8)   Professional office in conjunction with a residence, when no more
than two individuals are employed; and
      (9)   Home occupation; provided, that any home-based occupation and any
home-based business shall be licensed as required by §§
38.070 et seq.;
   (B)   When authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals. In R-2 General
Residential Zones, the following uses and buildings may be permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a special exception:
      (1)   Group care facilities, half-way houses or group homes for drug or
alcoholic addicts; and institutions not for penal, corrective or behavioral
health purposes; and
      (2)   Private clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations, social or
recreational buildings or properties when not conducted as a gainful business.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses. In R-2 General Residential Zones, the
following accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   All R-1 Single Family Residential Zones accessory uses; and
      (2)   Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted
principal use, including signs, subject however, to the provisions of §§
152.165 through
152.170 if this chapter.
   (D)   Lot areas.
      (1)   In R-2 General Residential Zones, no lot shall be less than 3,000
square feet in area, subject however, to the provision that this minimum area
shall be increased by 1,200 additional square feet for each dwelling unit more
than one that is contained in the structure.
      (2)   In areas in excess of 25% slope, the above stated minimum lot areas
shall be increased by 15%.
   (E)   Lot widths. In R-2 General Residential Zones, lot widths shall not be
less than 60 feet. Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by other provisions
of this chapter the Board of Zoning Appeals shall permit erection of a dwelling
or structure on any lot shown upon a platted record in a R-2 General
Residential Zone separately owned or under contract of sale and containing, at
the time of passage of this chapter, an area or width smaller than that
required by this chapter; provided, that the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
require yard areas and other restrictions governed by this chapter equal to the
average of those contained on existing built-upon lots along the street on
which is located the lot in question.
   (F)   Front yards. In R-2 General Residential Zones, front yards shall be
subject to the same provisions as specified for R-1 Single Family Residential
Zones.
   (G)   Side yards. In R-2 General Residential Zones, side yards shall be
subject to the same provisions as specified for R-1 Single Family Residential
Zones.
   (H)   Rear yards. In R-2 General Residential Zones, rear yards shall not be
less than 40 feet in width, provided however, that for any structure in excess
of three stories in height, the rear yard shall be increased by five additional
feet for each story.
   (I)   Residential structure requirements.
      (1)   Building heights. In R-2 General Residential Zones, residential
structures shall not exceed two and one-half stories or 30 feet in height.
Structures associated with other permissive or excepted uses shall not exceed
six stories.
      (2)   Roof overhang. In R-2 General Residential Zones, roof overhang and
eaves shall be designed for a minimum of six inches as measured from the
vertical side of the building and not including rain gutters, which are
required.
      (3)   Building width. In R-2 General Residential Zones, no housing unit
shall be less than 24 feet in width.
   (J)   Factory built housing units. The value of any factory built home sited
in a R-2 General Zone shall be equal to or greater than the average value of
all existing homes located within 350 feet in each direction from the factory
built home site; provided, that the burden of establishing the value of
existing homes located within 350 feet of the factory built home site shall be
upon the owner of the factory built home.
   (K)   Tiny home housing units. The value of any tiny home, as defined in §
152.011, sited in a R-2 Single-Family Residential Zone shall be equal to or
greater than the average value of all existing homes located within 350 feet in
each direction from tiny home site; provided, that the burden of establishing
the value of existing homes located within 350 feet of the tiny home site shall
be upon the owner of the tiny home.
   (L)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. In R-2 General
Residential Zones, off-street parking and loading requirements shall be
scheduled according to the provisions of §§
152.130 through
152.137 of this chapter.
   (M)   Prohibited uses. On and after August 8, 2018, rehabilitation center
activities, addiction treatment center activities, food distribution center
activities, social service activities, secondary social service activities or
homeless shelter activities may not be provided at any structure, whether
operated as a social services facility, church or similar charity, within 1,000
feet of a school, playground, library, athletic field or park, senior citizen
living facility, public swimming pool or city park.
   (N)   Location. On and after August 8, 2018, structures providing
rehabilitation center activities, addiction treatment center activities, food
distribution center activities, social service activities, secondary social
service activities or homeless shelter activities may not be located within
1,000 feet of each other.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. passed 8-7-2018; Ord.
passed 8-16-2019; Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 152.057 R-3 GENERAL RESIDENTIAL, FACTORY-BUILT HOME, MOBILE HOME AND MOBILE
HOME PARKS.
   (A)   Permitted uses. In R-3 General Residential, Mobile Home and Mobile
Home Parks Zones, the following buildings and uses are permitted:
      (1)   All uses permitted in R-1 Single-Family Residential Zones and R-
2 General Residential Zones; provided, that any home-based occupation and any
home-based business shall be licensed as required by §§
38.070 et seq.;
      (2)   Mobile home parks when established and operated in accordance with
published standards of either Kanawha County or Putnam County, whichever is
applicable for the location of the mobile home park, and the state; provided,
that the following are additional requirements:
         (a)   A mobile home park site shall be comprised of a minimum of two
acres, and shall provide a minimum of 5,000 square feet of net area per mobile
home unit;
         (b)   Off-street parking for two automobiles for each mobile home
unit;
         (c)   Setbacks for residential areas shall prevail, but no part of
this open space shall be used for any of the mobile home site functions;
         (d)   Mobile home parks will be enclosed on side yards and rear lot
lines, unless extending from one street to another. A six-foot wall or barrier
of fire resistant material or a strip of trees or shrubs at least two feet wide
and three feet high at the time of planting which will form a year round dense
screen at least six feet high within three years must be provided;
         (e)   No spot or flood lights shall be used for lighting or
advertising purposes. No lighting shall shine on adjacent properties; and
         (f)   All points of entrance or exit for motor vehicles shall be
located no less than 125 feet from the intersection of two streets.
      (3)   Individual single-wide mobile homes, double-wide mobile homes,
single-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings located in a R-3 General
Residential, Mobile Home and Mobile Home Parks Zones or in other than a R-
3 General Residential, Mobile Home and Mobile Home Parks Zone shall be subject
to the requirements stated in §
152.026 of this chapter;
      (4)   Tiny home housing units: the value of any tiny home, as defined in
§
152.011, sited in a R- 3 General Residential, Mobile Home and Mobile Home Parks
Zone shall be equal to or greater than the average value of all existing homes
located within 350 feet in each direction from tiny home site; provided, that
the burden of establishing the value of existing homes located within 350 feet
of the tiny home site shall be upon the owner of the tiny home; and
      (5)   Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by other provisions of this
chapter the Board of Zoning Appeals shall permit erection of a dwelling or
structure on any lot shown upon a platted record in a R-3 General Residential
Zone separately owned or under contract of sale and containing, at the time of
passage of this chapter, an area or width smaller than that required by this
chapter; provided, that the Board of Zoning Appeals shall require yard areas
and other restrictions governed by this chapter equal to the average of those
contained on existing built-upon lots along the street on which is located the
lot in question.
   (B)   Prohibited uses. On and after August 8, 2018, rehabilitation center
activities, addiction treatment center activities, food distribution center
activities, social service activities, secondary social service activities or
homeless shelter activities may not be provided at any structure, whether
operated as a social services facility, church or similar charity, within 1,000
feet of a school, playground, library, athletic field or park, senior citizen
living facility, public swimming pool, or city park.
   (C)   Location. On and after August 8, 2018, structures providing
rehabilitation center activities, addiction treatment center activities, food
distribution center activities, social service activities, secondary social
service activities or homeless shelter activities may not be located within
1,000 feet of each other.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. passed 8-7-2018; Ord.
passed 8-16-2019; Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
BUSINESS ZONES
§ 152.070 B-1 LOCAL OR NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS ZONES.
   (A)   Permitted uses. In any Local or Neighborhood Business Zone, the use of
land and buildings shall be limited to any neighborhood retail business or
service establishment, supplying commodities or performing services intended
primarily for residents of the surrounding neighborhood, such as:
      (1)   Barber or beauty shop;
      (2)   Business or professional office;
      (3)   Clothes cleaning or laundry pick up station;
      (4)   Self-service laundry;
      (5)   Delicatessen;
      (6)   Drug store;
      (7)   Grocery store;
      (8)   Meat market;
      (9)   Convenience and neighborhood commercial centers (excluding
wholesale sales);
      (10)   Family and group day care;
      (11)   Libraries;
      (12)   Places of worship;
      (13)   Police and fire stations, and other government services;
      (14)   Bed and breakfast facility; and
      (15)   Similar activities.
   (B)   Along state and federal highways.
      (1)   Along state or federal highways, the above permissive uses may be
permitted but shall not be limited to supplying commodities or performing
services for residents of the neighborhood;
      (2)   Other permitted uses along state and federal highways, such as:
         (a)   Antique or gift shop;
         (b)   Gasoline service stations;
         (c)   Automobile sales;
         (d)   Automobile service garages, see the table in §
152.026 of this chapter for required vehicle parking;
         (e)   Automobile or trailer sales lot;
         (f)   Commercial parking lot;
         (g)   Drive-in eating or drinking establishment;
         (h)   Motel and hotel;
         (i)   Tourist home; and
         (j)   Similar businesses.
      (3)   Automobile body repair shops, but see the table in §
152.026 of this chapter for required vehicle parking;
      (4)   Mortuary and funeral homes;
      (5)   Public utility stations;
      (6)   Restaurants;
      (7)   Business or financial services;
      (8)   Light commercial (excluding wholesale sales);
      (9)   Group care facilities;
      (10)   Physical fitness centers;
      (11)   Cultural and fraternal activities;
      (12)   Rehabilitation centers;
      (13)   Schools and colleges operated for profit (including commercial);
      (14)   Vocational and trade schools;
      (15)   Self-storage warehouses;
      (16)   Commercial printing and publishing; and
      (17)   Similar businesses.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses. In Local or Neighborhood Business Zones,
including those along state and federal highways, the following accessory
buildings and uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   Accessory parking areas;
      (2)   Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use, including signs attached flat against a building, and elevated
signs not exceeding 50 square feet in area per face, provided that these are at
least 15 feet from any street right-of-way; and
      (3)   On and after February 1, 2019, residential townhouses and
apartments that are a use that is accessory to a permitted use in divisions (A)
or (B) above; provided, that such uses meet all requirements for a habitable
dwelling.
   (D)   Prohibited uses.
      (1)   Any residential or industrial use except that which is clearly
necessary for and incidental to the conduct of a permitted retail business or
service of the premises or authorized by division (C)(3) above;
      (2)   Gambling establishments.
         (a)   On and after the effective dates of this division (D)(2) on
February 2, 2010, gambling establishments shall not be located within 3,000
feet of each other; provided, that on and after May 5, 2021, gambling
establishments shall not be located within 6,000 feet of each other.
         (b)   On and after the effective dates of this division (D)(2) on
February 2, 2010, no gambling establishment shall be located within 3,000 feet
of any church, place of worship, library, school, community center or publicly
owned property designated as a playground, park and under the control of the
city; provided, that on and after May 5, 2021, no gambling establishment shall
be located within 6,000 feet of any church, place of worship, library, school,
community center or publicly owned property designated as a playground, park
and under the control of the city.
         (c)   On and after May 5. 2021. any new gambling establishment not
already licensed and in existence in the city shall satisfy the following
requirements: it shall be an existing bar or restaurant: it shall have a
current business license issued under the authority of §
38.083 of this code of ordinances; and it shall be current and not delinquent
in the payment of any municipal fees or taxes.
         (d)   Upon the annexation into the city of any real property upon
which is situated a legally licensed and operating gambling establishment, the
use of the property as a gambling establishment, even if a nonconforming use,
shall continue until such time as the state’s Lottery Commission repeals,
withdraws or takes such other action that invalidates the license or licenses
required to allow legal gambling to occur at the gambling establishment.
      (3)   On and after August 8, 2018, rehabilitation center activities,
addiction treatment center activities, food distribution center activities,
social service activities, secondary social service activities or homeless
shelter activities may not be provided at any structure, whether operated as a
social services facility, church, or similar charity, within 1,000 feet of a
school, playground, library, athletic field or park, senior citizen living
facility, public swimming pool or city park.
      (4)   On and after August 8, 2018, structures providing rehabilitation
center activities, addiction treatment center activities, food distribution
center activities, social service activities, secondary social service
activities or homeless shelter activities may not be located within 1,000 feet
of each other.
   (E)   Lot areas. In any Local or Neighborhood Business Zone, no lot shall be
less than 7,200 square feet.
   (F)   Lot widths. In any Local or Neighborhood Business Zone, no lot shall
be less than 50 feet in width.
   (G)   Front yards. In any Local or Neighborhood Business Zone, no lot shall
have a front yard of less than 20 feet.
   (H)   Side yards. In any Local or Neighborhood Business Zone, common walls
shall be permitted and no side yards shall be required; provided, that where a
nonresidential use abuts a residential district, residential requirements must
be observed where the property abuts.
   (I)   Rear yards. In Local or Neighborhood Business Zone, rear yards shall
not be less than 20 feet in width.
   (J)   Building height. In any Local or Neighborhood Business Zone, no
building or structure shall exceed three stories.
   (K)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. In any Local or
Neighborhood Business Zone, off-street parking and loading requirements shall
be scheduled according to the provisions of the table in §
152.130.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. 10-2, passed 3-2-
2010; Ord. passed 8-7-2018; Ord. passed 1-15-2019; Ord. passed 5-4-2021)
§ 152.071 B-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS ZONE.
   (A)   Permitted uses. In any Central Business Zone, the following buildings
and uses only are permitted:
      (1)   All uses permitted in B-1 Local or Neighborhood Business Zones;
      (2)   Stores and shops for the conducting of any retail business;
      (3)   Personal service shops;
      (4)   Banks, offices and studios;
      (5)   Shops for custom work, and shops for making articles or products to
be sold at retail on the premises;
      (6)   Restaurants, cafes and similar establishments;
      (7)   Theaters, assembly halls, bowling alleys, amusement centers, golf
driving ranges, miniature golf courses, ice rinks, pool and billiard halls (and
similar recreational uses) and other public recreation uses;
      (8)   Retail building materials supply sales (wholesale and retail);
      (9)   Cultural institutions (such as museums and art galleries);
      (10)   Community commercial centers (including wholesale and retail
sales);
      (11)   Health and medical institutions (such as hospitals);
      (12)   Hotels and motels (excluding other residential occupancies);
      (13)   Commercial printing and publishing;
      (14)   Taverns and cocktail lounges;
      (15)   Regional commercial centers (including wholesale and retail
sales); and
      (16)   Other service establishments or retail or wholesale businesses
similar in nature to those listed above.
   (B)   Permitted accessory uses. In any Central Business Zone, the following
accessory uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   All uses permitted in B-1 Local or Neighborhood Business Zone; and
      (2)   Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted
principal use.
         (a)   All signs overhanging public ways shall conform to general
ordinances of the city and §§
152.165 through
152.170 of this chapter, now or hereinafter adopted.
         (b)   Signs, parking areas and buildings may be illuminated providing
the use of such illumination does not confuse, blind or distract vehicle
operators on the highways or streets.
   (C)   Prohibited uses. In any Central Business Zone, the following uses and
buildings are prohibited:
      (1)   Except for uses permitted in division (A) above, all uses
prohibited in B-1 Local or Neighborhood Business Zones;
      (2)   Any residential commercial or industrial use, which in the opinion
of the Board of Appeals may become noxious or offensive in a B-2 Central
Business Zones; and
      (3)   Gambling establishments.
         (a)   On and after the effective dates of this division (D)(3) on
February, 2010, gambling establishments shall not be located within 3,000 feet
of each other; provided that on and after March 3, 2010, gambling
establishments shall not be located within 1,000 feet of each other; provided,
however, that on and after March 17, 2010, gambling establishments shall not be
located within 6,000 feet of each other.
         (b)   On and after the effective dates of this division (D)(3) on
February, 2010, no gambling establishment shall be located within 3,000 feet of
any church, place of worship, library, school, community center or publicly
owned property designated as a playground, park and under the control of the
city; provided, however, that on and after March 17, 2010, no gambling
establishment shall be located within 6,000 feet of any church, place of
worship, library, school, community center, or publicly owned property
designated as a playground, park and under the control of the city.
         (c)   On and after March 3. 2010, any new gambling establishment not
already licensed and in existence in the city shall satisfy the following
requirements: it shall be an existing bar or restaurant; it shall have a
current business license issued under the authority of §
38.083 of this code of ordinances; and it shall be current and not delinquent
in the payment of any municipal fees or taxes.
         (d)   Upon the annexation into the city of any real property upon
which is situated a legally licensed and operating gambling establishment, the
use of the property as a gambling establishment, even if a nonconforming use,
shall continue until such time as the West Virginia Lottery Commission repeals,
withdraws or takes such other action that invalidates the license or licenses
required to allow legal gambling to occur at the gambling establishment.
      (4)   On and after August 8, 2018, rehabilitation center activities,
addiction treatment center activities, food distribution center activities,
social service activities, secondary social service activities or homeless
shelter activities may not be provided at any structure, whether operated as a
social services facility, church or similar charity, within 1,000 feet of a
school, playground, library, athletic field or park, senior citizen living
facility, public swimming pool or city park.
      (5)   On and after August 8, 2018, structures providing rehabilitation
center activities, addiction treatment center activities, food distribution
center activities, social service activities, secondary social service
activities or homeless shelter activities may not be located within 1,000 feet
of each other.
   (D)   Front yards. In any Central Business Zone, no front yard shall be
required.
   (E)   Side yards. Common wall shall be permitted and no side yards are
required.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. 10-2, passed 3-2-
2010; Ord. passed 8-7-2018)
HEAVY COMMERCIAL ZONE
§ 152.085 C-1 HEAVY COMMERCIAL ZONE.
   (A)   Permissive uses. In any C-1 Heavy Commercial Zone, the following
buildings and uses are permitted:
      (1)   Wholesale business, warehouses, storage areas and self-storage
warehouses;
      (2)   Wholesale building material sales, not including stone crushing and
concrete mixing;
      (3)   Distribution plants, parcel delivery hubs, ice and cold storage
plants and locker service, and beverage distributors and bottling plants;
      (4)   Cleaning and dyeing works;
      (5)   Major garage, including gasoline service station and automobile
body repair;
      (6)   Major automotive repair;
      (7)   Industrial bakeries;
      (8)   Plastic products design;
      (9)   Molding and assembly;
      (10)   Small metal products design;
      (11)   Casting;
      (12)   Fabricating and processing;
      (13)   Manufacturing and finishing;
      (14)   Storage yards; and
      (15)   Wood products manufacture and finishing but not including hand
crafted items.
   (B)   Permitted accessory uses. In any C-1 Heavy Commercial Zone, the
following accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   Accessory parking areas;
      (2)   Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted
principal use; and
      (3)   All signs shall conform to the requirements of §§
152.165 through
152.170 of this chapter.
   (C)   Prohibited uses.
      (1)   Any residential, commercial or industrial use which, in the opinion
of the Board of Appeals, may become offensive or noxious in a C-1 Heavy
Commercial Zone.
      (2)   On and after August 8, 2018, rehabilitation center activities,
addiction treatment center activities, food distribution center activities,
social service activities, secondary social service activities or homeless
shelter activities may not be provided at any structure, whether operated as a
social services facility, church, or similar charity, within 1,000 feet of a
school, playground, library, athletic field or park, senior citizen living
facility, public swimming pool or city park.
      (3)   On and after August 8, 2018, structures providing rehabilitation
center activities, addiction treatment center activities, food distribution
center activities, social service activities, secondary social service
activities or homeless shelter activities may not be located within 1,000 feet
of each other.
   (D)   Lot widths. In any Heavy Commercial Zone no lot shall be less than 50
feet
   (E)   Front yards. In any Heavy Commercial Zone, no front yard shall be less
than 15 feet on major streets. A ten-foot front yard shall be required on minor
streets. Major and minor streets shall be identified as shown on the major
thoroughfare plan.
   (F)   Side yards. In any Heavy Commercial Zone; side yards shall be subject
to the same provisions as specified B-1 Local or Neighborhood Business Zones.
   (G)   Rear yards. In any Heavy Commercial Zone rear yards shall be subject
to the same provision as specified for B-2 Central Business Zones.
   (H)   Building height. In any Heavy Commercial Zone, building heights shall
be subject to the same provisions as specified for B-2 Central Business Zones.
   (I)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. In any Heavy Commercial
Zone, off-street parking and loading requirements shall be scheduled according
to the provisions of §§
152.135 through
152.137 of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. passed 8-7-2018)
INDUSTRIAL ZONE
§ 152.100 I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE.
   (A)   Permitted uses. In any I-1 Light Industrial Zone, the following
buildings and uses only are permitted:
      (1)   All uses permitted in C-1 Heavy Commercial Zone;
      (2)   Activities of an industrial nature are permitted except uses or
industrial processes that may be noxious or injurious by reason of the
production of emission of dust, smoke, refuse matter, odor, gas fumes, noise,
vibration or similar substance conditions. Any use may be permitted if approved
by the Board of Appeals and subject to such conditions, restrictions and safe
guards as may be deemed necessary by such Board;
      (3)   Junk yards or automobile wrecking yards, scrap iron, scrap paper or
rag storage, sorting or hailing, provided that such enterprises are conducted
within a building or entirely within enclosure or fence of a type which will
conceal from public view; and
      (4)   Sewage disposal plant, when operated by the municipality, all
operations and storage.
   (B)   Permitted accessory uses. In any I-1 Light Industrial Zone, the
following accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   All uses permitted in a C-1 Heavy Commercial Zone; and
      (2)   Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted
principal use including signs; provided, that the provisions for the erection
of signs in B-1 and B-2 Zones shall apply in a I-1 Light Industrial Zone.
   (C)   Prohibited uses.
      (1)   Any residential, commercial or industrial use, which in the opinion
of the Board of Appeals may become offensive or noxious in an I-1 Light
Industrial Zone;
      (2)   On and after August 8, 2018, rehabilitation center activities,
addiction treatment center activities, food distribution center activities,
social service activities, secondary social service activities or homeless
shelter activities may not be provided at any structure, whether operated as a
social services facility, church or similar charity, within 1,000 feet of a
school, playground, library, athletic field or park, senior citizen living
facility, public swimming pool or city park; and
      (3)   On and after August 8, 2018, structures providing rehabilitation
center activities, addiction treatment center activities, food distribution
center activities, social service activities, secondary social service
activities or homeless shelter activities may not be located within 1,000 feet
of each other.
   (D)   Lot areas. In any I-1 Light Industrial Zone, no lot shall be less than
10,000 square feet
   (E)   Lot widths. In any I-1 Light Industrial Zone, no lot shall be less
than 100 feet in width.
   (F)   Front yards. In any I-1 Light Industrial Zone, no front yard shall be
less than 25 feet.
   (G)   Side yards. In any I-1 Light Industrial Zone, side yards shall be
subject to the same provisions as specified for C-1 Heavy Commercial Zones.
   (H)   Rear yards. In any I-1 Light Industrial Zone, rear yards shall be
subject to the same provisions as specified for C-1 Heavy Commercial Zones.
   (I)   Off-street parking. In any I-1 Light Industrial Zone, off-street
parking and loading requirements shall be scheduled according to the provisions
of §§
152.130 and
152.135 of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. passed 8-7-2018)
DESTINATION TOURISM ZONE
§ 152.115 D-1 DESTINATION TOURISM ZONE.
   (A)   Permissive uses. In any Destination Tourism Zone, the buildings and
uses permitted include, but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Restaurants;
      (2)   Hotels and motels;
      (3)   Live entertainment (but not including adult entertainment);
      (4)   Multiplex theaters;
      (5)   Family entertainment centers;
      (6)   Concert halls;
      (7)   Interactive games;
      (8)   Amusement attractions;
      (9)   Cultural and leisure time activities;
      (10)   West Virginia Lottery table games;
      (11)   West Virginia Lottery video lottery games;
      (12)   Dog racing;
      (13)   Pari-mutuel wagering;
      (14)   Retail stores;
      (15)   Private clubs;
      (16)   Sporting events;
      (17)   Marina;
      (18)   Heliport;
      (19)   Convention centers; and
      (20)   Police, fire and ambulance facilities.
   (B)   Permitted accessory uses. In any Destination Tourism Zone, the
following accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   Accessory parking; and
      (2)   Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use, including signs attached flat against a building; and elevated
signs not exceeding 80 square feet in area per face; provided, that these
elevated signs are at least 15 feet from any street right-of-way.
   (C)   Prohibited uses.
      (1)   Any residential or industrial use except that which is clearly
necessary for and incidental to the conduct of a permitted business or service
of the premises;
      (2)   On and after August 8, 2018, rehabilitation center activities,
addiction treatment center activities, food distribution center activities,
social service activities, secondary social service activities or homeless
shelter activities may not be provided at any structure, whether operated as a
social services facility, church or similar charity, within 1,000 feet of a
school, playground, library, athletic field or park, senior citizen living
facility, public swimming pool or city park; and
      (3)   On and after August 8, 2018, structures providing rehabilitation
center activities, addiction treatment center activities, food distribution
center activities, social service activities, secondary social service
activities or homeless shelter activities may not be located within 1,000 feet
of each other.
   (D)   Lot areas. In any Destination Tourism Zone, no lot shall be less than
20,000 square feet.
   (E)   Lot widths. In any Destination Tourism Zone, there is no minimum lot
width.
   (F)   Front yards. In any Destination Tourism Zone, there is no front yard
required.
   (G)   Side yards. In any Destination Tourism Zone, there is no side yard
required.
   (H)   Rear yards. In any Destination Tourism Zone, there is no rear yard
required.
   (I)   Building height. In any Destination Tourism Zone, no building shall be
greater in height than the level of fire protection that can be provided
through a combination of engineering and construction technology and the fire
protection capabilities of the city.
   (J)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. In any Destination
Tourism Zone, off-street parking and loading requirements shall be scheduled
according to the provisions of the table in §§
152.130 through
152.137 of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. passed 8-7-2018)
RESTRICTED USE DISTRICT
§ 152.125 RU RESTRICTED USE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The Restricted Use District overlaps existing districts. The
extraction of groundwater from any property located in the Restricted Use
District is prohibited and drilling activities are prohibited from the surface
of any property located in the Restricted Use District to gain access to
groundwater at, beneath or flowing from such property, for potable or other
purposes, except for the extraction of groundwater from or installation,
modification, or repair of certain monitoring wells operated pursuant to the
authorization of federal or state environmental officials.
   (B)   Boundaries. The boundaries of the Restricted Use District include all
areas of the city west of State Highway Route 25 and north of the southerly
boundary of that property known as the Fike/Artel Chemical Superfund Site, all
as shown on the map attached to Ordinance passed 3-19-2022, and shall be
identified and certified as a new district on the map entitled “Official Zoning
Ordinance Map” for the city on file in the office of the Zoning Officer of the
city, as the same may be amended thereafter.
   (C)   Regulations.
      (1)   Drilling is prohibited from the surface of any property located in
the Restricted Use District to gain access to groundwater at, beneath or
flowing from such property, for potable or other purposes, except for the
installation, modification or repair of monitoring wells operated pursuant to
the authorization of federal or state environmental officials.
      (2)   Extraction of groundwater at, beneath, or flowing from any property
located in the Restricted Use District is prohibited except for the extraction
of groundwater from monitoring wells operated pursuant to the authorization of
federal or state environmental officials.
      (3)   In addition to the requirements set forth in this zoning code and
as otherwise provided under applicable law, this subchapter may not be amended
or repealed without providing at least 90 days’ prior written notice of the
proposed action to (a) the Director of the West Virginia Division of
Environmental Protection, and (b) the Administrator of Region III of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, or to their respective statutory successors,
addressed to such individuals at the main office for each such governmental
agency.
(Ord. 02-03, passed 3-19-2002)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.130 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   General. There shall be provided at the time of erection of any main
building or at the time such buildings are altered, enlarged, converted or
increased in capacity minimum off-street parking space with adequate provision
for ingress and egress by standard-sized vehicles in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Parking space requirements.
      (1)   Required number. The off-street parking spaces required for each
use permitted by this chapter shall not be less than that found in table below,
provided that any fractional parking space be computed as a whole space. Every
business, commercial facility and industrial facility, to the extent permitted
by the physical characteristics of the facility and the surrounding property,
shall provide for safe and proper ingress to and egress from the facility for
delivery vehicles. Every newly constructed business, commercial facility and
industrial facility shall provide for safe and proper ingress to and egress
from the facility for delivery vehicles.
Off-Street Parking Schedule
Use Parking Spaces
Off-Street Parking Schedule
Use                                   Parking Spaces
Assembly, churches, auditorium        1/each 5 seats plus 1 for every 3
                                      employees
Automobile and trailer sales facility 1 for each 3 employees
Automobile repair and body shop       2/each work/repair bay + 1 for each 3
                                      employees
Bed and breakfast                     1/guest room plus 2/owner-occupant
Dwelling units                        2/DU
Funeral homes                         100
Health club                           1/100 gross square feet
Hotels/motels                         1/guest room plus 1/500 square feet of
                                      common area
Industry                              1/400 square feet
                                      1/200 gross square feet plus 1 for each
Medical office                        doctor and 1 for each 2 employees
                                      including nurses
Office                                1/300 gross square feet
Restaurant                            1/each 4 seats
Retail                                1/200 gross square feet plus 1 for every
                                      3 employees
Schools                               1/3.5 seats in class rooms plus 1/faculty
                                      member/employee
Warehouse                             1/500 gross square feet
 
      (2)   Combination of uses. Where there is a combination of uses on a lot,
the required number of parking spaces shall be the sum of that found for each
use.
      (3)   Location of lot. The parking spaces required by this chapter shall
be provided on the same lot as the use or where the exclusive use of such is
provided on another lot not more than 500 feet radially from the subject lot
within the same or less-restrictive zoning district.
   (C)   Parking space dimension.
      (1)   Width. A minimum width of nine feet shall be provided for each
parking space; provided, that the following exceptions shall apply:
         (a)   Parking spaces for compact vehicles shall be permitted to be
eight feet wide;
         (b)   Parallel parking spaces shall be permitted to be eight feet
wide; and
         (c)   The width of a parking space shall be increased ten inches for
obstructions located on either side of the space within 14 feet of the access
aisle.
      (2)   Length. A minimum length of 20 feet shall be provided for each
parking space; provided, that the following exceptions shall apply:
         (a)   Compact parking spaces shall be permitted to be 18 feet in
length; and
         (b)   Parallel parking spaces shall be a minimum 22 feet in length.
   (D)   Design of parking facilities.
      (1)   Driveway width. Every parking facility shall be provided with one
or more access driveways, the width of which shall be the following:
         (a)   Private driveways at least nine feet;
         (b)   Commercial driveways:
            1.   Twelve feet for one-way enter/exit; and
            2.   Twenty-four feet for two-way enter/exit.
      (2)   Driveway and ramp slopes. The maximum slope of any driveway or ramp
shall not exceed 20%; provided, that the restriction that the maximum slope of
any driveway or ramp shall not exceed 20% shall not apply to private driveways
used for single family residential structures. Transition slopes in driveways
and ramps shall be provided in accordance with the standards set by the Code
Official.
      (3)   Parking space accessibility. Each required parking space shall be
individually and easily accessible.
      (4)   Compact to standard space ratio. The maximum ratio of compact
spaces to standard spaces in any parking area shall not exceed one to two.
      (5)   Striping. All hard surface parking spaces installed after the
enactment of this chapter shall be striped, except a private garage or parking
area for the exclusive use of a single-family dwelling is not subject to this
requirement.
      (6)   Lighting. All lights illuminating a parking area shall be designed
and located so as to reflect away from any street and adjacent property.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 152.131 FENCE HEIGHTS.
   (A)   General. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, fences,
walls and hedges may be permitted in any required yard, or along the edge of
any yard; provided, that, no fence, wall or hedge shall exceed the height
stated in the table below; provided, however, that a wall that does not exceed
three feet in height is not classified as a retaining wall.
 
Maximum Fence Heights
Yards       Height (Feet)
Front       4
Lot side    6
Rear        6
Street side 4
 
   (B)   Privacy fences. A privacy fence may not interfere with the line of
sight at an angle of 90 degrees from the front door of the primary structure on
the adjoining lot, and may not exceed a height of six feet; provided, that, a
privacy fence may be eight feet in height if the top two feet of the fence does
not interfere with the free flow of air through the fenced enclosure.
   (C)   Sight line (visibility at intersections). All fences, walls, hedges,
screens, signs and other structures or plantings shall be set back from a
corner a sufficient distance so as to not create an unsafe condition for
purposes of automobile traffic. No fence, wall, hedge, screen, sign or other
structure or planting shall be higher than three and one-half feet in any
district within the triangle area (sight triangle) formed by the intersection
of the centerline of each street; the line measured along each center line will
be 100 feet along major streets and 80 feet on minor streets. When a major and
a minor street intersect, each shall retain their respective footage
requirements along the centerline to form the sight triangle. Trees may be
planted in this triangle area provided the lowest foliage is eight feet or
higher from the ground.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 152.132 LOCATION OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STORAGE BUILDINGS AND PRIVATE
GARAGES.
   (A)   General. Accessory buildings shall occupy the same lot as the main use
or building.
   (B)   Separation from main building. Any accessory building 150 square feet
or greater in size or that has any utility service installed shall be separated
from the main building by ten feet and shall also be in compliance with all
setback requirements; provided, that any accessory building less than 150
square feet in size that is used for storage or other similar use shall be
permitted to be located in any portion of the rear yard or side yard. No
storage building shall be located in the front yard.
   (C)   Private garages. An accessory building used as a private garage shall
be permitted to be located in the rear yard or side yard provided that setbacks
are maintained and the structures do not encroach into any recorded easements.
The building shall be permitted to be located in the front yard of a sloping
lot if the lot has more than a ten-foot difference in elevation from midpoint
of the front lot line to a point 50 feet away midway between the side lot
lines.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.133 ALLOWABLE PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS.
   (A)   General. Eaves, cornices, chimneys, new HVAC equipment and other
similar architectural features shall not be permitted to project into a
required yard; provided, that HVAC equipment that is replacing HVAC equipment
may be installed at the location of the equipment being replaced.
   (B)   Front yards.
      (1)   Open, unenclosed ramps, porches, platforms or landings, not covered
by a roof, shall not be permitted to extend into the required front yard, and
such porch may not extend above the first level and may be no more than six
feet above grade at any point.
      (2)   In any R-1 Single-Family Residential Zones, the front yard of any
lot of record at the time of enactment of this chapter shall be equal to the
average front yards of existing developed lots on the street on which it is
located. In the absence of developed lots along any such streets, the minimum
front yard shall be 20 feet.
   (C)   Rear yards. Windows shall be permitted to project into a required rear
yard no more than six inches.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.134 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General. Landscaping is required for all new buildings and additions
over 500 square feet as defined in this section. Basic landscaping, such as
sowing grass, shall be completed within one year from the date of occupancy of
the building.
   (B)   Front yards. Front yards required by this chapter shall be landscaped,
except for those areas occupied by access driveways, walls and structures.
   (C)   Street-side side yards. All flanking street-side side yards shall be
landscaped, except for those areas occupied by utilities, access driveways,
paved walks, walls and structures.
   (D)   Maintenance. All live landscaping required by this chapter shall be
properly maintained. All dead or dying landscaping shall be replaced
immediately and all sodded areas mowed, fertilized and irrigated on a regular
basis.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.135 LOADING SPACES.
   (A)   General. Loading spaces shall be provided on the same lot for every
building in the C or L-1 zones. No loading space is required if prevented by an
existing lawful building. In all zoning districts covered by this chapter, the
loading and unloading of trucks and all other vehicles shall be conducted in
such a manner that no part of said truck or vehicle, or the operations of the
loading and unloading shall extend onto the adjacent sidewalk or roadway or in
any other manner hinder or impede the use thereof. The Code Official may waive
this requirement on unusual lots.
   (B)   Size. On new construction, each loading space shall have a clear
height of 14 feet and shall be directly accessible through a usable door not
less than three feet in width and six feet eight inches high. The minimum area
of a loading space shall be 400 square feet and the minimum dimensions shall be
20 feet long and ten feet deep.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.136 PASSAGEWAYS.
   (A)   Residential entrances. There shall be a passageway of not less than
ten feet in width leading from the public way to the exterior entrance of each
dwelling unit in every residential building. The passageway shall be increased
by two feet for each story over two.
   (B)   Separation between buildings. There shall be at least ten feet of
clear space between every main building and accessory building on a lot. There
shall be at least 20 feet of clear space between every residential building and
another main building on the same lot.
   (C)   Location of passageways. Passageways shall be permitted to be located
in that space set aside for required yards. Passageways shall be open and
unobstructed to the sky and shall be permitted to have such projections as
allowed for yards, provided the users of said passageway have a clear walk-way
to the public way. Any space between buildings or passageways that has less
width than that prescribed herein shall not be further reduced.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.137 APPROVAL FOR AND AVAILABILITY OF ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
   (A)   General. All projects that require the additional use or new
facilities of essential services, such as sewers, storm drains, fire hydrants,
potable water, public streets, street lighting and similar services, shall
obtain such approval as required by the agency providing such service prior to
project approval. Fire hydrants shall be no more than 1,000 feet apart, no more
than 500 from any structure, approved by the city’s Fire Department, and
readily accessible by a fire truck.
   (B)   Approval for and availability of essential services. Nonavailability
of essential services shall be permitted to be grounds for denying permits for
additional development until such services are available. The city is not
obligated to extend or supply essential services if capacity is not available.
If capacity is available, the extension of services shall be by and at the cost
of the developer, unless the city agrees otherwise. All service extensions
shall be designed and installed in full conformance with the city’s standards
for such service, and shall be subject to review, permit and inspection as
required by other policies or this chapter.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
SPECIAL REGULATIONS
§ 152.150 HOME-BASED OCCUPATIONS; HOME-BASED BUSINESS.
   (A)   General. Home occupations shall be permitted in all zones, provided
the home occupation is clearly and obviously subordinate to the main use of the
dwelling unit for residential purposes. Home occupations shall be conducted
wholly within the primary structure on the premises.
   (B)   Conditions.
      (1)   The home occupation shall not exceed 15% of the floor area of the
primary structure.
      (2)   Only those related by blood, marriage or adoption may be employed
in the home occupation.
      (3)   Inventory and supplies shall not occupy more than 50% of the area
permitted to be used as a home occupation.
      (4)   There shall be no exterior display or storage of goods on said
premises.
      (5)   All home occupations shall require a conditional use permit.
      (6)   Sales and services to patrons shall be arranged by appointment and
scheduled so that not more than one patron vehicle is on the premises at the
same time.
      (7)   Two additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the
premises, except only one need be provided if the home occupation does not have
an employee. Said off-street parking shall comply with the parking requirements
in §
152.130 of this chapter.
      (8)   Each home-based occupation and each home-based business shall be
licensed as required by §§
38.070 et seq.;
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 152.151 PRIVATE CLUBS.
   (A)   General. A conditional use permit shall be obtained for all private
clubs.
   (B)   Provisions.
      (1)   No private clubs shall be located within 1,000 feet of a park,
school, day care center, library or religious or cultural activity.
      (2)   No private clubs shall be located within 500 feet of any other
private clubs or any agricultural or residential zone boundary.
      (3)   Such distances shall be measured in a straight line without regard
to intervening structures, topography and zoning; provided, that on and after
March 3, 2010, such distances shall be measured door-to-door with regard to
intervening structures, topography and zoning; provided however, that on and
after March 17, 2010, such distances shall be measured in a straight line
without regard to intervening structures, topography and zoning.
      (4)   Private clubs shall not be located in R-1 or R-2 Zones and shall
not be permitted as a home occupation.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. 10-2, passed 3-2-
2010)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 152.165 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect safety and orderly development
of the community through the regulation of signs and sign structures.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.166 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conformance to chapter. Any sign hereafter erected shall conform to
the provisions of this chapter and any other ordinance or regulation within
this city.
   (B)   Signs in rights-of-way. No sign other than an official traffic sign or
similar sign shall be erected within two feet of the lines of any street, or
within any public way, unless specifically authorized by other ordinance or
regulation of this city or by specific authorization of the Code Official.
   (C)   Projections over public ways. Signs projecting over public walkways
shall be permitted to do so only subject to the projection and clearance limits
either defined herein or, if not so defined, at a minimum of eight feet from
grade level to the bottom of the sign. Signs, architectural projections or sign
structures projecting over vehicular access areas must conform to the minimum
height clearance limitations imposed by the city for such structures.
   (D)   Traffic visibility. No sign or sign structure shall be erected at the
intersection of any street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear
vision, nor at any location where by its position, shape or color it may
interfere with or obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device.
   (E)   Computation of frontage. If a premises contains walls facing more than
one property line or encompasses property frontage bounded by more than one
street or other property usages, the sign area(s) for each building wall or
property frontage will be computed separately for each building wall or
property line facing a different frontage. The sign area(s) thus calculated
shall be permitted to then be applied to permitted signs placed on each
separate wall or property line frontage.
   (F)   Animation and changeable messages. Animated signs, except as
prohibited in §
152.168 of this chapter, are permitted in all nonresidential zones. Changeable
signs, manually activated, are permitted for nonresidential uses in all zones.
Changeable signs, electrically activated, are permitted in all nonresidential
zones.
   (G)   Maintenance, repair and removal. Every sign permitted by this chapter
shall be kept in good condition and repair. When any sign becomes insecure, in
danger of falling or is otherwise deemed unsafe by the Code Official, or if any
sign shall be unlawfully installed, erected or maintained in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, the owner thereof or the person or firm
using same shall, upon written notice by the Code Official immediately in the
case of immediate danger, and in any case within not more than ten days, make
such sign conform to the provisions of this chapter, or shall remove it. If
within ten days the order is not complied with, the Code Official shall be
permitted to remove or cause such sign to be removed at the expense or the
owner and/or the user of the sign.
   (H)   Obsolete sign copy. Any sign copy that no longer advertises or
identifies a use conducted on the property on which the sign is erected must
have the sign copy covered or removed within 30 days after written notification
from the Code Official and upon failure to comply with such notice, the Code
Official is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign copy, and any
expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure
or ground on which the sign in located.
   (I)   Nonconforming signs. Any sign legally existing at the time of the
passage of this chapter that does not conform in use, location, height or size
with the requirements of the zone in which such sign is located, shall be
considered a legal nonconforming use or structure and shall be permitted to
continue in such status until such time as it is either abandoned or removed by
its owner, subject to the following limitations:
      (1)   Structural alterations, enlargement or re-erection are permissible
only where such alterations will not increase the degree of nonconformity of
the signs; and
      (2)   Any legal nonconforming sign shall be removed or re-built without
increasing the existing height or area if it is damaged, or removed if allowed
to deteriorate to the extent that the cost of repair or restoration exceeds 50%
of the replacement cost of the sign as determined by the Code Official.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.167 EXEMPT SIGNS.
   (A)   Generally. The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of
this chapter; provided, that no sign shall be exempt from the provisions of §
152.166(D) of this chapter.
   (B)   Exempt signs.
      (1)   Official notices authorized by a court, public body or public
safety official;
      (2)   Directional, warning or information signs authorized by federal,
state, county or municipal governments;
      (3)   Memorial plaques, building identification signs and building
cornerstones when cut or carved into a masonry surface or when made of
noncombustible material and made an integral part of the building or structure;
      (4)   The flag of a government or noncommercial institution, such as a
school;
      (5)   Religious symbols and seasonal decorations within the appropriate
public holiday season;
      (6)   Works of art displayed in conjunction with a commercial enterprise
where the enterprise does not receive direct commercial gain; and
      (7)   Street address sign and combination nameplate and street address
signs that contain no advertising copy and which do not exceed six square feet
in area.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.168 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   Generally. The following devices and locations shall be specifically
prohibited.
   (B)   Prohibited signs.
      (1)   Signs located in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise
interfere with an official traffic sign, signal or device, or obstruct or
interfere with a driver’s view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic;
      (2)   Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, signs encroaching
upon or overhanging a public right-of-way. No sign shall be attached to any
utility pole, light standard, street tree or any other public facility located
within the public right-of-way;
      (3)   Signs which blink, flash or are animated by lighting in any fashion
that would cause such signs to have the appearance of traffic safety signs and
lights, or municipal vehicle warnings from a distance;
      (4)   Portable signs except as allowed for temporary signs;
      (5)   Any sign attached to, or placed on, a vehicle or trailer parked on
public or private property, except for signs meeting the following conditions:
         (a)   The primary purpose of such a vehicle or trailer is not the
display of signs;
         (b)   The signs are magnetic, decals or painted upon an integral part
of the vehicle or equipment as originally designed by the manufacturer and do
not break the silhouette of the vehicle; or
         (c)   The vehicle or trailer is in operating condition, currently
registered and licensed to operate on public streets when applicable, and
actively used or available for use in the daily function of the business to
which such signs relate.
      (6)   Vehicles and trailers are not used primarily as static displays,
advertising a product or services, not utilized as storage, shelter or
distribution points for commercial products or services for the general public;
      (7)   Balloons, streamers or pinwheels except those temporarily displayed
as part of a special sale, promotion or community event. For purposes of this
division (B)(7), “temporarily” means no more than 20 days in any calendar year;
and
      (8)   Signs, including lights installed on the front of a building or are
situated on the perimeter of a building, that blink, flash, are highly
illuminated, or otherwise because of the sign's design may confuse, blind,
distract or interfere with a vehicle operator's ability to drive a motor
vehicle in a safe manner on streets or highways within the city.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010; Ord. passed 1-17-2023)
§ 152.169 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits required. Unless specifically exempted, a permit must be
obtained from the Code Official for the erection and maintenance of all signs
erected or maintained within the city and in accordance with other provisions
of this chapter. Exemptions from the necessity of securing a permit, however,
shall not be construed to relieve the owner of the sign involved from
responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a safe manner and in a
manner in accordance with all the other provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Construction documents. Before any permit is granted for the erection
of a sign or sign structure requiring such permit, construction documents shall
be filed with the Code Official showing the dimensions, materials and required
details of construction, including loads, stresses, anchorage and any other
pertinent data. The permit application shall be accompanied by the written
consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is to be
erected and by engineering calculations signed and sealed by a registered
design professional.
   (C)   Changes to signs. No sign shall be structurally altered, enlarged or
relocated except in conformity to the provisions herein, nor until a proper
permit, if required, has been secured. The changing or maintenance of moveable
parts or components of an approved sign that is designed for such changes, or
the changing of copy, business names, lettering, sign faces, colors, display
and/or graphic matter, or the content of any sign shall not be deemed a
structural alteration.
   (D)   Permit fees. Permit fees to erect, alter or relocate a sign shall be
in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.170 SPECIFIC SIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Identification signs. Identification signs shall be in accordance with
divisions (A)(1) through (A)(3) below.
      (1)   Wall signs. Every single-family residence, multiple-family
residential complex, commercial or industrial building, and every separate
nonresidential building in a residential zone may display wall signs per street
frontage subject to the limiting standards set forth in the table below. For
shopping centers, planned industrial parks or other multiple occupancy
nonresidential buildings, the building face or wall shall be calculated
separately for each separate occupancy.
      (2)   Freestanding signs. In addition to any allowable wall signs, every
single-family residential subdivision, multiple-family residential complex,
commercial or industrial building and every freestanding or combination signs
per street frontage subject to the limiting standards set forth in the table
below.
      (3)   Directional signs. No more than two directional signs shall be
permitted per street entrance to any lot. There shall be no limit to the number
of directional signs providing directional information interior to the lot. In
residential zones, the maximum area for directional signs shall be four square
feet. For all other zones, the maximum area for any directional sign visible
from adjacent property or rights-of-way shall be four square feet. Not more
than 25% of the area of any directional sign shall be permitted to be devoted
to business identification or logo, which area shall not be assessed as
identification sign area.
 
Identification Sign Standards - Wall Signs
Land Use                                        Aggregate Area(square Feet)
Single-family residential (R-1)                 6
Multiple-family residential (R-2 & R-3)         6
Nonresidential in a residential zone (churches, 12
schools and the like)
Commercial and industrial                       80
 
   (B)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be in accordance with divisions
(B)(1) through (B)(4) below.
      (1)   Real estate signs. Real estate signs shall be permitted in all
zoning districts, subject to the following limitations.
         (a)   Real estate signs located on a single residential lot shall be
limited to one sign, not greater than three feet in height and four square feet
in area.
         (b)   Real estate signs advertising the sale of lots located within a
subdivision shall be limited to one sign per entrance to the subdivision, and
each sign shall be no greater the 32 square feet in area nor seven feet in
height. All signs permitted under this section shall be removed with ten days
after sale of the last original lot.
         (c)   Real estate signs advertising the sale or lease of space within
commercial or industrial buildings shall be no greater than 32 square feet in
area nor seven feet in height and shall be limited to one sign per street
front.
         (d)   Real estate signs advertising the sale or lease of vacant
commercial or industrial land shall be limited to one sign per street front and
each sign shall be no greater than seven feet in height, and 32 square feet for
property of ten acres or less, or 100 square feet for property exceeding ten
acres.
         (e)   Real estate signs shall be removed not later than ten days after
execution of a lease agreement in the event of a lease, or the closing of the
sale in the event of a purchase.
      (2)   Development and construction signs. Signs temporarily erected
during construction to inform the public of the developer, contractors,
architects, engineers, the nature of the project or anticipated completion
dates, shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following
limitations.
         (a)   Such signs on a residential lot shall be limited to one sign,
not greater than eight feet in height and 16 square feet in area.
         (b)   Such signs for a residential subdivision or multiple residential
lots shall be limited to one sign, at each entrance to the subdivision or on
one of the lots to be built upon, and shall be no greater than ten feet in
height and 32 square feet in area.
         (c)   Such signs for nonresidential uses in residential districts
shall be limited to one sign, and shall be no greater than five feet in height
and 16 square feet in area.
         (d)   Such signs for commercial and industrial projects shall be
limited to one sign per street front, not to exceed ten feet in height and 32
square feet, regardless of the number of acres in the project.
         (e)   Development and construction signs may not be displayed until
after the issuance of construction permits by the Building Official, and must
be removed not later than 24 hours following issuance of an occupancy permit
for all portions of the project.
      (3)   Special event signs in public ways. Signs advertising a special
community event shall not be prohibited in or over public rights-of-way,
subject to approval by the Code Official as to size, location and method of
erection. The Code Official shall not approve any special event signage that
would impair the safety and convenience of use of public rights-of way or
obstruct traffic visibility.
      (4)   Portable signs. Portable signs shall be permitted only in the B-1,
B-2, C-1 and I-1 Zones, as designated in this chapter, subject to the following
limitations.
         (a)   No more than one such sign may be displayed on any property, and
shall not exceed a height of four feet nor an area of 32 square feet.
         (b)   Such signs shall be displayed not more than 20 days in any
calendar year.
         (c)   Any electrical portable signs shall comply with the ICC
Electrical Code, as adopted by the city.
   (C)   Requirements for specific sign types. Signs of specific type shall be
in accordance with divisions (C)(1) through (C)(7) below.
      (1)   Canopy and marquee signs.
         (a)   The permanently-affixed copy area of canopy or marquee signs
shall not exceed an area equal to 75% of the face area of the canopy, marquee
or architectural projection upon which such sign is affixed or applied.
         (b)   Graphic striping, patterns or color bands on the face of a
building, canopy, marquee or architectural projection shall not be included in
the computation of sign copy area.
      (2)   Awning signs.
         (a)   The copy area of awning signs shall not exceed an area equal to
25% of the background area of the awning or awning surface to which such sign
is affixed or applied, or the permitted area for wall or fascia signs, which
ever is less.
         (b)   Neither the background color of an awning, nor any graphic
treatment or embellishment thereto such as striping, patterns or valances,
shall be included in the computation of sign copy area.
      (3)   Projecting signs.
         (a)   Projecting signs shall be permitted in lieu of freestanding
signage on any street frontage limited to one sign per occupancy along any
street frontage with public entrance to such an occupancy, and shall be limited
in area to 16 square feet.
         (b)   Such signs shall maintain a clear vertical distance above any
public sidewalk a minimum of ten feet.
      (4)   Under canopy signs.
         (a)   Under canopy signs shall be limited to no more than one such
sign per public entrance to any occupancy, and shall be limited to an area not
to exceed one square foot.
         (b)   Such signs shall maintain a clear vertical distance that is a
minimum of nine feet above any sidewalk or pedestrian way.
      (5)   Roof signs.
         (a)   Roof signs shall be permitted in commercial and industrial
districts only.
         (b)   Such signs shall be limited to a height above the roofline on
the elevation parallel to the sign face of no more than 25% of the height of
the roofline in commercial and industrial districts.
      (6)   Window signs. Window signs shall be permitted for any
nonresidential use in a residential district, and for all commercial and
industrial districts, subject to the following limitations:
         (a)   The aggregate area of all such signs shall not exceed 25% of the
window area on which such signs are displayed. Window panels separated by
muntins or mullions shall be considered as one continuous window area; and
         (b)   Window signs shall not be assessed against the sign area
permitted for other sign types.
      (7)   Menu boards. Menu boards shall not be permitted to exceed 50 square
feet.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES
§ 152.185 GENERAL; CONTINUANCE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise required by law, a structure or use legally
established prior to the adoption date of this chapter may be maintained
unchanged.
   (B)   In other than criminal proceedings, the owner, occupant or user shall
have the burden to show that the structure, lot or use was lawfully
established.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.186 DISCONTINUANCE.
   (A)   Vacancy. Any lot or structure, or portion thereof, occupied by a
nonconforming use, which is or hereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied
by a nonconforming use for a period of six continuous months shall not
thereafter be occupied, except by a use which conforms to this chapter;
provided, that if a single-family owner occupied structure remains vacant for a
period exceeding six continuous months because it is being foreclosed upon by a
financial institution, the property shall not thereafter be occupied as a
single-family owner occupied structure if the structure remains vacant for more
than the six continuous months immediately succeeding the completion of the
foreclosure proceeding; provided however, that if a single-family owner
occupied structure remains vacant for a period exceeding six continuous months
because the property owner is delinquent in paying ad valorem property taxes
and the property is under going the tax foreclosure and sale procedure, the
property shall not thereafter be occupied as a single-family owner occupied
structure if the property remains vacant for more than the six continuous
months immediately succeeding the completion of the tax sale proceeding.
   (B)   Damage. If any nonconforming structure or use is, by any cause,
damaged to the extent of 50% of the value as determined by the Code Official,
it shall not thereafter be reconstructed as such unless such reconstruction is
first approved as a variance by the Zoning Board of Appeals; provided, that a
single-family owner occupied structure that is up to 100% destroyed shall not
thereafter be reconstructed as a single-family owner occupied structure unless
such reconstruction commences no later than 12 months immediately succeeding
the month in which the structure was destroyed.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.187 ADDITIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Maintenance and repair. Maintenance, repairs and structural
alterations shall be permitted to be made to nonconforming structures or to a
building housing a nonconforming use with valid permits.
   (B)   Changes of nonconforming use.
      (1)   A change of use of a nonconforming use of a structure or parcel of
land shall not be made except to that of a conforming use.
      (2)   Where such change is made, the use shall not thereafter be changed
back to a nonconforming use.
   (C)   Additions. All additions to nonconforming structures shall conform to
the requirements of this chapter. Additions to structures housing nonconforming
uses that increase the area of a nonconforming use shall not be made unless
first authorized as a variance by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
CONDITIONAL USES
§ 152.200 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Generally. A conditional use permit shall be obtained for certain uses
which may be harmonious under special conditions and in specific locations
within a zone, but shall not be allowed under the general conditions of the
zone as stated in this chapter.
   (B)   Submittal. All conditional use permit applications shall be submitted
to the Code Official who in turn will forward the application to the Zoning
Board of Appeals. All applications shall be accompanied by maps, drawings,
statements or other documents in accordance with the provisions of §
152.007(F)(4) of this chapter. A fee established by this chapter shall be
collected at the time of submittal of any amendment to an approved conditional
use permit as determined by the city.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.201 PUBLIC HEARING.
   Prior to the approval, amending or denial of a conditional use permit, a
public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions of §
152.009 of this chapter. Upon the completion of said public hearing, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall render a decision within a time limit as required by
law.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.202 DETERMINATION; AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals, shall have the authority to impose
conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary to protect and enhance the
health, safety and welfare of the surrounding area.
   (B)   The authorization of a conditional use permit shall not be made unless
the evidence presented is such as to establish:
      (1)   Such use will not, under the specific circumstances of the
particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the
surrounding area and that the proposed use is necessary or desirable and
provides a service or facility that contributes to the general well being of
the surrounding area;
      (2)   Such use will comply with the regulations and conditions specified
in this chapter for such use; and
      (3)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall itemize, describe or justify,
then have recorded and filed in writing, the conditions imposed on the use.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.203 EXPIRATION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   General. Any granted conditional use permit shall become null and void
within one year of the date of approval if not exercised. A conditional use
permit shall be considered exercised when the use has been established or when
a building permit has been issued and substantial construction accomplished. If
the permit is abandoned or discontinued for a period of one year, it may not be
reestablished unless authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (B)   Revocation. A conditional use permit may be revoked if the applicant
fails to comply with the imposed conditions by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.204 AMENDMENTS.
   An amendment to an approved conditional use permit shall be submitted to the
Code Official accompanied by supporting information, and the Code Official
shall in turn forward the amendment to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the
requirements established by §
152.202 of this chapter and shall review the amendment and shall be permitted
to grant, deny or amend such amendment and impose conditions deemed necessary.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.205 CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   A request for a conditional use shall be permitted to be approved,
approved with conditions or denied.
   (B)   Each request for a conditional use approval shall be consistent with
the criteria listed below:
      (1)   The request is consistent with all applicable provisions of the
comprehensive plan;
      (2)   The request shall not adversely affect adjacent properties;
      (3)   The request is compatible with the existing or allowable uses of
adjacent properties;
      (4)   The request can demonstrate adequate public facilities, including
roads, drainage, potable water, sanitary sewer, and police and fire protection
exist or will exist to serve the requested use at the time such facilities are
needed;
      (5)   The request can demonstrate adequate provision for maintenance of
the use and associated structures;
      (6)   The request has minimized, to the degree possible, adverse affects
on the natural environment;
      (7)   The request will not create undue traffic congestion;
      (8)   The request will not adversely affect the public health, safety or
welfare; and
      (9)   The request conforms to all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
§ 152.220 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Planned unit developments (PUDS) shall be allowed by Planning
Commission approval in any zoning district. No planned unit development permit
shall be granted unless the development will meet the use limitations of the
zoning district in which it is located and meet the density and other
limitations of such districts, except as such requirements may be lawfully
modified as provided by this chapter. Compliance with this chapter in no way
excuses the developer from the applicable requirements of a subdivision, except
as modifications thereof are specifically authorized in the approval of the
application for the planned unit development.
   (B)   The requirements of this chapter relating to a PUD provides a means
for effecting desirable and quality development by permitting greater
flexibility and design freedom than may otherwise be permitted under the
chapter, and seeks to accomplish a well-balanced, aesthetically satisfying city
and economically desirable development of building sites within a PUD. The
requirements of this chapter relating to a PUD are established to permit
latitude in the development of the building site if that development is found
to be in accordance with the purpose, spirit and intent of this chapter and is
found not to be hazardous, harmful, offensive or otherwise adverse to the
environment, property values or the character of the neighborhood or the
health, safety and welfare of the city. The requirements of this chapter
relating to a PUD are intended to permit and encourage diversification,
variation and imagination in the relationship of uses, structures, open spaces
and heights of structures for developments conceived and implemented as
comprehensive and cohesive unified projects, and to encourage more rational and
economic development with relationship to public services, and to encourage and
facilitate preservation of open lands.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.221 CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Area. No planned unit development shall have an area less than that
approved by the Planning Commission as adequate for the proposed development.
   (B)   Uses.
      (1)   A planned unit development which will contain uses not permitted in
the zoning district in which it is to be located will require a change of
zoning district and shall be accompanied by an application for a zoning
amendment, except that any residential use shall be considered a permitted use
in a planned unit development which allows residential uses and shall be
governed by density, design and other requirements of the planned unit
development permit.
      (2)   Where a site is situated in more than one use district, the
permitted uses applicable to such property in one district may be extended into
the adjacent use district.
   (C)   Ownership. The development shall be in single or corporate ownership
at the time of application, or the subject of an application filed jointly by
all owners of the property.
   (D)   Design. The Planning Commission shall require the arrangement of
structures and open spaces within the site development plan as necessary to
ensure that adjacent properties will not be adversely affected.
      (1)   Density. Density of land use shall in no case be more than 15%
higher than allowed in the zoning district.
      (2)   Arrangement. Where feasible, the least height and density of
buildings and uses shall be arranged around the boundaries of the development.
      (3)   Specific requirements. Lot area, width, yard, height, density and
coverage requirements shall be determined by approval of the site development
plan.
   (E)   Open spaces. Preservation, maintenance and ownership of required open
spaces within the planned unit development shall be accomplished by either:
      (1)   Dedication of the land as a public park or parkway system; or
      (2)   Creating a permanent, open space easement on and over the said
private open spaces to guarantee that the open space remain perpetually in
recreational use, with ownership and maintenance being the responsibility of an
owners’ association established with articles of association and bylaws which
are satisfactory to the City Council.
   (F)   Landscaping. Landscaping, fencing and screening related to the uses
within the site and as a means of integrating the proposed development into its
surroundings shall be planned and presented to the Planning Commission for
approval, together with other required plans for the planned unit development.
A planting plan showing proposed tree and shrubbery plantings shall be prepared
for the entire site to be developed. A grading and drainage plan shall also be
submitted to the Planning Commission with the application.
   (G)   Signs. The size, location, design and nature of signs, if any, and the
intensity and direction of area or floodlighting shall be detailed in the
application.
   (H)   Desirability. The proposed use of the particular location shall be
shown as necessary or desirable, to provide a service or facility which will
contribute to the general well being of the surrounding area. It shall also be
shown that under the circumstances of the particular case, the proposed use
will not be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons
residing in the vicinity of the planned unit development.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.222 PLANNING COMMISSION DETERMINATION.
   In carrying out the intent of this section, the Planning Commission shall
consider the following principles.
   (A)   It is the intent of this section that site and building plans for a
planned unit development shall be prepared by a designer or team of designers
having professional competence in urban planning as proposed in the
application. The Planning Commission shall be permitted to require the
applicant to engage such professional expertise as a qualified designer or
design team.
   (B)   It is not the intent of this section that control of the design of a
planned unit development by the Planning Commission be so rigidly exercised
that individual initiative be stifled and substantial additional expense
incurred; rather, it is the intent of this section that the control exercised
be the minimum necessary to achieve the purpose of this section.
   (C)   The Planning Commission may approve or disapprove an application for a
planned unit development. In an approval, the Planning Commission shall be
permitted to attach such conditions as it may deem necessary to secure
compliance with the purposes set forth in this chapter. The denial of an
application for a planned unit development by the Planning Commission shall be
permitted to be appealed to the City Council.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.223 REQUIRED CONTRIBUTIONS.
   The City Council, as part of the approval of a planned unit development,
shall be permitted to require an applicant to make reasonable contributions
including, but not limited to, any combination of the following:
   (A)   Dedication of land for public park purposes;
   (B)   Dedication of land for public school purposes;
   (C)   Dedication of land for public road right-of-way purposes;
   (D)   Construction of or addition to roads serving the proposed project when
such construction or addition is reasonably related to the traffic to be
generated;
   (E)   Installation of required traffic safety devices; and
   (F)   Preservation of areas containing significant natural, environmental,
historic, archeological or similar resources.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 152.224 PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   Approval. In order that it may approve a planned unit development, the
Planning Commission shall have authority to require that the following
conditions (among others it deems appropriate) be met by the applicant:
      (1)   That the proponents intend to start construction within one year of
either the approval of the project or of any necessary zoning district change,
and intend to complete said construction, or approved stages thereof, within
four years from the date construction begins; and
      (2)   That the development is planned as one complex land use rather than
as an aggregation of individual and unrelated buildings and uses.
   (B)   Limitations on application.
      (1)   Upon approval of a planned unit development, construction shall
proceed only in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the
Planning Commission and in conformity with any conditions attached by the city
as to its approval.
      (2)   Amendment to approved plans and specifications for a planned unit
development shall be obtained only by following the procedures herein outlined
for first approval.
      (3)   The Code Official shall not issue any permit for any proposed
building, structure or use within the project unless such building, structure
or use is in accordance with the approved development plan and with any
conditions imposed in conjunction with its approval.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
CHAPTER 153: FLOODPLAIN AREA
Section
   
153.01   General provisions
   
153.02   Interpretations and definitions
   
153.03   Establishment of the floodplain area
   
153.04   Utilization of the floodplain area
   
153.05   Criteria for building and site plan approval
   
153.06   Specific requirements
   
153.07   Administration
   
153.08   Appeals
   
153.09   Government actions
   
153.10   Municipal liability
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Intent. The intent of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community;
      (2)   Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future;
      (3)   Minimize danger to public health and safety by protecting water
supply and sanitary sewage disposal in cooperation with the County Sanitarian,
and to protect natural drainage;
      (4)   Assure the County Assessor obtains information concerning
improvement of real property as required by W. Va. Code 11-3-3A;
      (5)   Assure County E-911 addresses are obtained to maintain the currency
of established emergency response dispatch systems; and
      (6)   Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing the unwise design and construction of
development in areas subject to flooding.
   (B)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter supersedes any
ordinance currently in effect in flood prone areas. Any ordinance, however,
shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are
more restrictive.
   (C)   Application.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any contractor, person, partnership,
business or corporation to undertake or cause to be undertaken, any
development, new construction, substantial improvement, repair of substantial
damage, or the placement or relocation of any structure (including manufactured
homes) within the city, unless a permit application has been completed and a
permit and certificate of compliance has been obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator. In addition, where land is to be subdivided, utilized for a
manufactured home park or subdivision or otherwise developed, a site plan must
be submitted to, and approved by, the Floodplain Administrator prior to any
development.
      (2)   Provision of all other codes, ordinances and regulations shall be
applicable insofar as they are consistent with the provisions of this chapter
and the community’s need to minimize the hazards and damage resulting from
flooding.
   (D)   Matters not provided for specifically. Where conditions are
encountered that are not specifically provided for herein, the Floodplain
Administrator shall determine the applicability of the provisions of this
chapter in accordance with its intent, and shall require the applicant to take
appropriate measures pursuant to such determination.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 12-18-2007) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.02 INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Interpretations. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
interpretations shall apply:
      (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense;
      (2)   The singular includes the plural;
      (3)   The plural includes the singular;
      (4)   The term SHALL or WILL is always mandatory;
      (5)   The word BUILDING or STRUCTURE shall be construed as if followed by
the phrase “or part thereof”; and
      (6)   The word ORDINANCE shall refer to the floodplain ordinance.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure on the same parcel or property as the
principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. This does not include a gas or liquid storage tank.
      BASE FLOOD. The flood, which has been selected to serve as the basis upon
which the floodplain management provisions of this chapter and other ordinances
have been prepared; for purposes of this chapter, the 100-YEAR FLOOD.
      BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
      CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certification that the entire development,
including the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in
compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
      CONTRACTOR.
         (a)   A person who in any capacity for compensation, other than as an
employee of another, undertakes, offers to undertake, purports to have the
capacity to undertake or submits a bid to construct, alter, repair, add to,
subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road,
railroad, structure or excavation associated with a project, development or
improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding
or other structures or works in connection therewith, where the cost of the
undertaking is $1,000 or more. CONTRACTOR includes a construction manager who
performs management and counseling services on a construction project for a
professional fee.
         (b)   CONTRACTOR does not include:
            1.   One who merely furnishes materials or supplies without
fabricating or consuming them in the construction project;
            2.   A person who personally performs construction work on the site
of real property which the person owns or leases whether for commercial or
residential purposes;
            3.   A person who is licensed or registered as a professional and
who functions under the control of any other licensing or regulatory board,
whose primary business is real estate sales, appraisal, development, management
and maintenance, who acting in his or her respective professional capacity and
any employee of such professional, acting in the course of his or her
employment, performs any work which may be considered to be performing
contracting work;
            4.   A pest control operator licensed under the provisions of W.
VA. Code 19-16A-7 or this code to engage in the application of pesticides for
hire, unless the operator also performs structural repairs exceeding $1,000 on
property treated for insect pests; or
            5.   A corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship whose
primary purpose is to prepare construction plans and specifications used by the
contractors defined in this section, and who employs full time a registered
architect licensed to practice in this state or a registered professional
engineer licensed to practice in this state. CONTRACTOR also does not include
employees of such corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship.
(W. Va. Code 21-11-3(c))
      DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
      FLOOD. A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
      FLOODPLAIN.
         (a)   A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or
watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; and/or
         (b)   An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff
of surface waters from any source.
      FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The Mayor shall be the Floodplain
Administrator. The Mayor may delegate this authority to others as deemed
appropriate. The FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR may also be identified as the
FLOODPLAIN MANAGER.
      FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land area that must be reserved to discharge the base flood without increasing
the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point.
      FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
      FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for
unknown factors that may contribute uncertainty to flood heights of any given
flood and floodway condition, such as wave action, blockage at stream
crossings; and increased runoff from urbanization of the watershed.
      HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
         (c)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
         (d)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
            1.   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
            2.   Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without
approved programs.
      LICENSED MANUFACTURED HOME DEALER. A business licensed to sell
manufactured homes in the state as set forth in the state code.
      LICENSED MANUFACTURING HOME INSTALLER. A contractor licensed to install
Manufactured Homes in the state as set forth in the state code.
      LICENSED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR. Any person licensed by the State Board of
Examiners of Land Surveyors to engage in the practice of land surveying as
defined in the state code.
      LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished enclosure constructed with flood resistant materials
as defined in the FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) and usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
      NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction as
herein defined commenced on or after May 7, 1974 and including any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
      100-YEAR FLOOD. A flood that has one chance in 100 or a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
      PERSON. Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association or other entity, including state and local governments and
agencies.
      PRACTICE OF ENGINEERING. 
         (a)   Any service or creative work, as described in W. Va. Code
Chapter 30, Article 13, the adequate performance of which requires engineering
education, training and experience in the application of special knowledge of
the mathematical, physical and engineering sciences to such services or
creative work as consultation, investigation, evaluation, planning and design
of engineering works and systems; planning the use of land and water; teaching
of advanced engineering subjects, engineering surveys and studies; and the
review of construction for the purpose of assuring compliance with drawings and
specifications any of which embraces such services or work, either public or
private, in connection with any utilities, structures, buildings, machines,
equipment, processes, work systems, projects and industrial or consumer
products or equipment of a mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, pneumatic or
thermal nature, insofar as they involve safeguarding life, health or property,
and including such other professional services as may be necessary to the
planning, progress and completion of any engineering services. Engineering
surveys include all survey activities required to support the sound conception,
planning, design, construction, maintenance and operation of engineered
projects.
         (b)   Any person who practices any branch of the profession of
engineering or who, by verbal claim, sign, advertisement, letterhead, card or
in any other way represents himself or herself to be a registered professional
engineer, or by using another title implies that he or she is a registered
professional engineer or that he or she is registered under W. Va. Code Chapter
30, Article 13 or who holds himself or herself out as able to perform, or who
performs any engineering service or work or any other service designated by the
practitioner which is recognized as engineering, is considered to practice or
offer to PRACTICE ENGINEERING within the meaning and intent of W. Va. Code
Chapter 30, Article 13.
      PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. Where at least 51% of the actual cash value of
a structure, less land value, is above ground.
      REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING. Base flood waters will not inundate the
land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and
that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing
or proposed buildings.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
         (a)   Built on a single chassis;
         (b)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
         (c)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
         (d)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use.
      REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person who has been duly registered
or licensed as a registered professional engineer by the state’s Board of
Registration for Professional Engineers as required under W. Va. Code Chapter
30, Article 13 et seq.
      REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring a structure or other development into
compliance with the requirements of this chapter or, if full compliance is not
possible, to reduce the adverse impacts of the non-compliance to the greatest
extent feasible.
      START OF CONSTRUCTION. (The definition for start of construction is to be
used only when calculating the starting time of the six-month expiration of a
permit.) The date the permit was issued, including permits for substantial
improvement or substantial damage, provided the actual START of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual START means
either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Although a permit must be obtained prior to
beginning, permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an
alteration, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
      STATE COORDINATING OFFICE. The state’s Division of Homeland Security and
Emergency Management.
      STREAM. As defined in W. Va. Code 7-1-3U, any watercourse, whether
natural or human-made, distinguishable by banks and a bed, regardless of their
size, through which water flows continually or intermittently, regardless of
its volume.
      STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
      SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means cumulative flood-related damages sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each flood event equals or exceeds 25% of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred. See SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. 
         (a)   Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement.
         (b)   This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial
damage”, as defined herein, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violation of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
         (c)   Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that
would constitute a SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT, as defined above, must comply with
all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
         (d)   For the purpose of this definition, IMPROVEMENT is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural
part of the building commences whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure.
      TOP OF BANK. The lines depicted on the FIRM maps delineating each side of
a stream indicate the top of bank. In the field, a professional familiar with
fluvial geomorphology should document the TOP OF BANK. When a professional is
not employed, the TOP OF THE BANK will be considered to be the top of the first
significant slope landward of the waters edge when it is followed by at least
50 feet of relatively flat land.
      VIOLATION. The failure of any structure or development to be fully
compliant with all requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 153.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FLOODPLAIN AREA.
   (A)   Identification.
      (1)   The identified floodplain area shall be those areas of the city
which are subject to the 100-year flood, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM), and described in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) prepared for the
city by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) dated February 8, 2007
or the most recent revision thereof.
      (2)   The identified floodplain area shall also be those areas of the
city which have been identified as flood hazard areas by the city by use of
historic or other technical data and shown on the city’s local flood hazards
map. These areas shall be designated as appropriate with the level of technical
data described below and shall be managed accordingly.
   (B)   Descriptions of floodplain areas. The identified floodplain shall
consist of the following four specific areas.
      (1)   The Floodway Area (F1) shall be those areas identified as such in
the FIS and as shown on the floodway map or FIRM. The term shall also include
floodway areas identified in other studies for the approximated area discussed
in division (D) below.
      (2)   The Floodway Fringe Area (F2) shall be those areas for which
specific 100-year flood elevations have been provided in the FIS but which lie
beyond the floodway area.
      (3)   The AE Area without Floodway (F3) shall be those areas identified
as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which 100-
year flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been delineated.
      (4)   The Approximated Area (F4) shall be those areas identified as an A
Zone on the FIRM or floodway map included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for
which no 100-year flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state or other
acceptable source shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the
applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
or other techniques. When hydrologic and hydraulic analyses are required, they
shall only be undertaken by a registered professional engineer, who shall
certify that the methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical
concepts. The resultant study shall include a cover letter, signed by the
responsible professional, providing a statement of findings in basic terms. In
addition, studies, analyses, computations and the like shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Floodplain
Administrator.
   (C)   Changes in designation of area.
      (1)   The delineation of the identified floodplain area may be revised by
the city where natural or human-made changes have occurred and/or more detailed
studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, a River
Basin Commission or other qualified agency or individual document the necessity
for such changes. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained
from the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
      (2)   The city may identify and regulate new flood hazard or ponding
areas. These areas may be delineated using locally derived technical
information such as flood of record, historic high water marks and/or
topographic data.
   (D)   Elevations prevail.
      (1)   If the lowest natural grade adjacent to proposed development within
an identified flood hazard area is at or above the base flood elevation
specified in the flood insurance study, the structure shall not be required to
conform to the flood prevention design and construction standards or flood-
related development codes in §
153.06. Topographic data certified by a registered professional engineer or
surveyor shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by
the Floodplain Administrator. The applicant is advised to apply for a Letter of
Map Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA to have the special flood hazard area
designation removed from the parcel or structure.
      (2)   If the lowest natural grade adjacent to proposed development is
below the base flood elevation specified in the flood insurance study, the site
shall be considered to be within the floodplain area and the proposed structure
shall be required to conform to all appropriate provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   Boundary disputes. Should a dispute concerning any district boundary
arise, an initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator
and any party aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the city. The burden of
proof shall be on the appellant/applicant.
(Prior Code, § 1733.03) (Ord. 07-05, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 153.04 UTILIZATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN AREA.
   (A)   Floodway (F1).
      (1)   Within any floodway area (F1), no encroachments, including fill,
new- construction, substantial improvements, repair of substantial damage or
other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that the proposed encroachment will not result in any
increase in the base flood elevation.
      (2)   Because floodways present increased risk to human life and property
due to their relatively faster and deeper flowing waters, the floodway shall be
preserved to the greatest extent possible.
         (a)   New development shall not be permitted in the floodway where
reasonable alternatives exist elsewhere. In addition to the requirements below,
the applicant shall demonstrate that there are no reasonable alternatives other
than the floodway encroachment before a permit is issued.
         (b)   When the floodway is the only reasonable alternative, the
applicant shall demonstrate that the floodway encroachment is the minimum
necessary to accomplish the project.
         (c)   All permitted uses, activities and development shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the flood-proofing and related provisions
contained herein, and in all other applicable codes, ordinances and
regulations.
   (B)   Floodway Fringe (F2) and Approximated Floodplain (F4).
      (1)   In the Floodway Fringe (F2) and Approximated Floodplain (F4), any
development and/or use of land shall be permitted, provided that all such uses,
activities and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the
flood-proofing and related provisions contained herein and in all other
applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
      (2)   In the Approximated Floodplain (F4), the Floodplain Manager shall
review, or shall cause to be reviewed, proposed development less than ten lots
or two acres to ascertain the specific flood risk at the building site and
assign a “minimal, moderate or significant” risk level.
         (a)   Development determined to represent a minimal risk and costing
less than $10,000 shall be required to provide “Point on Boundary” elevation
data and historic flood heights. The Floodplain Manager shall attempt to
determine a height that will be reasonably safe from flooding using this
elevation data. The Floodplain Manager shall enter the flood height in Section
“G” of the elevation certificate. Any new or substantially improved structures
using the “point on boundary” method (other than appurtenant structures) shall
be required to have the lowest floor elevated at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade even if the collected elevation data would indicate a
lower flood elevation. If this method is not adequate to allow the Floodplain
Manager to confidently determine the flood height, the applicant shall be
required to utilize one of the methods set forth below.
         (b)   Development determined to represent a low to moderate risk and/
or costing less than $30,000 shall provide Quick-2 engineering data prepared by
a registered professional engineer or obtain free LOMA data from FEMA. This
semi-detailed method will be used by the Floodplain Manager to determine a
“Community Flood Elevation”. The Floodplain Manager shall enter the community
flood elevations in Section “G” of the elevation certificate.
         (c)   Development determined to represent a high risk and/or costing
more than $30,000 shall be required to develop a base flood elevation using a
detailed method such as HEC-ras. This data shall be prepared and certified by a
registered professional engineer, who shall certify that the methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. The resultant study
shall include a cover letter, signed by the responsible professional, providing
a statement of findings in basic terms and a completed elevation certificate.
In addition, studies, analyses, computations and the like shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Floodplain
Manager. Base flood elevations determined using this method can be used to rate
flood insurance, typically resulting in a reduced premium.
      (2)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments which
are proposed to take place, either fully or partially, within the Approximated
Floodplain Area (F4) and which are greater than ten lots or two acres,
whichever is the lesser, shall include base flood elevation data.
         (a)   This data may be available from an authoritative source, such as
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, U.S. Geological Survey, Natural Resource
Conservation Service or state and local water resource department.
         (b)   If the required data is not available from other sources, the
applicant shall develop the technical data using detailed methodologies
comparable to those contained in a flood insurance study. This data shall be
prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer, who shall certify
that the methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
   (C)   AE area without floodway (F3). Within any AE Area without Floodway, no
new construction or development shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated
through a hydrologic and hydraulic study that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the elevation of the 100-year flood more than
one foot at any point. This requirement can be satisfied by utilization of the
floodway area where determined.
   (D)   Alteration or relocation of a stream.
      (1)   Whenever a developer intends to alter or relocate a stream within
the Floodplain Area, the developer shall notify in writing, by certified mail,
the city, Floodplain Administrator, the State Coordinating Office and any
adjacent communities of all such intended activities prior to the alteration or
relocation of the stream. Copies of all required notifications must be
submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration. In addition prior to issuing
the local permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall require copies of all
necessary permits from those governmental agencies from which federal or state
law requires approval. Contact information for state and federal permitting
authorities as well as addresses for required notification of appropriate
county, state and federal government agencies are contained in the city’s
stream alteration administrative procedures.
      (2)   The developer shall also assure the city in writing that the
carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of stream will be
maintained. The Floodplain Administrator may require the applicant to
demonstrate that the altered or relocated portion of stream will provide equal
or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. If hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses are required, they shall only be undertaken by a registered
professional engineer, who shall certify that the methods used correctly
reflect currently accepted technical concepts. The resultant study shall
include a cover letter, signed by the responsible professional, providing a
statement of findings in basic terms. In addition, studies, analyses,
computations and the like shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   Alteration of a stream includes placement of culverts, bridges or
other stream crossings. The Floodplain Administrator may require the use of
“best practice” techniques in the construction of bridges, culverts or stream
crossings to prevent damage, loss of stream crossings and localized flooding
caused by blockage. These techniques may include, but are not limited to, wing
walls, trash grates or requiring openings to be of sufficient size to pass
debris and/or anticipated future increases in flood heights.
      (4)   All new and replacement bridges, culverts and other stream
crossings shall adhere to the relevant anchoring requirements contained in this
chapter.
      (5)   The developer is required to provide the community a legal
agreement detailing all scheduled inspections and maintenance to be performed
on altered or relocated watercourses, including culverts, bridges and other
stream crossings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to transfer
this agreement when the land associated with the watercourse alteration is
transferred. A copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a signed copy to
the Floodplain Administrator shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in §
153.99.
      (6)   The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material
required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the flood
insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, when notified by the
Floodplain Administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose.
(Prior Code, § 1733.04) (Ord. 07-05, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 153.05 CRITERIA FOR BUILDING AND SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   General. Permits are required in order to determine whether all new
construction or substantial improvements are:
      (1)   Located in an identified floodplain, floodway or other flood hazard
area;
      (2)   Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
      (3)   Constructed with material and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage as outlined in FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) or the most
recent revision thereof;
      (4)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
and
      (5)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
   (B)   Basic format. The basic format of the permit shall include the
following:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is
to occur;
      (3)   Names, addresses and valid West Virginia license numbers of all
contractors working at the building site, or affidavits stating that work is
being performed by individuals exempt from contractor licensing as set forth in
W. Va. Code 30-42-6 or state regulations or the most recent revision thereof;
      (4)   A description of site location sufficient to locate the project,
including tax map and parcel number;
      (5)   A standard site plan showing size and location of the proposed
development as well as any existing buildings or structures. The site plan
shall also show all adjacent roads and watercourses with direction of flow;
      (6)   An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to pay any and all fees
associated with the permitting process as set forth in §
153.07(I);
      (7)   An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to allow community
officials access to the development to inspect for compliance; and
      (8)   The contract required by West Virginia Code of State Regulations,
Title 28, Series 4, and all addendums to the contract(s) shall be presented to
the Floodplain Administrator for review. Any amendments or addendums to this
contract shall be presented within five business days of signing. The community
does not require and will not keep copies of the contracts. Failure to present
a contract or an amendment or addendum for review shall void the permit. If a
licensed contractor is not involved, or the work is of an aggregate value of
less than $10,000 including materials and labor, a brief written description of
proposed work and the estimated value will suffice.
   (C)   Elevation and flood-proofing information.
      (1)   All applicants are encouraged to exceed the minimum elevation
requirements contained herein. Flood insurance rates can be lowered
significantly by increasing the elevation of the lowest floor above the
freeboard height required by this chapter.
      (2)   Depending on the type of structure involved, the following
information shall also be included in the application for work within the
floodplain area;
         (a)   For structures to be elevated two feet above the base flood
elevation:
            1.   A plan showing the size of the proposed structure and its
relation to the lot where it is to be constructed;
            2.   A determination of elevations of the base flood, existing
ground, proposed finished ground and lowest floor, certified by a registered
professional engineer, surveyor or architect;
            3.   Plans showing the method of elevating the proposed structure,
including details of proposed fills, pile structures, retaining walls,
foundations, erosion protection measures and the like. When required by the
Floodplain Administrator, a registered professional engineer or architect shall
prepare these plans;
            4.   Plans showing the methods used to protect utilities (including
sewer, water, telephone, electric, gas and the like) from flooding to two feet
above the base flood elevation at the building site;
            5.   During the course of construction, as soon as the basic
elements of the lowest floor are in place and before further vertical
construction, it is highly recommended that the applicant obtain elevation data
completed by a licensed surveyor certifying the height of the lowest floor; and
            6.   A nonconversion agreement shall be signed by the applicant
whenever the community determines that the area below the first floor could be
converted to a nonconforming use (generally areas below base flood elevation
with ceilings higher than five feet). This agreement shall state:
               a.   The area below base flood elevation shall not be converted
for use other than for parking, building access or for allowable storage as
detailed in this chapter; and
               b.   The applicant agrees to notify prospective buyers of the
existence of the non-conversion agreement. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to transfer the agreement at closing to the new owner via
notarized signature, a copy of all new agreements shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator. Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a
signed copy to the Floodplain Administrator shall subject the violator to the
penalties set forth in §
153.99.
         (b)   For structures to be flood-proofed to two feet above the base
flood elevation (nonresidential structures only): all applicants are encouraged
to exceed the minimum flood-proofing requirements contained herein. Flood
insurance rates can be lowered significantly by increasing the level of flood-
proofing above the height required by this chapter. In order to obtain an
“elevation credited” flood insurance rate on dry flood-proofed buildings,
flood-proofing must extend at least one foot above the base flood elevation:
            1.   Plans showing details of all flood-proofing measures, prepared
by a registered professional engineer, showing the size of the proposed
structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed;
            2.   A determination of elevations of the base flood, existing
ground, proposed finished ground, lowest floor and flood-proofing limits,
certified by a registered professional engineer, surveyor or architect; and
            3.   A flood-proofing certificate, FEMA 81-65, as revised by FEMA,
shall be prepared by the registered professional engineer who prepared the
plans in (C)(2)(b)1. above, stating the structure in question, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities is designed so that:
               a.   The structure is water tight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water from the lowest structural element to two
feet above the base flood elevation; and
               b.   The structure will withstand the hydrostatic, hydrodynamic,
buoyant, impact and other forces resulting from the flood depths, velocities,
pressures and other factors associated with the base flood.
         (c)   Appurtenant structures, structures constructed of flood
resistant materials and used solely for parking of vehicles or storage:
            1.   Plans showing details of all flood-proofing measures and
showing the size of the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it
is to be constructed;
            2.   A completed elevation certificate showing elevation of
existing ground, proposed finished ground and lowest floor; and
            3.   The Floodplain Manager shall prepare, or shall cause to be
prepared, certification confirming that the appurtenant structure, together
with attendant utilities is designed so that:
               a.   Flood resistant materials as detailed in FEMA Technical
Bulletin 2-93 (FIA-TB-2) are used in the construction of the structure from the
lowest structural element to two feet above the base flood elevation and that
all utilities are located at least two feet above the base flood elevation;
               b.   Hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls are equalized by
allowing for automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
                  i.   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided;
                  ii.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade; and
                  iii.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves
or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
               c.   The applicant shall sign a non-conversion agreement and
notify prospective buyers of the existence of the agreement. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to transfer the non-conversion agreement to any
new owner at closing via notarized signature. A signed copy of the transferred
non-conversion agreement shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
Failure to transfer the agreement and provide a signed copy to the Floodplain
Administrator shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in §
153.99.
   (D)   Site plan criteria. The owner or developer of any proposed
development, including subdivisions and manufactured home parks, shall submit a
preliminary site plan to the Floodplain Administrator that includes the
following information:
      (1)   Name of registered professional engineer, surveyor or other
qualified person responsible for providing the information required in this
section;
      (2)   A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or
development with respect to the town’s floodplain areas, proposed lots sites
and fills. In addition, it is required that all subdivision proposals and other
proposed new developments which are proposed to take place either fully or
partially within the approximated floodplain (F4) and which are greater that
ten lots or two acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include base flood
elevation data. If FEMA has completed a Flood Insurance Study (FIS), that data
must be used to substantiate the base flood. Otherwise, the developer may
submit data provided by an authoritative source, such as U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, U.S. Geological Survey, Natural Resources Conservation Service,
state and local water resource departments, or technical data developed using
detailed methodologies comparable to those contained in a flood insurance
study. This data shall be prepared and certified by a registered professional
engineer, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect
currently accepted technical concepts;
      (3)   Where the subdivision and/or development lies partially or
completely in the floodplain areas, the plan map shall include detailed
information giving the location and elevation of proposed roads, public
utilities and building sites. All such maps shall also show contours at
intervals of two or five feet depending upon the slope of the land and identify
accurately the boundaries of the floodplain areas; and
      (4)   Where the subdivision lies partially in the floodplain area and all
proposed development will take place on natural grade a significant vertical
distance above the floodplain area, development of detailed base flood
elevation data may not be necessary. In these cases the site plan for the
proposed development must clearly delineate the area to be developed and the
location of the floodplain areas as depicted on the FEMA map. A registered
professional engineer or licensed professional surveyor must certify the site
plan.
   (E)   Restrictions to subdivision of land in floodplain areas. Subdivision
of land in the floodplain area must result in lots that include a buildable
portion outside of the identified flood hazard area and be served by streets
within the proposed subdivision having surfaces not lower than one foot below
the elevation of the line defining the floodplain limits. All new structures
must be sited on the portion of the subdivided lot that is located outside of
the identified flood hazard area.
(Prior Code, § 1733.05) (Ord. 07-05, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 153.06 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.
   In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings, structures and related
utilities and facilities, the following restrictions apply to all development,
subdivision proposals, manufactured home parks, new construction and to
construction of substantial improvements, and the repair of substantial damage,
to existing structures occurring in the floodplain area.
   (A)   Basements and lowest floors.
      (1)   All new construction, relocation and substantial improvements,
including repair of substantial damage, of residential structures must have the
lowest floor, including basement, ductwork and utilities, elevated to two feet
above the base flood elevation.
      (2)   All new construction, relocation, substantial improvements,
including repair of substantial damage, of nonresidential structures must have
the lowest floor, including basement, ductwork and utilities, elevated to two
feet above the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure is water tight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water from the lowest
structural element to two feet above the base flood elevation.
      (3)   For all new construction, relocation, substantial improvements and
repair of substantial damage, those fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria.
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (B)   Manufactured home placement. All manufactured homes to be installed or
substantially improved within the identified flood hazard areas of city shall
be installed by a contractor possessing a valid West Virginia Manufactured Home
Installer’s License. Contractors shall install in accordance with the following
standards.
      (1)   The lowest floor, ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump,
shall be elevated two feet above the base flood elevation.
      (2)   Elevation shall be on reinforced piers on a permanent foundation or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength engineered for use in
a flood hazard area. Installation designs incorporating dry stacked block piers
shall not be used in flood hazard areas.
      (3)   All manufactured homes shall be anchored to the permanent
foundation in compliance with the requirements of 42 West Virginia Code of
State Regulations, Series 19 Sections 10A.1, 10A.2 and 10A2.b as authorized by
W. Va. Code 21-9-4. The anchoring shall be adequate to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, the over-the-top and frame ties, attached to permanent foundation
elements. Ground anchors are not adequate to satisfy flood specific anchoring
requirements. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      (4)   Any additions to a manufactured home shall be similarly anchored.
      (5)   A contractor possessing a valid state Manufactured Home Installer’s
License shall certify in writing that the manufactured home has been installed
to the standards set forth above.
   (C)   Appurtenant structures.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) below, appurtenant structures
shall be located out of the floodplain area or elevated to two feet above the
base flood elevation.
      (2)   Where appurtenant structures not connected to the principal
structure are to be located on sites below the base flood elevation, the
following flood damage reduction provisions apply:
         (a)   Structures shall be no more than 600 square feet in size and
valued at less than $10,000;
         (b)   Floors shall be at or above grade on at least one side;
         (c)   Structures shall be located, oriented and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
         (d)   Structures shall be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
         (e)   Flood resistant materials as detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin
2-93 (FIA-TB-2) shall be used in the construction of the structure from the
lowest structural element to two feet above the base flood elevation;
         (f)   Machinery, electric devices or appliances and all utilities
shall be located at least two feet above the base flood elevation; and
         (g)   The venting requirements contained in division (A) above are
applicable and shall be strictly adhered to.
      (3)   A nonconversion agreement shall be signed by the applicant stating
that the use of the appurtenant structure or detached or attached garage shall
not be changed from the use permitted, acknowledging that the structure may be
subject to greater flood risk and that higher flood insurance premiums may be
possible, and that a change in use may require full compliance with this
chapter. The applicant agrees to notify prospective buyers of the existence of
this agreement. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to transfer the
agreement at closing to the new owner via notarized signature, a copy of all
new agreements shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. Failure to
transfer the agreement and provide a signed copy to the Floodplain
Administrator shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in §
153.99.
   (D)   Recreational vehicle placement. Recreational vehicles to be placed
within any floodplain area shall either:
      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle
is READY FOR HIGHWAY use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions; or
      (3)   Be installed in accordance with the manufactured home placement
requirements and all other flood reduction requirements contained in this
chapter.
   (E)   Fill.
      (1)   The city officially recognizes the beneficial functions the
floodplain serves in storage and transportation of water during floods. The
city also finds that placement of fill in floodplains can have undesirable and
detrimental effects on velocity, erosion and sedimentation rates causing
increased flooding. (No fill shall be permitted in the floodway.)
      (2)   Placement of fill in other floodplain areas is restricted to
functional purposes such as elevating a structure. Placement of fill to dispose
of spoil from excavation or to elevate yards, parking lots or fields will not
generally be considered a functional purpose. The Floodplain Administrator may
require the developer to provide compensatory storage before permitting fill.
All fill placed in the floodplain area shall meet or exceed the following
standards.
         (a)   Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not
adversely affect adjacent properties. The city may require the applicant to
demonstrate through engineering reports that proposed fill would not adversely
affect adjacent properties. When required, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
shall be undertaken only by a registered professional engineer who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. The resultant study shall include a cover letter, signed
and sealed by the responsible professional, providing a statement of findings
in basic terms. In addition, studies, analyses, computations and the like shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
city. During permit review, the community shall consider the following issues
that have the potential to cause adverse impact to adjacent properties:
            1.   Unacceptable increases in flood heights;
            2.   Blocking drainage from adjacent property;
            3.   Deflection of floodwaters onto adjacent existing structures;
            4.   Increases to stream velocity initiating or exacerbating
erosion problems; or
            5.   Other unique site conditions may be considered when
determining whether fill will cause adverse impact to adjacent property,
including, but not limited to, subsidence areas, karst topography, stream
blockages and steep topography adjacent to the channel.
         (b)   Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not
adversely affect the capacity of channels or floodways of any tributary to the
main stream, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system.
         (c)   Filled site must be contoured to drain properly (avoid ponding).
         (d)   Fill shall extend beyond a structure for a sufficient distance
to provide acceptable access. For residential structures, fill shall extend
laterally 15 feet beyond the building line from all points before the start of
sloping required in division (F) below. For nonresidential structures, fill
shall be placed to provide access acceptable for intended use. At grade access,
with fill extending laterally 15 feet beyond the building line, shall be
provided to a minimum of 25% of the perimeter of a nonresidential structure.
         (e)   Fill shall consist of soil or rock material only. Sanitary
landfills shall not be permitted, no trash or woody debris shall be buried on
site.
         (f)   Fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary
stability and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling. Fill compaction
standards must be appropriate to proposed post fill use, particular attention
is necessary when fill is being used to elevate a structure.
         (g)   Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one vertical on two
horizontal, unless substantiating data justifying steeper slopes are submitted
to and approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
         (h)   Fill site and fill must be protected from erosion.
            1.   Fill slopes exposed to flood waters with expected velocities
during the occurrence of the base flood of five feet per second or less must be
protected from erosion by covering them with grass, vines, weeds or similar
vegetative undergrowth.
            2.   Fill slopes exposed to flood waters with expected velocities
during the occurrence of the base flood of greater than five feet per second
must be protected from erosion by armoring them with stone or rock slope
protection.
         (i)   The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other
material required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise
the flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, when notified by
the Floodplain Administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by
FEMA for this purpose.
   (F)   Placement of structures. All buildings and structures shall be
constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the
flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum obstruction effect upon
the flow and height of floodwater.
      (1)   Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
      (2)   So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on
the same flood- flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
   (G)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All buildings and structures, including stream crossings, shall be
firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse and lateral movement, thus reducing the threat to life and
property and decreasing the possibility of the blockage of bridge openings and
other restricted sections of the watercourse.
      (2)   All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below
the base flood elevation shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation.
   (H)   Flood protection setback.
      (1)   A flood protection setback equal to twice the width of the
watercourse channel measuring from the top of one bank to the top of the
opposite bank or 50 feet, whichever is less, shall be maintained from the top
of the banks of all watercourses. To reduce erosion, natural vegetation shall
be maintained in this area. Where natural vegetation does not exist along the
watercourse and conditions for replanting are suitable, high priority shall be
given to planting vegetation in the setback area to stabilize banks and enhance
aquatic resources.
      (2)   Necessary public works and temporary construction may be exempted
from this division (H).
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator may consider an appeal to the flood
protection setback requirement if the applicant demonstrates that it is
impossible to allow any development without encroachment into the flood
protection setback area. The appeal conditions shall be the minimum necessary
and shall be made only after due consideration is given to varying other siting
standards, such as side, front and back lot line setbacks.
   (I)   Storage.
      (1)   No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in times of
flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, shall be stored
below base flood elevation.
      (2)   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
      (3)   Due to the potential of masking the natural elevation and making it
more difficult to enforce this chapter, material that resembles “fill” material
shall not be considered “storage” material for purposes of this division (I).
   (J)   Utility and facility requirements.
      (1)   All new or replacement water systems, whether public or private,
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems.
      (2)   All new or replacement sanitary disposal systems, whether public or
private, shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      (3)   All other new or replacement public and/or private utilities and
facilities shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
      (4)   Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (K)   Drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazard.
   (L)   Backflow preventers. Back flow prevention valves should be used for
all enclosed structures with sewage or drainage facilities located in the
floodplain.
(Prior Code, § 1733.06) (Ord. 07-05, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 153.07 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Building Codes Official is hereby appointed as Floodplain Administrator
to administer and implement this local law by granting or denying floodplain
development permits in accordance with its provisions.
   (A)   Development permits and site plan approvals required. It shall be
unlawful for any contractor, person, partnership, business or corporation to
undertake or cause to be undertaken, any development, new construction,
substantial improvement, repair of substantial damage, placement or relocation
of any structure, including manufactured homes, within city unless a permit
application and standard site plan has been completed and submitted, and a
permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator. In addition, where
land that is either partially or fully in the regulatory floodplain is to be
subdivided, utilized for a manufactured home park or subdivision or otherwise
developed, a detailed site plan must be submitted to, and approved by, the
Floodplain Administrator prior to any development.
   (B)   Approval of permits and plans.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review, or shall cause to be
reviewed, all permit applications and plans in order to determine whether
proposed building sites are reasonably safe from flooding.
      (2)   All permits and plans shall be approved only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with
the requirements of the state and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall not issue a permit to any person
who does not possess a valid contractor’s license when a contractor’s license
is required by W. Va. Code 21-11-10.
      (4)   The Floodplain Administrator, before issuance of the permit, shall
require the applicant to furnish satisfactory proof that such person is duly
licensed as a contractor under the provisions of state code. If the applicant
is not licensed a written affidavit that such person is not subject to
licensure as a contractor or subcontractor, as defined in W. Va. Code 21-11-3,
shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator and placed in the permit
file.
      (5)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require copies of all necessary
permits from those governmental agencies from which federal or state law
requires approval.
      (6)   The Floodplain Administrator shall provide a copy of all permits to
the County Assessor as required by W. Va. Code 11-3-3A.
      (7)   The Floodplain Administrator shall provide a copy of all permits
for new structures to the County E-911 addressing coordinator.
      (8)   The city shall provide sufficient space to allow the Floodplain
Administrator to keep on file in perpetuity, in a location safe from natural
hazards, all information collected during the course of the administration of
this chapter.
   (C)   Application procedures. Application for a permit and/or site plan
approvals shall be made, in writing, on the forms supplied by the city, and
shall include all information stipulated under §
153.05.
   (D)   Changes. After the issuance of a permit or site plan approval by the
Floodplain Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the
application, permit or any of the plans, specification or other documents
submitted with the application without the written consent or approval of the
Floodplain Administrator.
   (E)   Permit placards. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit
placard, which shall be prominently displayed on the premises during the time
construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit,
the date of its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (F)   Start of construction. Work on the proposed construction shall begin
within six months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. All work on the proposed construction must be completed within
12 months of permit issuance, at which time the permit shall expire, unless a
time extension is granted in writing by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (G)   Stop-work orders, inspections and revocations.
      (1)   Stop-work orders.
         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued,
a “Stop- Work Order Notice” for any development found ongoing without having
obtained a permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject the violator to
the penalties described in §
153.99.
         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued,
a “Stop- Work Order Notice” for any development found non-compliant with the
provisions of this law and/or the conditions of the permit. Disregard of a
stop-work order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in §
153.99.
      (2)   Inspections and revocations.
         (a)   During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or
other authorized official may inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
application and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
         (b)   If the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not
comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances or
that there has been false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the
Floodplain Administrator shall issue a “Stop-Work Order Notice”, revoke the
permit and notify the Chief Elected Official.
         (c)   The Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official may
inspect any development covered by this chapter or previous ordinance to
determine whether any portion of the development has been altered to be in non-
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The Chief Elected Official
shall be notified of any development found to be out of compliance with this
chapter.
   (H)   Certificate of compliance.
      (1)   In areas of flood hazard, it shall be unlawful to occupy, or to
permit the use or occupancy, of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, installed, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the Local Floodplain Administrator stating that
the building or land conforms to the requirements of this local law. Occupying
or using a building or premises in violation of this section shall subject the
violator to the penalties described in §
153.99.
      (2)   In areas of flood hazard, it shall be unlawful to inspect and
approve a permanent utility connection to any building or premises, or both, or
part thereof hereafter created, erected, installed or rebuilt until the
inspector is in possession of a copy of the certificate of compliance issued by
the Local Floodplain Administrator stating that the particular development
being inspected conforms to the requirements of this local law. Inspection and
approval of utilities in violation of this section shall subject the violator
to the penalties described in §
153.99.
      (3)   In areas of flood hazard it shall be unlawful to install a
permanent utility connection to any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, installed or rebuilt until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the Local Floodplain Administrator stating that
the development conforms to the requirements of this local law. Installation of
utilities in violation of this section shall subject the violator to the
penalties described in §
153.99.
      (4)   A certificate of compliance shall be issued when the Floodplain
Administrator is satisfied that all development in areas of special flood
hazard will comply with the requirements of this chapter.
      (5)   Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in this chapter or local administrative procedures, and
upon receipt of finished construction elevation certificate, hydraulic data,
flood-proofing certificate or encroachment analyses required as a condition of
permit approval.
   (I)   Fees.
      (1)   A floodplain determination fee as set by the City Council, payable
to the city, shall be assessed on all proposed development.
      (2)   A fee of $10, payable to the city, shall be charged for completion
of a special flood hazard determination form for real estate, loan or insurance
purposes.
      (3)   Application for a permit for proposed development determined to be
occurring in a flood hazard area regulated by this chapter shall be accompanied
by a fee, payable to the city, based upon the estimated value of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator at the following
rates:
 
Type of Development                              Fee
Accessory structures                             As set by the City Council
Floodway development reviews (additional fee)    As set by the City Council
One- and two-family dwelling                     As set by the City Council
Site plans, grading and filling (additional fee) As set by the City Council
Any other structures                             As set by the City Council
 
      (4)   In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the
city for any additional costs for services necessary for review and/or
inspection of proposed development. Services include, but are not limited to,
professional engineering and surveying. The Floodplain Administrator may
require a deposit towards these additional costs. Additional costs may include
reimbursement for contracted services.
      (5)   When any work for which a permit is required by this chapter is
started or proceeded with prior to obtaining a permit, the fees above specified
shall be doubled. Payment of the doubled fee shall not relieve any person from
complying fully with the requirements of this chapter in the execution of the
work or from other penalties prescribed herein.
(Prior Code, § 1733.07) (Ord. 07-05, passed 12-18-2007) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.08 APPEALS.
   (A)   Generally. Whenever any person is aggrieved by a decision of the
Floodplain Administrator with respect to the provision of this chapter, it is
the right of that person to appeal to the City Council which shall be known as
the Appeals Authority. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days
after notification of the decision. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Appeals
Authority shall set a time and place not less than ten nor more than 45 days
for the purpose of hearing the appeal. Notice of the time and place of the
hearing shall be given to all parties at which time they may appear and be
heard. The determination by the Appeals Authority shall be final in all cases.
   (B)   Appeal review criteria.
      (1)   All appeals contesting only the permit fee, the cumulative
substantial damage requirement, the flood protection setback requirement or the
freeboard requirements may be handled at the discretion of the Appeals
Authority.
      (2)   All decisions on appeals to all other provisions of this chapter
shall adhere to the following criteria.
         (a)   Affirmative decisions shall only be issued by the Appeals
Authority upon: a showing of good and sufficient cause; a determination that
failure to grant the appeal would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant; and a determination that the granting of an appeal will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances or cause fraud on or victimization of the
public or conflict with existing locals laws or ordinance.
         (b)   An affirmative decision shall be issued only upon determination
that it is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief. Financial hardship, as a sole criterion, shall not be considered
sufficient justification to grant an appeal.
         (c)   An affirmative decision shall be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
         (d)   The Appeals Authority shall notify the applicant in writing over
the signature of a community official that the issuance of a decision to allow
construction of a structure below the base flood elevation will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance, such construction below the base
flood elevation increases risk to life and property. Such notifications shall
be maintained with a record of all decisions as required in division (B)(2)(e)
below; and
         (e)   The Appeals Authority shall maintain a record of all decisions
including justification for their issuance, and report such decisions issued in
its biannual report to the Federal Insurance Administration.
         (f)   An affirmative decision shall not be granted for any
construction, development, use or activity within any floodway area that would
cause any increase in the base flood elevation.
(Prior Code, § 1733.08) (Ord. 07-05, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 153.09 GOVERNMENT ACTIONS.
   (A)   Municipal annexation.
      (1)   The city shall pass a resolution acknowledging and accepting
responsibility for enforcing floodplain ordinance standards during annexation
of any area containing identified flood hazards.
      (2)   All plats or maps of annexation shall show the floodplain
boundaries, base flood elevation and location of the floodway where determined.
   (B)   Permits for government entities. Unless specifically exempted by law,
all public utilities and municipal, county, state and federal entities are
required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. Any
entity claiming to be exempt from the requirements of this chapter must provide
a written statement setting forth the rationale for exemption. In addition, the
entity claiming exemption shall provide copies of all relevant legal
documentation demonstrating the exemption.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 153.10 MUNICIPAL LIABILITY.
   The granting of a permit or approval of a subdivision or development plan in
an identified flood- prone area shall not constitute a representation,
guarantee or warranty of any kind by the city, or by any official or employee
thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and shall create
no liability upon the city. All applicants proposing development in or near a
flood hazard area are urged to locate development as far away from, and as high
above, all flooding sources as possible.
(Prior Code, § 1733.09) (Ord. 07-05, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of this chapter or direction of the Floodplain Administrator, or any
other authorized employee of the community, shall be unlawful and shall be
referred to the Municipal Attorney, who shall expeditiously prosecute all such
violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, pay a fine to the city of an
amount not to exceed state law plus cost of prosecution. In default of such
payment, such person shall be imprisoned for a term not to exceed state law.
Each day during which any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute
a separate offense. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are
hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of
this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or
noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the violation or non-
compliance with the ordinance or permit it to continue; and all such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or non-compliance within
a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the city to
be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
(Prior Code, § 1733.99) (Ord. 07-05, passed 12-18-2007)
CHAPTER 154: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Title, scope and intent
   
154.002   Applicability
   
154.003   Interpretation and definitions
   
154.004   Department of Property Maintenance Inspection and Property
Maintenance Advisory Board created
   
154.005   Duties and powers of Property Maintenance Inspector
   
154.006   Approval
   
154.007   Violations
   
154.008   Notice and violations
Unsafe Structures
   
154.020   Purpose
   
154.021   Definitions
   
154.022   Closing and removal of unsafe structures
   
154.023   Inspection
   
154.024   Correction of unsafe conditions
   
154.025   Relief from order for corrective action
   
154.026   Owner responsible for costs
   
154.027   Civil action for corrective action and recovery of costs
   
154.028   Notices
Maintenance Requirements
   
154.040   Scope and responsibility
   
154.041   Exterior property areas
   
154.042   Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs
   
154.043   Exterior of structures
   
154.044   Interior structures
   
154.045   Handrails and guardrails
   
154.046   Rubbish, salvage, garbage, materials, machinery and equipment
   
154.047   Extermination
   
154.048   Reserved
   
154.049   Penalties for violating this subchapter
Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations
   
154.060   Scope, responsibility and alternative devices
   
154.061   Light
   
154.062   Ventilation
   
154.063   Occupancy limitations
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements
   
154.075   Scope and responsibility
   
154.076   Required facilities
   
154.077   Toilet rooms
   
154.078   Plumbing systems and fixtures
   
154.079   Water system
   
154.080   Sanitary drainage system
   
154.081   Storm drainage
Mechanical and Electrical Facilities
   
154.095   Scope and responsibility
   
154.096   Heating facilities
   
154.097   Mechanical equipment
   
154.098   Electrical facilities
   
154.099   Electrical equipment
   
154.100   Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters
   
154.101   Duct systems
Fire Safety Requirements
   
154.115   Scope and responsibility
   
154.116   Means of egress
   
154.117   Fire-resistance ratings
   
154.118   Fire protection systems
Salvage Yards
   
154.130   Scope and responsibility
   
154.131   License required; issuance; fee; renewal
   
154.132   Areas where establishment prohibited; screening requirements;
existing licensed yards; issuance
   
154.133   Requirements as to fences
   
154.134   Payment of costs of screening
   
154.135   Violations declared a public nuisance; abatement; injunctions
Decontamination and Demolition of Contaminated Structures
   
154.150   Purpose and authority
   
154.151   Definitions
   
154.152   Decontamination contractor certification and responsibilities
   
154.153   Basic decontamination contractor training and certification
   
154.154   Refresher training course
   
154.155   Worker and supervisor certification
   
154.156   Denial, suspension or revocation of certification
   
154.157   Certified decontamination contractor list
   
154.158   Decontamination, sampling and testing requirements and
responsibilities
   
154.159   Sampling procedures
   
154.160   Designating contamination
   
154.161   Notification of contaminated property
   
154.162   Property owner decontamination responsibilities
   
154.163   Verifying decontamination
   
154.164   Recording decontamination
   
154.165   Repayment for decontamination and demolition services
   
154.166   Creation of a lien to pay for decontamination or demolishing
contaminated property
Vacant Structure Registration
   
154.180   Purpose, authority and authorization
   
154.181   Definitions
   
154.182   Owner registration required
   
154.183   Violation
   
154.184   Investigations; determining structures not occupied
   
154.185   Notice of structure found to be a vacant structure
   
154.186   Assessment of fees
   
154.187   Collection of fees
   
154.188   Liability; remedies and City Fund
   
154.189   Right to appeal
   
154.190   Exemption from vacant structure status
   
154.191   Forms
   
154.192   Compliance with other code provisions
 
   
154.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 TITLE, SCOPE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known as the “Property Maintenance
Ordinance of the City of Nitro, West Virginia”, hereinafter referred to as
“this chapter”.
   (B)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing
residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and
constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures,
equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation,
protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards,
and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators
and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for
administration, enforcement and penalties.
   (C)   Intent. This chapter shall be construed to secure its expressed
intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they
are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and
premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these
provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health
and safety as required herein. Repairs, alterations, additions to and change of
occupancy in existing buildings shall comply with the International Existing
Building Code.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.002 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   General. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all matters
affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in this
subchapter. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this chapter
specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
   (B)   Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by
this chapter or a previous regulation or article under which the structure or
premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good
working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service,
facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be
removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except
for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are
in progress. The requirements of this chapter are not intended to provide the
basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and
devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner
or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of
buildings, structures and premises.
   (C)   Application of other code. Repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the International Existing Building Code. Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision
of the International Zoning Code.
   (D)   Existing remedies. The provisions in this chapter shall not be
construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the city or its officers or
agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is
dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary.
   (E)   Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations
which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this chapter
shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
   (F)   Historic buildings. The provisions of this chapter shall not be
mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings
when such buildings or structures are judged by the Property Maintenance
Inspector to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare.
   (G)   Requirements not covered by ordinance. Requirements necessary for the
strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or
equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not
specifically covered by this chapter, shall be determined by the Property
Maintenance Inspector.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.003 INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall,
for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown in this subchapter.
   (B)   Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter;
the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
   (C)   Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this
chapter and are defined in the International Building Code, International Fire
Code, International Zoning Code, International Plumbing Code, International
Mechanical Code, International Existing Building Code or the ICC Electrical
Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
   (D)   Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings
such as the context implies.
   (E)   Parts. Whenever the words DWELLING UNIT, DWELLING, PREMISES, BUILDING,
ROOMING HOUSE, ROOMING UNIT, HOUSEKEEPING UNIT or STORY are stated in this
chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or
any part thereof”.
   (F)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABANDONED SALVAGE YARD. Any unlicensed salvage yard or any salvage yard
that was previously licensed but upon which the license has not been renewed
for more than one year.
      APPROVED. Approved by the Property Maintenance Inspector.
      BASEMENT. The portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade.
      BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or
shower.
      BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping
purposes.
      CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
      DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
      EASEMENT. The portion of land or property reserved for present or future
use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property.
The EASEMENT shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or
lots.
      EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
      EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rats or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or
by any other approved pest elimination methods.
      FENCE. An enclosure, barrier or screen constructed of materials or
consisting of plantings, natural objects or other appropriate means approved by
the Property Maintenance Inspector and located, placed or maintained so as
effectively to screen at all times salvage yards and the salvage therein
contained from the view of persons residing within the restricted distance of
passing upon the public roads and streets in the city.
      GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at
or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the
possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
      HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered HABITABLE SPACES.
      HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating
which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or
shower.
      IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-
threatening injury or death at any time.
      INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or
premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
      INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the
public streets for reason, including, but not limited to, being unlicensed,
wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair or incapable of being moved under
its own power.
      LABELED. Devices, equipment, appliances or materials to which has been
affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the
production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer
attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.
      LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET. To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record, thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to
a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
      OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
      OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
      OCCUPIED PRIVATE RESIDENCE. A private residence which is occupied for at
least six months each year.
      OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
      OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting
as a unit.
      PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way,
including any structures thereon.
      PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTOR. The official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this chapter, or any duly authorized
representative.
      PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
      RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY. An area wherein five or more occupied private
residences are located within any 1,000-foot radius.
      ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or
without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family
dwelling.
      ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking
purposes.
      RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage;
the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and
other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
      SALVAGE. Old or scrap brass, copper, iron, steel, other ferrous or
nonferrous materials, batteries or rubber and any junked, dismantled or wrecked
machinery, machines or motor vehicles or any parts of any junked, dismantled or
wrecked machinery, machines or motor vehicles.
      SALVAGE YARD. Any place which is maintained, operated or used for the
storing, keeping, buying, selling or processing of salvage, or for the
operation and maintenance of a motor vehicle graveyard.
      STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited,
or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
      STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
      TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
      TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub
or shower.
      VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned
or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
      WASTE TIRE. Any continuous solid or pneumatic rubber covering designed to
encircle the wheel of a vehicle but which has been discarded, abandoned or is
no longer suitable for its original, intended purpose nor suitable for
recapping, or other beneficial use, because of wear, damage or defect. A tire
is no longer considered to be suitable for its original intended purpose when
it fails to meet the minimum requirements to pass a state motor vehicle safety
inspection. Used tires located at a commercial recapping facility or tire
dealer for the purpose of being reused or recapped are not WASTE TIRES.
      WASTE TIRE MONOFILL or MONOFILL. An approved solid waste facility where
waste tires not mixed with any other waste are placed for the purpose of long
term storage for eventual retrieval for marketing purposes.
      WASTE TIRE PROCESSING FACILITY. A solid waste facility or manufacturer
that accepts waste tires generated by sources other than the owner or operator
of the facility for processing by such means as cryogenics, pyrolysis,
pyroprossing cutting, splitting, shredding, quartering, grinding or otherwise
breaking down waste tires for the purposes of disposal, reuse, recycling or
marketing.
      WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
      YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.004 DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION AND PROPERTY
MAINTENANCE ADVISORY BOARD CREATED.
   (A)   The Department of Property Maintenance Inspection is hereby created
and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Property
Maintenance Inspector.
      (1)   Appointment. The Property Maintenance Inspector shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. The Property Maintenance
Inspector shall not be removed from office except for cause and after full
opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges by and before the
appointing authority. The Property Maintenance Inspector shall be supervised by
the Code Official.
      (2)   Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the city
and with the concurrence of the Mayor and the City Council, the Property
Maintenance Inspector shall have the authority to appoint a Deputy Property
Maintenance Inspector, other related technical officers, inspectors and other
employees.
      (3)   Liability.
         (a)   The Property Maintenance Inspector, and the employees of that
office, while acting for the city, shall not thereby be rendered liable
personally, and are hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage
accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or permitted in
the discharge of official duties.
         (b)   Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of
an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties
and under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by the legal
representative of the city until the final termination of the proceedings. The
Property Maintenance Inspector or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs
in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this chapter; and any officer of the Department of Property
Maintenance Inspection, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free
from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of
any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection
therewith.
      (4)   Property maintenance fee. There is hereby imposed a property
maintenance fee for activities and services performed by the Department in
carrying out the property owner’s responsibilities under this chapter;
provided, that the Department shall give ten days’ notice in the manner
prescribed in §
154.008(B) and (C) to the property owner in advance of performing the property
owner’s responsibilities. The property maintenance fee shall be $250 per hour
or part thereof plus the amount of any fine imposed under §
154.999 to perform or carry out a specific activity or service under the
authority of this chapter; provided, that on and after September 16, 2013, the
property maintenance fee shall be $100 per hour or part thereof for each
employee of the city directed to perform or carry out a specific activity or
service under the authority of this subchapter, $200 for each piece of
equipment used to perform or carry out such activity or service, and,
additionally, the amount of any fine imposed under §
154.999. The property maintenance fee hereby imposed shall be due and payable
no later than seven days after the service or activity occurs.
         (a)   Failure to pay the fee creates a lien. If the property
maintenance fee is not paid within seven days after it is due, the amount shall
be in default and may be recovered by the city in any appropriate action. The
property maintenance fee shall, if not paid when due, constitute a lien upon
the premises served, which lien may be foreclosed against the lot or parcel of
land on which the building is located in accordance with state law relating to
the foreclosure of liens on real property. The city shall file semi-annually in
the office of the County Clerk of the county wherein the property is located a
statement of all unpaid property maintenance fees and liens, executed on its
behalf and duly verified by the City Treasurer, showing the kind and nature of
the service, the period covered, the amount of the charges due and unpaid for a
period of more than 90 days, the description or designation of the premises to
which services are chargeable and the name of the property owner, and further
showing an additional fee of $10 to reimburse the city for its costs in
preparing such statement and the additional item of $11 to reimburse the city
for the fee paid by it to the County Clerk for the recordation of such lien
statement, which statement when so filed of record shall be and constitute
notice of a first and prior lien upon the property.
         (b)   Release of lien filed for failure to pay property maintenance
fee.
            1.   Whenever the amount of any lien filed in accordance with this
subchapter has been paid, together with costs, in full to the City Treasurer,
the City Treasurer shall certify such payment to the Mayor, who shall execute
and deliver to the party paying the lien a release of the lien, which may be
recorded in the office of the County Clerk as other releases of liens.
            2.   The Mayor is authorized to issue a release of any such lien
which may have been filed by mistake against the wrong property, upon evidence
of such mistake being presented to the Mayor by the City Treasurer.
         (c)   Unpaid property maintenance fee collected when property
transferred. If the property maintenance fee imposed under this subchapter is
delinquent and the property is transferred from the record owner to another
person, the amount of such property maintenance fee shall be collected from the
transferor at the time of the transfer and the amount so collected shall be
paid to the City Treasurer.
   (B)   Property Maintenance Advisory Board created. The Property Maintenance
Advisory Board is hereby created.
      (1)   Membership. The membership of the Property Maintenance Advisory
Board shall be comprised of the city officials, or their respective designee:
Mayor; the City Recorder; the Code Official; the Property Maintenance
Inspector; the Fire Chief; the Police Chief; the Director of the Public Works
Department; and two members of the City Council appointed by the Mayor.
      (2)   Duties. The Property Maintenance Advisory Board shall meet at least
once each month to review complaints submitted by residents of the city, and to
provide general assistance and guidance to the Property Maintenance Inspector.
The City Recorder shall take complete minutes of each meeting, such minutes to
be distributed to each member of City Council.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009; Ord. passed 9-20-2011; Ord. 13-3, passed 9-3-
2013)
§ 154.005 DUTIES AND POWERS OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTOR.
   (A)   General. The Property Maintenance Inspector shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Rule-making authority.
      (1)   The Property Maintenance Inspector shall have authority as
necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, with
the consent of the City Council to adopt and promulgate rules and procedures;
to interpret and implement the provisions of this chapter; to secure the intent
thereof; and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or
other conditions.
      (2)   The Property Maintenance Inspector shall not have the authority to
waive any structural or fire performance requirements specifically provided for
in this chapter, or of violating accepted engineering methods involving public
safety.
   (C)   Inspections. The Property Maintenance Inspector shall make all of the
required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved
agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing
and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The Property Maintenance Inspector is authorized to
engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical
issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
   (D)   Right of entry. The Property Maintenance Inspector is authorized to
enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect, subject to
constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is
refused or not obtained, the Property Maintenance Inspector is authorized to
pursue recourse as provided by law.
   (E)   Identification. The Property Maintenance Inspector shall carry proper
identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of
duties under this chapter.
   (F)   Notices and orders. The Property Maintenance Inspector shall issue all
necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (G)   Department records. The Property Maintenance Inspector shall keep
official records of all business and activities of the Department specified in
the provisions of this chapter. Such records shall be retained in the official
records as long as the building or structure to which such records relate
remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by other regulations.
   (H)   Coordination of inspections. Whenever in the enforcement of this
chapter or another code or subchapter, the responsibility of more than one
Property Maintenance Inspector of the city is involved, it shall be the duty of
the Property Maintenance Inspectors involved to coordinate their inspections
and administrative orders as fully as practicable so that the owners and
occupants of the structure shall not be subjected to visits by numerous
inspectors or multiple or conflicting orders. Whenever an inspector from any
agency or department observes an apparent or actual violation of some provision
of some law, code or subchapter not within the inspector’s authority to
enforce, the inspector shall report the findings to the Property Maintenance
Inspector having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.006 APPROVAL.
   (A)   Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Property Maintenance Inspector
shall have the authority to grant modifications for specific cases, provided
the Property Maintenance Inspector shall first find that the specific case
makes the strict letter of this chapter impractical, the modification is in
compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter, and that such
modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The
details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the
Department files.
   (B)   Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this
chapter are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to
prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this
chapter, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative
material or method of construction shall be approved where the Property
Maintenance Inspector finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and
complies with the intent of the provisions of this chapter, and that the
material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the
equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
   (C)   Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or
method does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to
substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the Property
Maintenance Inspector shall have the authority to require tests to be made as
evidence of compliance at no expense to the city.
      (1)   Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the Property Maintenance Inspector shall be permitted to approve
appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency.
      (2)   Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the Property
Maintenance Inspector for the period required for retention of public records.
   (D)   Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and devices shall
not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been
reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working
condition and approved.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.007 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation
to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Notice of violation. The Property Maintenance Inspector shall serve a
notice of violation or order in accordance with §
154.008.
   (C)   Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice
of violation or order served in accordance with §
154.008 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and the violation shall be
deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied
with:
      (1)   If the notice is for a violation of §
154.041(D), the Property Maintenance Inspector shall proceed in accordance with
said §
154.041(D); and
      (2)   If the notice is for violation of any other section of this
subchapter, the Property Maintenance Inspector shall institute the appropriate
proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or
to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the
structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter or of the order or
direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the city shall be charged
against the real property upon which the structure is located and shall be a
lien upon such real property.
         (a)   Failure to pay the charge against the real property creates a
lien. If the charge against the real property is not paid within 14 days after
it is due, the amount shall be in default and may be recovered by the city in
any appropriate action. The city may file semi-annually in the office of the
County Clerk of the county wherein the property is located a statement of all
unpaid property maintenance fees and liens, executed on its behalf and duly
verified by the City Treasurer, showing the kind and nature of the service, the
period covered, the amount of the charges due and unpaid for a period of more
than 90 days, the description or designation of the premises to which services
are chargeable and the name of the property owner, and further showing an
additional fee of $10 to reimburse the city for its costs in preparing such
statement and the additional item of $11 to reimburse the city for the fee paid
by it to the County Clerk for the recordation of such lien statement, which
statement when so filed of record shall be and constitute notice of a first and
prior lien upon the property.
         (b)   Release of lien filed for failure to pay the charge against the
real property.
            1.   Whenever the amount of any lien filed in accordance with this
subchapter has been paid, together with costs, in full to the City Treasurer,
the City Treasurer shall certify such payment to the Mayor, who shall execute
and deliver to the party paying the lien a release of the lien, which may be
recorded in the office of the County Clerk as other releases of liens.
            2.   The Mayor is authorized to issue a release of any such lien
which may have been filed by mistake against the wrong property, upon evidence
of such mistake being presented to the Mayor by the City Treasurer.
         (c)   Unpaid charge against the real property collected when property
transferred. If the charge or charges against the real property imposed under
this subchapter is delinquent and the property is transferred from the record
owner at the time the charge or charges were incurred to another person, the
amount of such charge shall be collected from the transferor at the time of the
transfer and the amount so collected shall be paid to the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 11, passed 9-20-2011; Ord. passed 9-20-2011) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.008 NOTICE AND VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Notice to person responsible. Whenever the Property Maintenance
Inspector determines that there has been a violation of this chapter or has
grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the
manner prescribed in divisions (B) and (C) below to the person responsible for
the violation as specified in this chapter. If the corrective action as
described in the notice is not taken within ten days subsequent to the date of
the formal notice, the Property Maintenance Inspector shall file a complaint in
the city’s Municipal Court and said Municipal Court shall cause a summons to be
served upon the person responsible for correcting the violation.
   (B)   Form. The notice prescribed in division (A) above shall be in
accordance with all of the following:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;
      (3)   Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the
notice is being issued;
      (4)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs, improvements or other corrective action required to bring the dwelling
unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (5)   Inform the property owner of the right to appeal; and
      (6)   Include a statement of the city’s right to file a lien in
accordance with §
154.007(C).
   (C)   Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
upon the person responsible for correcting the violation if a copy thereof is:
      (1)   Delivered personally;
      (2)   Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known
address upon the person responsible for correcting the violation; or
      (3)   If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not
delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the structure affected by such notice.
   (D)   Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall
be as set forth in §
154.999.
   (E)   Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a
notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the
provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied
with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation
issued by the Property Maintenance Inspector and shall furnish to the Property
Maintenance Inspector a signed and notarized statement from the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance
order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without
condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance
order or notice of violation.
(Ord. 11, passed 9-20-2011) Penalty, see §
154.999
UNSAFE STRUCTURES
§ 154.020 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter provides a process for the identification, inspection,
correction and removal of unsafe structures within the city in a manner that
ensures adequate notice to the owners of such structures while protecting the
public from danger due to unsafe or unsanitary conditions.
(Ord. passed 12-5-2017)
§ 154.021 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. The Building Department of the City of Nitro, a
code enforcement department as defined by Title 87 West Virginia Code of State
Rules § 7-2, as it may be amended.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OFFICIAL. Any person employed by the city who has
been delegated authority code enforcement agency to conduct property
maintenance inspections.
   OWNER or LANDOWNER. A person who individually or jointly with others:
      (1)   Has legal title to the property, with or without actual possession
of the property;
      (2)   Has charge, care or control of the property as owner or agent of
the owner;
      (3)   Is an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the owner;
      (4)   Is the agent of the owner for the purpose of managing, controlling
or collecting rents; or
      (5)   May control or direct the management or disposition of the
property.
   UNSAFE, UNSANITARY, DANGEROUS OR DETRIMENTAL TO THE PUBLIC SAFETY OR
WELFARE.
      (1)   Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of
egress that does not conform to the approved building or fire code of the city
of Nitro as related to the requirements for existing buildings;
      (2)   The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or
other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to
not provide safe and adequate means of egress;
      (3)   Any portion of a dwelling, building, structure or appurtenance that
has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect,
abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to an extent that it is likely to
partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged;
      (4)   Any portion of a structure or building, or any member, appurtenance
or ornamentation on the exterior that is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of one and one-half the
original designed value;
      (5)   The dwelling, building or structure, or part of the building or
structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction,
the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the
support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely
collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or
structure is likely to fail or give way;
      (6)   The dwelling, building or structure, or any portion, is clearly
unsafe for its use;
      (7)   The dwelling, building or structure is neglected, damaged,
dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to
children, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals, criminal activity or
enables persons to resort to the dwelling, building or structure for committing
a nuisance or an unlawful act;
      (8)   Any dwelling, building or structure constructed, exists or
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to any dwelling, building or structure provided by the approved building or
fire code of the city or of any law or ordinance that presents either a
substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and
safety;
      (9)   A dwelling, building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
contamination by any hazardous substance or material including, but not limited
to, substance resulting from the illegal manufacture of drugs, damage, faulty
construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or
plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the code enforcement agency to
be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely
to cause sickness or disease;
      (10)   Any dwelling, building or structure, because of a lack of
sufficient or proper fire resistance-rated construction, fire protection
systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing
system or other cause, is determined by the code enforcement agency official to
be a threat to life or health; or
      (11)   Any portion of a building that remains on a site after the
demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or whenever any
building or structure is abandoned.
(Ord. passed 12-5-2017)
§ 154.022 CLOSING AND REMOVAL OF UNSAFE STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Agency may order the repair, alteration,
improvement, closing, demolition, or removal of any dwelling, building, or
structure that is determined by a Code Enforcement Agency Official to be
unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or welfare in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this subchapter.
   (B)   In order to make a determination regarding the classification of a
structure as unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous, or detrimental to the public safety
or welfare pursuant to this subchapter, and to determine and enforce the
appropriate remedy for any such structure, Code Enforcement Agency Officials
shall be entitled to make inspections, perform investigations, obtain search
warrants, issue notices, require corrective measures, present complaints to the
Municipal Judge, and exercise all other powers and duties authorized by W. Va
Code 8-12-16, as it may be amended.
   (C)   The powers and duties granted in this subchapter are in addition to
those otherwise granted by law and shall not be construed to limit any other
lawful powers of the city, including the power of code enforcement agency
officials to interpret and enforce the Building Code of the city.
   (D)   This subchapter shall be construed broadly so as to promote the
purpose of efficiently removing dangerous conditions that are harmful to the
community.
(Ord. passed 12-5-2017)
§ 154.023 INSPECTION.
   For purposes of inspections performed pursuant to this subchapter, the
following rules shall apply.
   (A)   When a code enforcement agency official enters the premises of the
property for investigating or inspecting any structure, dwelling or building,
the investigation shall be conducted in a way that minimizes the inconvenience
to the owner or persons in possession.
   (B)   Except in exigent circumstances and as permitted by law, the code
enforcement agency shall provide reasonable advance notice of the inspection to
the owner and request permission from the owner to enter the property.
   (C)   If the owner cannot be located after reasonable inquiry by the code
enforcement agency, or if the owner refuses entry, the code enforcement agency
may obtain an administrative search warrant from either the Municipal Court, or
the Kanawha County Magistrate Court or the Putnam County Magistrate Court,
depending upon in which county the property is located. Before obtaining an
administrative search warrant, a code enforcement agency official is required
to make a sworn statement and prima facie case showing that the code
enforcement agency was unable to gain access to the structure, dwelling, or
building after reasonable and good faith efforts, and that there is a
legitimate and substantial safety concern involving the structure, dwelling, or
building that supports the requested entry.
   (D)   If the administrative search warrant is granted by the court, and if
the owner can be located, the code enforcement agency shall provide the owner a
copy of the administrative search warrant five days before entering the
property. If there is a tenant or other person in possession of the structure
who is not the owner, and if such person(s) can be located, the code
enforcement agency shall also provide such person(s) a copy of the
administrative search warrant five days before entering the property.
   (E)   Any entry pursuant to this section shall be made for the sole purpose
of inspection of the structure, dwelling, or building for unsafe or unsanitary
conditions and not for the purpose of criminal prosecution or gathering
evidence for use in any criminal charge or proceeding unrelated to the unsafe
or unsanitary condition of the structure, dwelling or building.
(Ord. passed 12-5-2017)
§ 154.024 CORRECTION OF UNSAFE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Upon a determination by the Code Enforcement Agency that a structure
is unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the public safety or
welfare, the city may take corrective action by causing it to be vacated,
closed, removed, or demolished, either directly or by the use of third party
agents, without either the agreement of the owner or a court order, pursuant to
the following conditions:
      (1)   The Code Enforcement Agency undertakes reasonable efforts to seek
agreement from the owner;
      (2)   The corrective action may only be taken as to a dwelling,
structure, or building that is either:
         (a)   Defined in divisions (3), (5) or (8) in the definition for
UNSAFE, UNSANITARY, DANGEROUS OR DETRIMENTAL TO THE PUBLIC SAFETY OR WELFARE;
or
         (b)   Defined in divisions (6), (7), (9) or (11) in the definition for
UNSAFE, UNSANITARY, DANGEROUS OR DETRIMENTAL TO THE PUBLIC SAFETY OR WELFARE;
provided, that the dwelling, building or structure is vacant, abandoned or has
been lawfully declared unfit for human habitation; and the reasonable estimated
cost of repair, rehabilitation or corrective action exceeds the fair market
value of the dwelling, building or structure.
      (3)    Prior to undertaking the correction, the city will meet the
following procedural requirements:
         (a)   The code enforcement agency shall produce a written notice
containing a description of the real estate sufficient for identification, the
date of the last inspection, the name of the inspector, a reasonable
description of the unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous, or detrimental condition(s),
the corrective measures required, the allotted time to correct the substandard
condition(s), a statement of the right to file a lien, a statement of the right
to appeal to board of appeals under the State Building Code and the allotted
time the owner has to apply to the circuit court for a temporary injunction or
other similar relief restraining action by the enforcement agency
         (b)   The notice shall be served upon the owner or landowner by
conspicuously posting and attaching a copy of the notice to the subject
property, and by serving the notice on the owner or landowner in the same
manner as service of a complaint as set forth in §
154.028.
         (c)   If the code enforcement agency cannot effect personal service on
the owner, a code enforcement agency official shall subscribe a written
affidavit, to be maintained for a minimum of two years, that demonstrates the
structure, dwelling or building falls within one of the categories set forth in
division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) above and sets forth the basis in reasonable
detail including documentation of same, and memorializes the code enforcement
agency official’s efforts to contact or get permission for entry and corrective
action from the owner; and the code enforcement agency shall publish notice of
its intent to enter the property for the purpose of demolition or correction,
along with the address of the property, the name of the owner(s), and the date
of the proposed action, as a Class II legal advertisement consistent with the
requirements of W. Va. Code 59-3-2, the first of which shall run at least
thirty days before the date of the proposed action by the code enforcement
agency, and the last being no later than 20 days before the date of the
proposed action by the enforcement agency.
         (d)    If there is no response to the notice by the owner or landowner
in the time specified in the notice, then the city shall have the authority to
proceed in correction or demolition of the subject dwelling, building or
structure.
   (B)   It shall be an absolute defense to any civil action by an owner,
landowner, or tenant for damages resulting from the closure, demolition, or
other corrective action taken by the city under this section that the city
followed the procedures set forth herein; provided, that the city acted in good
faith, can demonstrate that the structure, dwelling or building falls within
one of the categories set forth in divisions (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) above,
followed the procedures set forth in this section, and had adopted the state
building code at the time the closure, demolition or other corrective action
occurred.
(Ord. passed 12-5-2017)
§ 154.025 RELIEF FROM ORDER FOR CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   (A)   The owner of property subject to corrective action shall be given
notice of the right to apply to the Circuit Court of Kanawha County or the
Circuit Court of Putnam County, depending upon in which county is located, for
a temporary injunction or other similar relief restraining correction or
demolition by the city. Such notice shall be provided in the written notice
produced pursuant to §
154.024(A)(3)(a).
   (B)   If an application for relief is made by the owner to the Circuit
Court, a hearing shall be had within twenty days of the application, or as soon
as reasonably possible.
   (C)   Continuances of the hearing provided for in this section may be made
for cause only. If a continuance is granted upon request by the owner, the
owner is required to pay into court, in the form of a bond, any reasonable and
necessary costs related to the property likely to be incurred by the
municipality during the continuance. This requirement for security is in
addition to any other bond required or authorized by the West Virginia Rules of
Civil Procedure or other applicable law.
   (D)   At the conclusion of a hearing held under this subdivision, if the
court finds that the property is unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous, or detrimental
to the public safety or welfare, the court shall make and enter an order
granting the relief as requested by the city. The court may disburse any moneys
paid into court by the owner in accordance with this section.
(Ord. passed 12-5-2017)
§ 154.026 OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR COSTS.
   (A)   The owner of any dwelling or building under determination of the State
Fire Marshal, as provided in W. Va. Code 29-3-12, or under order of the Code
Enforcement Agency of the city, shall be required to pay for the costs of
repairing, altering, improving, vacating, closing, removing or demolishing any
dwelling or building.
   (B)   In addition to any other rights provided by law, the city may file a
lien against the real property in question for an amount that reflects all
costs incurred by the city for repairing, altering, improving, vacating,
closing, removing or demolishing any dwelling or building.
(Ord. passed 12-5-2017)
§ 154.027 CIVIL ACTION FOR CORRECTIVE ACTION AND RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   (A)   In addition to any other rights provided by law, the city may also
institute a civil action in circuit court against the landowner or other
responsible party to get an order to take corrective action up to and including
demolition of any structure, dwelling, or building that is unsafe, unsanitary,
dangerous, or detrimental to the public safety or welfare; and to recover all
reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city with respect to the property
and for reasonable attorney fees and court costs incurred in the prosecution of
the action.
   (B)   No fewer than ten days before instituting a civil action as provided
in this section, the city shall send notice to the landowner by certified mail,
return receipt requested, advising the landowner of the governing body’s
intention to institute such action.
   (C)   The notice shall be sent to the most recent address of the landowner
of record in the office of the Kanawha County Assessor or the Putnam County
Assessor, depending upon in which county the property is located, and to any
other address for the landowner as may exist on record with the city. If, for
any reason, such certified mail is returned without evidence of proper receipt,
the municipality shall resend the notice(s) by first class mail, postage
prepaid, and shall also post notice on the front door or other conspicuous
location on the subject property.
(Ord. passed 12-5-2017)
§ 154.028 NOTICES.
   (A)   To the extent not otherwise authorized by state law, all notices of
violation or correction for violations that fall within one of the categories
defined in divisions (1), (2), (4), or (10) in the definition for UNSAFE,
UNSANITARY, DANGEROUS OR DETRIMENTAL TO THE PUBLIC SAFETY OR WELFARE shall be
served in accordance with the process set forth in the state building code.
   (B)   (1)   Any violation of this subchapter may be prosecuted by the
municipality consistent with state and local laws. Unless otherwise authorized
by state law, prosecution of a violation shall be initiated by a complaint
presented to and sworn or affirmed before a Municipal Judge or other municipal
official with lawful authority to hear and determine violations of municipal
code in the municipality where the offense is alleged to have occurred.
      (2)   Unless otherwise provided by statute, the presentation and oath or
affirmation shall be made by a code enforcement agency official or municipal
attorney showing reason to have reliable information and belief. If from the
facts stated in the complaint the Municipal Judge or other municipal official
with lawful authority to hear and determine violations of municipal code finds
probable cause, the complaint becomes the charging instrument initiating a
criminal proceeding.
      (3)   A complaint lawfully authorized by this subsection along with a
summons setting forth the date, time and place of appearance before a Municipal
Judge and or other municipal official with lawful authority to hear and
determine violations of municipal code shall be served in accordance with the
law of the state concerning the service of process in civil actions, except
that personal service of a summons and complaint may be made by a code
enforcement agency official.
      (4)   If service is made by certified mail under Rule 4(d)(1)(D) of the
West Virginia Rules of Civil Procedure and delivery of the summons and
complaint is refused, the code enforcement agency official, promptly upon the
receipt of the notice of the refusal, shall mail to the person or entity being
noticed, by first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy of the summons and
complaint. If the first class mailing is not returned as undeliverable by the
U.S. Postal Service, service of the summons and complaint is presumed to have
been effectuated. Upon service of the summons and complaint consistent with
this division (B), the violation may be prosecuted consistent with state and
local law.
(Ord. passed 12-5-2017)
MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.040 SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures,
equipment and exterior property.
   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the
structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except
as otherwise provided for in this subchapter. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a
sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of
this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit
are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part
of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they
occupy and control.
   (C)   Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof
or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary
condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect the public health or safety.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.041 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
   (A)   Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in
a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the
exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and
sanitary condition.
   (B)   Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water
thereon, or within any structure located thereon. Exception: approved retention
areas and reservoirs.
   (C)   Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and
maintained free from hazardous conditions.
   (D)   Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free
from weeds or plant growth in excess of ten inches in height. All noxious weeds
shall be prohibited.
      (1)   Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.
      (2)   Effective for the calendar year commencing January 1, 2018, and
each subsequent calendar year, the Property Maintenance Inspector upon finding
the owner or agent, including a lessee, having charge of a property has failed
to cut or destroy weeds shall serve upon that owner or agent, including a
lessee, a citation for violation of this division (D); provided, that if the
owner or agent, including a lessee, is not available or cannot be located, the
citation shall be served upon the property.
         (a)   The first citation of the calendar year shall be a warning
citation that requires the violation stated thereon to be corrected within five
days of issuance of the warning citation. Each citation issued in a calendar
year subsequent to the warning citation shall not require the issuance of an
additional warning citation.
         (b)   If the violation stated on the warning citation is not corrected
within the five days immediately succeeding issuance of that warning citation,
the Property Maintenance Inspector shall issue a citation that requires the
violation stated thereon to be corrected within the ten days immediately
succeeding the issuance of the citation.
      (3)   Issuance of a warning citation or a citation shall be prima facie
evidence of the violation indicated on the face of the respective citation. Any
person alleging he or she was improperly issued a citation may, within ten days
after service of the citation, file a petition for appeal of the citation or
payment thereof, along with the required bond, with the Municipal Court Clerk
in accordance with the following procedure.
         (a)   In order to properly and timely appeal a citation, the petition
for appeal shall be filed within ten days after service of the citation and the
alleged violator shall pay the required amount of the applicable fine in full
to the Municipal Court Clerk. The amount so paid shall be held by the Municipal
Court Clerk as bond pending an evidentiary hearing before and resolution of the
case by the Municipal Court. The Municipal Court Clerk shall issue to the
alleged violator a receipt showing the amount of bond paid.
         (b)   If any petition for appeal filed in accordance with this section
is not timely filed or is not accompanied with the required bond, the alleged
violator shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to appeal the
citation, and such petition shall be summarily denied as untimely filed.
         (c)   Nothing set forth above shall prevent the Municipal Court Judge
from finding, upon a proper showing, that an alleged violator suffers from
financial hardship, and, as a result, waiving the requirement that the bond be
posted as a prerequisite to filing the petition for appeal.
         (d)   Any petition filed with the Municipal Court Clerk shall be in
writing, on the form provided by the Municipal Court Clerk, and signed by the
alleged violator affirming that the contents of the petition are true and
accurate to the best knowledge of the alleged violator at the time of signing.
The petition for appeal shall state the facts and reasons in support of the
petition. Upon filing the petition for appeal with the Municipal Court Clerk,
the alleged violator shall serve a copy of the petition and receipt showing
proof of bond or waiver thereof upon the Property Maintenance Inspector who
shall receive the documents as a representative for the City Attorney.
         (e)   Upon filing a petition for appeal with the Municipal Court
Clerk, the Clerk, or his or her designee, shall place the case on the Municipal
Court docket, set the case for evidentiary hearing within 30 days from the date
of filing the petition, provide a notice of hearing to the alleged violator,
and forward a copy to the Property Maintenance Inspector. Upon receipt of the
petition, the Property Maintenance Inspector shall cause a copy of the citation
at issue to be forwarded to the Municipal Court Clerk who shall file it as the
original complaint alleging the violation indicated therein.
         (f)   The Municipal Court shall treat the citation itself as the
original complaint before the court, and shall treat it as prima facie evidence
of the violation alleged therein. At the close of all of the evidence, should
the Municipal Judge find against the alleged violator, the bond posted by the
alleged violator shall be applied as payment for the fine imposed for the
violation. In the event the Municipal Court Judge finds that a violator suffers
from financial hardship, the Municipal Judge may permit alternative sentencing.
Should the court find in favor of the alleged violator, the bond shall be
refunded to the alleged violator by the Municipal Court Clerk.
      (4)   Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly
authorized employee of the city or contractor hired by the city shall be
authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the
weeds growing thereon, and the fee imposed for such removal shall be calculated
in accordance with §
154.004(A)(4) and paid by the owner or agent, including a lessee, responsible
for the property.
   (E)   Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept
free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall
be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to
human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation.
   (F)   Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not
discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous
or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private
property or that of another tenant.
   (G)   Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair.
   (H)   Motor vehicles.
      (1)   Storage of vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations,
no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, commercial
vehicle or trailer shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no
vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in
the process of being stripped or dismantled; provided, that a vehicle of any
type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work, provided that
such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed
and approved for such purposes. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless
conducted inside an approved spray booth.
      (2)   Removal of unsafe or abandoned vehicles.
         (a)   Unsafe vehicles. The Property Maintenance Inspector upon
discovering on either public property or private property a motor vehicle,
recreational vehicle, commercial vehicle or trailer considered to be unsafe
shall attempt to discover the owner of such vehicle and issue to that
individual a notice requiring the unsafe condition to be corrected within 30
days; provided, that for purposes of this subchapter, an UNSAFE CONDITION shall
include, but not be limited to, broken glass, an open trunk or doors, damage
that prevents the vehicle from being driven, and jagged edges on metal;
provided, however, that if the owner of the vehicle cannot be located or if
located refuses to correct the unsafe conditions, the Property Maintenance
Inspector shall recommend to the Code Official that the owner be prosecuted
under the authority of §
154.007 and if the vehicle is located upon public property, the City Police
Department be notified to have the vehicle towed.
         (b)   Abandoned, unsafe or “junked” vehicles. The Property Maintenance
Inspector upon discovering upon either public or private property a motor
vehicle, recreational vehicle, commercial vehicle or trailer that is considered
to be abandoned, unsafe or “junked” shall attempt to discover the owner of such
vehicle and issue to that individual a notice requiring the abandoned vehicle
to be removed from the property within 30 days from the date of the notice;
provided, that for purposes of this subchapter, an abandoned, unsafe or
“junked” motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, commercial vehicle or trailer is
such a vehicle that may not be operated on a public highway or street because
its registration had expired at least three months previously, its safety
inspection had expired at least three months previously, its on blocks or other
devices, or is mechanically inoperable; provided, however, that if the owner of
the motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, commercial vehicle or trailer cannot
be located or if located refuses to remove the vehicle, the Property
Maintenance Inspector shall recommend to the Code Official that the owner be
prosecuted under the authority of §
154.007 and if the motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, commercial vehicle or
trailer is located upon public property, the City Police Department be notified
to have the vehicle towed with the expense therefore to be paid by the owner.
   (I)   Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage,
mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any
private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an
approved state of maintenance and repair; provided, that this requirement is
not intended to relieve a person, other than the owner, from any civil or
criminal liability or responsibility from such acts.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009; Ord. passed 9-5-2017)
§ 154.042 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS.
   (A)   Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, and in good repair.
   (B)   Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing
water more than 24 inches in depth, shall be completely surrounded by a fence
or barrier at least 48 inches in height above the finished ground level
measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such
barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching
device is less than 54 inches above the bottom of the gate, the release
mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self- closing and
self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively
close and latch when released from an open position of six inches from the
gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a
manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.043 EXTERIOR OF STRUCTURES.
   (A)   General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.
   (B)   Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including, but not
limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces,
other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and
decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking
and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and
masonry joints, as well as those between the building envelope, and the
perimeter of windows, doors and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant
and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be
coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or
corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion.
Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for
stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
   (C)   Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers
placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road
fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background.
Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be
a minimum of four inches high with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch.
   (D)   Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead
and live loads.
   (E)   Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
   (F)   Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks,
and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly
surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.
   (G)   Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and
not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free
from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates
a public nuisance.
   (H)   Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta
trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
   (I)   Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not
limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes
and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored
so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
   (J)   Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway,
deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
   (K)   Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in
good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
   (L)   Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   (M)   Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and
frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.
      (1)   Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks
and holes.
      (2)   Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be
easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.
   (N)   Insect screens. During the period from May 1 to September 30, every
door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable
rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products
to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly
fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch and every swinging door shall
have a self-closing device in good working condition. Exception: screens shall
not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect
repellent fans, are employed.
   (O)   Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming
units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress
doors shall be in accordance with §
154.116(C).
   (P)   Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to
prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
   (Q)   Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable
shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved
protection against the entry of rodents.
   (R)   Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units,
room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to
provide security for the occupants and property within.
      (1)   Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a
deadbolt lock meeting specifications set forth herein. Such deadbolt locks
shall be operated only by the turning of a knob or a key and shall have a lock
throw of not less than one-inch. For the purpose of this section, a sliding
bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. Such deadbolt locks
shall be installed according to manufacturer’s specifications and maintained in
good working order. All deadbolt locks required by this section shall be
designed and installed in such a manner so as to be operable inside of the
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit without the use of a key,
tool, combination thereof or any other special knowledge or effort.
      (2)   Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within six
feet (1,828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide
access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented,
leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking devices.
   (S)   Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let
shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry.
   (T)   Removal of signs from buildings. Any sign or other symbol indicating a
prior occupant of a residential or commercial structure, regardless of whether
the prior occupant is the property owner or another, shall be removed within 30
days subsequent to cessation of that occupancy.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.044 INTERIOR STRUCTURES.
   (A)   General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in
a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming
house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or
two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary
condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.
   (B)   Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained
structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.
   (C)   Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors,
shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping,
flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or
loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be
corrected.
   (D)   Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony,
porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and
good repair.
   (E)   Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   (F)   Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within
its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and
securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer
of the attachment hardware.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.045 HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS.
   Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers
shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a
stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is
more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails
shall not be less than 30 inches high or more than 42 inches high measured
vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the
landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches high above
the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking
surface. Exception: guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted
Building Code.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.046 RUBBISH, SALVAGE, GARBAGE, MATERIALS, MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and
premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
   (B)   Disposal of rubbish.
      (1)   Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a
clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers.
      (2)   Whenever rubbish, trash or other refuse shall be allowed to
accumulate upon any premises within the city in such quantities as to be a fire
hazard or detrimental to public health, the owner and person in charge of the
premises upon which such accumulation is found shall be jointly and severally
responsible for its removal and shall be required to remove or cause to be
removed such accumulation within 72 hours after receipt of written notice from
Code Enforcement Officer.
      (3)   If both the owner and the person in charge of such property fails
within the time indicated in the order or notice to comply with such notice,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall thereupon authorize and direct the Public
Works Department to remove such accumulations of refuse; and after the removal
of such refuse, the City Treasurer shall collect from the property owner the
amount of the expense to the city of such removal.
      (4)   The provisions of § §
154.004(D) relating to collection of property maintenance fees shall be
applicable to the charges provided for under this section.
         (a)   Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premises
shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the
premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
         (b)   Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in
operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first
removing the doors; provided, that prior to being discarded or abandoned but
while being retained at the premises, any refrigerator or similar equipment not
in operation shall be stored with the doors removed and otherwise in accordance
with the requirements established in division (D) below.
   (C)   Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved
garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.
      (1)   Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of
the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit;
an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in
each dwelling unit; or an approved leakproof, covered, outside garbage
container and on at least a weekly basis deposit accumulated garbage into such
containers for pick-up and disposal by the city.
      (2)   Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage
shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof
containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials
until removed from the premises for disposal.
   (D)   The occupant of every dwelling shall store all materials, machinery
and equipment within a building or fully screened by way of a legal fence so as
not to be visible from the front of the residence, or from adjoining or
adjacent lands.
      (1)   The following are exceptions to the foregoing requirement:
         (a)   Laundry drying;
         (b)   Construction materials, machinery and equipment which is
currently being used on the premises;
         (c)   Landscaping and agricultural equipment and machinery which is
currently being used or intended for current use on the premises;
         (d)   House decorations or yard ornaments that are in current use; and
         (e)   Trash containers, provided they are maintained at the side or at
the rear of the dwelling.
      (2)   Fencing for the purposes of screening items that are stored outside
a structure shall be permitted and inspected for compliance with the zoning
ordinance.
    (E)   Upon passage of this division (E), the following procedures shall be
effective for the remainder of calendar year 2020, and calendar years
commencing on and after January 1, 2021 for enforcing violations of the
foregoing divisions (A), (B), (C) or (D) above.
      (1)   When the Property Maintenance Inspector upon finding the owner or
agent, including a lessee, having charge of a property has failed to maintain
the property as required by the foregoing divisions (A), (B), (C) or (D) above,
the Property Maintenance Inspector shall serve upon that owner or agent,
including a lessee, a citation for violation of this section; provided, that if
the owner or agent, including a lessee, is not available or cannot be located,
the citation shall be served upon the property.
         (a)   The first citation of the calendar year shall be a warning
citation that requires the violation stated thereon to be corrected within five
days of issuance of the warning citation. Each citation issued in a calendar
year subsequent to the warning citation shall not require the issuance of an
additional warning citation.
         (b)   If the violation stated on the warning citation is not corrected
within the five days immediately succeeding issuance of that warning citation,
the Property Maintenance Inspector shall issue a citation that requires the
violation stated thereon to be corrected within the ten days immediately
succeeding the issuance of the citation.
      (2)   Issuance of a warning citation or a citation shall be prima facie
evidence of the violation indicated on the face of the respective citation. Any
person alleging he or she was improperly issued a citation may, within ten days
after service of the citation, file a petition for appeal of the citation or
payment thereof, along with the required bond, with the Municipal Court Clerk
in accordance with the following procedure:
         (a)   In order to properly and timely appeal a citation, the petition
for appeal shall be filed within ten days after service of the citation and the
alleged violator shall pay the required amount of the applicable fine in full
to the Municipal Court Clerk. The amount so paid shall be held by the Municipal
Court Clerk as bond pending an evidentiary hearing before and resolution of the
case by the Municipal Court. The Municipal Court Clerk shall issue to the
alleged violator a receipt showing the amount of bond paid.
         (b)   If any petition for appeal filed in accordance with this section
is not timely filed or is not accompanied with the required bond, the alleged
violator shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to appeal the
citation, and such petition shall be summarily denied as untimely filed.
         (c)   Nothing set forth above shall prevent the Municipal Court Judge
from finding, upon a proper showing, that an alleged violator suffers from
financial hardship, and, as a result, waiving the requirement that the bond be
posted as a prerequisite to filing the petition for appeal.
         (d)   Any petition filed with the Municipal Court Clerk shall be in
writing, on the form provided by the Municipal Court Clerk, and signed by the
alleged violator affirming that the contents of the petition are true and
accurate to the best knowledge of the alleged violator at the time of signing.
The petition for appeal shall state the facts and reasons in support of the
petition. Upon filing the petition for appeal with the Municipal Court Clerk,
the alleged violator shall serve a copy of the petition and receipt showing
proof of bond or waiver thereof upon the Property Maintenance Inspector who
shall receive the documents as a representative for the city attorney.
         (e)   Upon filing a petition for appeal with the Municipal Court
Clerk, the Clerk, or his or her designee, shall place the case on the Municipal
Court docket, set the case for evidentiary hearing within 30 days from the date
of filing the petition, provide a notice of hearing to the alleged violator,
and forward a copy to the property maintenance inspector. Upon receipt of the
petition, the property maintenance inspector shall cause a copy of the citation
at issue to be forwarded to the Municipal Court Clerk who shall file it as the
original complaint alleging the violation indicated therein.
         (f)   The Municipal Court shall treat the citation itself as the
original complaint before the court, and shall treat it as prima facie evidence
of the violation alleged therein. At the close of all of the evidence, should
the Municipal Judge find against the alleged violator, the bond posted by the
alleged violator shall be applied as payment for the fine imposed for the
violation. In the event the Municipal Court Judge finds that a violator suffers
from financial hardship, the Municipal Judge may permit alternative sentencing.
Should the court find in favor of the alleged violator, the bond shall be
refunded to the alleged violator by the Municipal Court Clerk.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009; Ord. passed 6-1-2020)
§ 154.047 EXTERMINATION.
   (A)   Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be
promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-
infestation.
   (B)   Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
   (C)   Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-
tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the
premises.
   (D)   Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more
dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas
of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of
an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant
shall be responsible for extermination.
   (E)   Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the
continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure. Exception: where the
infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be
responsible for extermination.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.048 RESERVED.
§ 154.049 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATING THIS SUBCHAPTER.
   Any provisions of § 154.999 notwithstanding, any person violating the
provisions of this subchapter, titled Maintenance Requirements, shall be fined
$50; upon a second violation such person shall be fined $75; upon a third
violation such person shall be fined $100; and upon any subsequent violation
such person shall be fined $150. Each day any such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. Court costs as determined by the court shall be
added to each conviction.
(Ord. passed 5-20-2025)
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
§ 154.060 SCOPE, RESPONSIBILITY AND ALTERNATIVE DEVICES.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a
structure.
   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements.
A person shall not occupy as owner- occupant, or permit another person to
occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and
ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation
complying with the International Building Code shall be permitted.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.061 LIGHT.
   (A)   Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window
of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum
total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8% of the floor area of
such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any
room and such obstructions are located less than three feet from the window and
extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not
be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be
included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the
room. Exception: where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior
glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening
to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of the floor area of the interior
room or space, but not less than 25 square feet. The exterior glazing area
shall be based on the total floor area being served.
   (B)   Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in
residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be
lighted at all times with at least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb
for each 200 square feet of floor area or equivalent illumination, provided
that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet. In other
than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of
egress stairways, shall be illuminated at all times the building space served
by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of one footcandle at floors,
landings and treads.
   (C)   Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or
artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions,
and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances,
equipment and fixtures.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.062 VENTILATION.
   (A)   Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one
openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be
equal to at least 45% of the minimum glazed area required in §
154.061(A). Exception: where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors
are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the
adjoining room shall be at least 8% of the floor area of the interior room or
space, but not less than 25 square feet. The ventilation openings to the
outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.
   (B)   Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall
comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by
division (A) above, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces
equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical
ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the
outdoors and shall not be recirculated.
   (C)   Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of
occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory
unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present
in a rooming unit or dormitory unit. Exception: where specifically approved in
writing by the Property Maintenance Inspector.
   (D)   Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious
fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system
shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be
exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
   (E)   Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be
independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.063 OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming
units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate
from other adjoining spaces.
   (B)   Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not
be less than seven feet in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear
passageway of not less than three feet between counter fronts and appliances or
counter fronts and walls.
   (C)   Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors,
laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have
a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet. Exceptions include the
following.
      (1)   In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less
than four feet on center and projecting not more than six inches below the
required ceiling height.
      (2)   Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied
exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height
of not less than six feet eight inches with not less than six feet four inches
of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions.
      (3)   Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes
and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling
height of at least seven feet over not less than one-third of the required
minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those
portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five feet or more
shall be included.
   (D)   Bedroom requirements. Every bedroom shall comply with the requirements
of divisions (D)(1) through (D)(5) below.
      (1)   Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one person
shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every bedroom occupied
by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for
each occupant thereof.
      (2)   Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means
of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only
means of egress from other habitable spaces. Exception: units that contain
fewer than two bedrooms.
      (3)   Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at
least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another
bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one
water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an
adjacent story.
      (4)   Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be
used for sleeping purposes.
      (5)   Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable
provisions of this subchapter, including, but not limited to, the light,
ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this
chapter; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of
§§
154.075 to
154.081; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of §§
154.095 to
154.101; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of §§
154.115 to
154.118.
   (E)   Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants
than permitted by the minimum area requirements of the table below.
 
Minimum Area Requirements (in square feet)
Space            1-2 Occupants   3-5 Occupants 6 or More Occupants
Living room a, b No requirements 120           150
Dining room a, b No requirements 80            100
Bedrooms         Shall comply with division (D) above
 
      (1)   Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by the table
above shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum
occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with
division (D) above.
      (2)   Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall
comply with the requirements of the table above if the total area is equal to
that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function
as a combination living room/dining room.
   (F)   Efficiency unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency
living unit from meeting the following requirements.
      (1)   A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear
floor area of not less than 220 square feet. A unit occupied by three occupants
shall have a clear floor area of not less than 320 square feet. These required
areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by the following divisions (F)
(2) and (F)(3) below.
      (2)   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance
and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less
than 30 inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this subchapter
shall be provided.
      (3)   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a
water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
      (4)   The maximum number of occupants shall be three.
   (G)   Food preparation.
      (1)   All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall
contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a
sanitary manner.
      (2)   There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary
disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.075 SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum
plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.076 REQUIRED FACILITIES.
   (A)   Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or
shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a
sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room
as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly
into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not
be used as a substitute for the required lavatory.
   (B)   Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units.
   (C)   Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not
provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having
access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants.
   (D)   Employees’ facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and
one drinking facility shall be available to employees. DRINKING FACILITIES
include a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable
cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be
located in toilet rooms or bathrooms.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.077 TOILET ROOMS.
   (A)   Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall
not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the
exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common
or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
   (B)   Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming
units or dormitory units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing
not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or
passageway.
   (C)   Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have
access from within the employees’ working area. The required toilet facilities
shall be located not more than one story above or below the employees’ working
area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of
500 feet. Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined
employee and public facilities. Exception: facilities that are required for
employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent
structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a
travel distance of 500 feet from the employees’ regular working area to the
facilities.
   (D)   Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor
shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such
floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.078 PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES.
   (A)   General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and
maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks
and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing
fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe,
sanitary and functional condition.
   (B)   Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances
for usage and cleaning.
   (C)   Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a
structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of
inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, back siphonage,
improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the
Property Maintenance Inspector shall require the defects to be corrected to
eliminate the hazard.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.079 WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a
public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks,
lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot
or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the International
Plumbing Code.
   (B)   Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located
above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink
faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which are attached and left in place,
shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an
approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
   (C)   Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to
provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in
sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function
properly, safely and free from defects and leaks.
   (D)   Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly
installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to
be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility
at a temperature of not less than 110°F (43°C). A gas-burning water heater
shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied
room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An
approved combination temperature and pressure- relief valve and relief valve
discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.080 SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a
public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
   (B)   Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall
function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.081 STORM DRAINAGE.
   Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on
the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public
nuisance.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL FACILITIES
§ 154.095 SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the requirements of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.096 HEATING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in
structures as required by this section.
   (B)   Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the International
Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to
meet the requirements of this section. Exception: in areas where the average
monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C)
shall be maintained.
   (C)   Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom
on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof
shall supply heat during the period from September 1 to May 1 to maintain a
temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
toilet rooms. Exceptions: when the outdoor temperature is below the winter
outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating
at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the
locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing
Code; and in areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C) a
minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
   (D)   Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat during the period from September 1 to May 1 to maintain a
temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are
occupied. Exceptions: processing, storage and operation areas that require
cooling or special temperature conditions; and areas in which persons are
primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
   (E)   Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be
measured three feet above the floor near the center of the room and two feet
inward from the center of each exterior wall.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.097 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid
fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall
be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be
capable of performing the intended function.
   (B)   Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and
appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. Exception: fuel-
burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation.
   (C)   Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be
maintained.
   (D)   Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall
be maintained in effective operation.
   (E)   Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel
and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be
provided for the fuel-burning equipment.
   (F)   Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel
consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line
thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed
unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.098 ELECTRICAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an
electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and §
154.099.
   (B)   Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as
a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with
the ICC Electrical Code. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/
240-volt, single phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60
amperes.
   (C)   Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical
system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and
lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or
for similar reasons, the Property Maintenance Inspector shall require the
defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.099 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be
properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
   (B)   Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at
least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall
contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground
fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one
receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit
interrupter protection.
   (C)   Lighting fixtures. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room,
kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at
least one electric lighting fixture.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.100 ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS.
   (A)   Generally. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained
to sustain safely all imposed loads, to operate properly and to be free from
physical and fire hazards. The most current certificate of inspection shall be
on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or
dumbwaiter; or the certificate shall be available for public inspection in the
office of the building operator.
   (B)   Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least
one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is
occupied. Exception: buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be
permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or
servicing.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.101 DUCT SYSTEMS.
   Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable
of performing the required function.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.115 SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior
premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.
   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain
such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner- occupant or permit another
person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.116 MEANS OF EGRESS.
   (A)   General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be
provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of
egress shall comply with the International Fire Code.
   (B)   Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the
International Fire Code shall be unobstructed.
   (C)   Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from
the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special
knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted
by the International Building Code.
   (D)   Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be
maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction,
and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be
operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars,
grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency
escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies
with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices
shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool
or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape
and rescue opening.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.117 FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS.
   (A)   Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating
of fire-resistance- rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and
floors shall be maintained.
   (B)   Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained
in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in
operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or
obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.118 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate
an alarm or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be
maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the
International Fire Code.
   (B)   Smoke alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be
installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated
in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following
locations:
      (1)   On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in
the immediate vicinity of bedrooms;
      (2)   In each room used for sleeping purposes; and
      (3)   In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and
cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings
or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the
adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for
the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full
story below the upper level. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be
installed in other groups in accordance with the International Fire Code.
   (C)   Power source. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as
Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary
power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a
commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms
shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and
without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent
protection. Exception: smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated
in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not
served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings
undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior
wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic,
crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building
wiring without the removal of interior finishes.
   (D)   Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be
installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in
dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be
interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate
all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in
all bedrooms over background noise with all intervening doors closed.
Exceptions: interconnection is not required in buildings which are not
undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind; and smoke alarms
in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or
repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes
exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement
available which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of
interior finishes.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
SALVAGE YARDS
§ 154.130 SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the
establishment, operation, maintenance and use of salvage yards in the city.
   (B)   Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the of
the property upon which a salvage yard is situated to maintain the property in
a manner that assures that the property is not unsightly or visually offensive,
does not depress the value of adjacent property and does not detract from the
safety and recreational value of adjacent property or the roads and streets
that pass by the property.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.131 LICENSE REQUIRED; ISSUANCE; FEE; RENEWAL.
   No salvage yard or any part thereof shall be established, operated or
maintained without obtaining the annual license issued by the city and the
payment of the required fee or tax. No license shall be issued to any salvage
yard that contains more than 100 waste tires which are not mounted on wheels on
vehicles or machines unless the salvage yard has received a license, permit or
approval from the state’s Division of Environmental Protection for storage, use
or processing of waste tires or has entered into an agreement with the state’s
Division of Environmental Protection for the proper disposal of the waste
tires. Upon payment of all required taxes and fees, the license may be renewed.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.132 AREAS WHERE ESTABLISHMENT PROHIBITED; SCREENING REQUIREMENTS;
EXISTING LICENSED YARDS; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   New salvage yard restricted. On and after the effective date of this
subchapter, no license may be issued to establish a salvage yard within 1,000
feet of the nearest occupied private residence, unless waived by the owner of
such residence, or within 5,000 feet of the nearest occupied private residence
which is part of a residential community. The provisions of this division (A),
as amended, shall apply only to salvage yards licensed after April, 1 1988.
   (B)   Existing salvage yard requirement.
      (1)   The license of any salvage yard existing on the effective date of
this subchapter any part of which is within 1,000 feet of the nearest occupied
private residence or within 5,000 feet of the nearest occupied private
residence which is part of a residential community, may be renewed only if the
view of the said salvage yard and all parts thereof are effectively screened
from the adjacent road by natural objects, plantings, fences or other
appropriate means or a waiver is obtained from the owner of an occupied private
residence.
      (2)   Any salvage yard existing on the effective date of this subchapter
and no part of which is located within 1,000 feet of the nearest residence or
within 5,000 feet of the nearest occupied private residence which is part of a
residential community may continue to be operated and maintained without
screening by natural objects, plantings, fences or other appropriate means.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, ownership
of a salvage yard continuously maintained and licensed since the effective date
of this subchapter may be sold or otherwise transferred, and the salvage yard
shall be eligible for relicensure and may continue to be operated under the
same legal requirements that would have been applicable had the change in
ownership not occurred.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.133 REQUIREMENTS AS TO FENCES.
   Fences shall be kept in good order and repair and no advertisement shall be
permitted thereon other than the name of the licensee and the nature of the
business conducted on the premises. The height, location, construction,
planting, size and composition of any sign or advertisement and maintenance of
fences, living or otherwise, shall conform to the requirements established in
Chapter 152.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.134 PAYMENT OF COSTS OF SCREENING.
   The costs of screening by fences shall be paid by the salvage yard owner or
operator.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
§ 154.135 VIOLATIONS DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE; ABATEMENT; INJUNCTIONS.
   The establishment, operation or maintenance of a salvage yard or any part
thereof in violation of any provision of this subchapter is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance, and the Property Maintenance Inspector shall apply to the
Municipal Court for an injunction to abate such nuisance. The Municipal Court
shall have authority to hear and decide such questions and grant injunctions or
such other relief as it may deem proper.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009)
DECONTAMINATION AND DEMOLITION OF
CONTAMINATED STRUCTURES
§ 154.150 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the public’s health, safety and
welfare by establishing standards, procedures and responsibilities for:
   (A)   The certification of contractors and their employees authorized to
perform decontamination or demolition of methamphetamine or other illegal drug
lab sites; and
   (B)   Prohibiting the occupancy and use of property where hazardous
chemicals or chemical residues commonly associated with the manufacture of
methamphetamine or other illegal drugs are or may be present.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.151 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED CONTRACTOR or DECONTAMINATION CONTRACTOR. Any person certified by
the Planning Office or the Building Inspector to decontaminate, conduct
sampling or dispose of contained property as required by this subchapter.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The City Building Inspector.
   CERTIFICATE. An accepted approval on file in the Planning Office or the
office of the Building Inspector as authorized in accordance with this
subchapter.
   CERTIFIED. A person who is authorized by the Planning Office or the Building
Inspector to perform the inspection and decontamination activities required by
this subchapter.
   CITY. The City of Nitro, West Virginia.
   CONDEMNED PLACARD. A sign posted by the Building Inspector conspicuously on
a methamphetamine or other illegal drug lab site informing the public that
hazardous chemicals may exist on, or have been removed from, the premises and
that entry is prohibited.
   CONTAMINATED or CONTAMINATION. Polluted by hazardous chemicals associated
with methamphetamine or other illegal drug labs so that the property is unfit
for human habitation or use due to immediate or long-term hazards. Property
that at one time was CONTAMINATED, but has been satisfactorily decontaminated
according to procedures listed in this subchapter is considered not
CONTAMINATED.
   DANGER - UNSAFE FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY PLACARD. A sign posted by the Building
Inspector to warn the public that property is unfit for human habitation or use
due to immediate or long- term hazards, and that entry is prohibited.
   DECONTAMINATION. The process of reducing levels of methamphetamine or other
illegal drugs to the target level of 0.1 micrograms per 100 square centimeters
or less using currently available methods and processes.
   DISPOSAL OF CONTAMINATED PROPERTY. The disposition of contaminated property.
   HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS. Substances used in the manufacture of methamphetamine
or other illegal drugs.
   INITIAL SITE ASSESSMENT. The first evaluation of a property to determine the
nature and extent of observable damage and contamination.
    LIST OF CONTAMINATED PROPERTIES. A list of properties contaminated by
methamphetamine or other illegal drug manufacturing, attempted manufacturing or
the storage of hazardous chemicals used in manufacturing methamphetamine or
other illegal drugs.
   METHAMPHETAMINE OR OTHER ILLEGAL DRUG LAB SITE. Any property where a person
illegally manufactured methamphetamine or other illegal drugs, attempted to
illegally manufacture methamphetamine or other illegal drugs, or stored one or
more methamphetamine or other illegal drug ingredient(s), as noted by a law
enforcement agency.
   NO TRESPASSING PLACARD. A sign posted by the Building Inspector to prohibit
movement by persons over or through a structure.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, association, copartnership, political
subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private
corporation, or other legal entity.
   PLANNING OFFICE. The Kanawha County Planning Office or the Putnam County
Planning Office, depending upon the county in which the contaminated structure
is located.
   POSTING. Attaching printed “DANGER - UNSAFE FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY”,
“CONDEMNED” or “NO TRESPASSING” placards conspicuously on property which may
be, or is determined to be, contaminated by methamphetamine or other illegal
drug manufacturing, attempted methamphetamine or other illegal drug
manufacturing, or the storage of a hazardous material used in manufacturing
methamphetamine or other illegal drugs.
   PROPERTY. Any site, lot, parcel of land, structure, or part of a structure,
or personal property involved in the illegal manufacture of methamphetamine or
other illegal drugs, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Single-family residences;
      (2)   Units or multiplexes;
      (3)   Condominiums;
      (4)   Apartment buildings;
      (5)   Motels and hotels:
      (6)   Accessory structures;
      (7)   Storage units;
      (8)   Campers or trailers;
      (9)   Manufactured housing or mobile homes; or
      (10)   Any structure, or part of a structure that may be contaminated by
previous use.
   PROPERTY OWNER. A person with a lawful right of possession of the property
by reason of obtaining it by purchase, exchange, gift, lease, inheritance or
legal action.
   REFRESHER COURSE. An approved annual training course for decontamination
workers and supervisors. An approved REFRESHER COURSE:
      (1)   Reviews the subjects taught in the initial training course; and
      (2)   Includes updated information on decontamination technology.
   SUPERVISOR. A person certified and employed by an authorized decontamination
contractor who is on site during the decontamination of a methamphetamine or
other illegal drug lab site and who is responsible for the activities
performed.
   WORKER. A person certified and employed by an authorized decontamination
contractor who performs decontamination of a methamphetamine or other illegal
drug lab site.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.152 DECONTAMINATION CONTRACTOR CERTIFICATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   A contractor may advertise, offer to undertake, or perform
decontamination, sampling or disposal work at a methamphetamine or other
illegal drug lab site only after securing certification from the Planning
Office or the Building Inspector.
   (B)   Applicants for a Building Inspector certification as an authorized
contractor shall submit to the Building Inspector:
      (1)   Evidence of certification for each employee who will perform
decontamination work on a methamphetamine or other illegal drug lab site; and
      (2)   Documentation that the contractor has at least:
         (a)   One certified indoor environmental consultant or one forensic
chemist or one industrial hygienist;
         (b)   Documentation demonstrating the decontamination workers and
supervisors have completed a minimum of 40-hour HAZWOPER training; and
         (c)   Documentation demonstrating the decontamination workers and
supervisors have successfully completed an approved methamphetamine or other
illegal drug decontamination training course or equivalent.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.153 BASIC DECONTAMINATION CONTRACTOR TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION.
   Contractors who wish to be approved by the Building Inspector for
decontamination and testing must provide proof of certification by the Planning
Office or proof of training at basic worker and supervisor methamphetamine or
other illegal drug lab clean-up training courses that provided at a minimum:
   (A)   Information on state and federal laws, rules and regulations
applicable to methamphetamine or other illegal drug lab site;
   (B)   Chemical terminology, classifications and properties related to
methamphetamine or other illegal drug manufacturing;
   (C)   Methamphetamine or other illegal drug characteristics;
   (D)   First aid;
   (E)   Adverse health effects of exposure related to chemicals used in
methamphetamine or other illegal drug manufacturing including, but not limited
to:
      (1)   Toxicology; and
      (2)   Symptomology.
   (F)   Decontamination criteria;
   (G)   Sampling techniques and equipment used for decontamination of
property;
   (H)   Handling unknown substances;
   (I)   State and federal requirements for dealing with hazardous materials
including, but not limited to, the following subject matter:
      (1)   Disposal;
      (2)   Transportation;
      (3)   Storage; and
      (4)   Reporting.
   (J)   In addition to the foregoing, training for supervisors must also
include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Obtaining necessary information for making site assessment;
      (2)   Initial site assessment;
      (3)   Initial site sampling;
      (4)   Decontamination techniques;
      (5)   Final site sampling; and
      (6)   Report completion.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.154 REFRESHER TRAINING COURSE.
   (A)   An eight-hour methamphetamine or other illegal drug lab clean-up
training course is required every year for decontamination contractor workers
and supervisors.
   (B)   Approved refresher worker and supervisor training courses shall
provided at a minimum:
      (1)   A thorough review of the subjects listed in the basic training
course, including proper sampling techniques, proper decontamination techniques
and proper handling of hazardous chemicals;
      (2)   An update of information on state-of-the-art procedures and
equipment;
      (3)   A review of regulatory changes and interpretations; and
      (4)   Other subjects if required by the Building Inspector to update
information on new technology and procedures.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.155 WORKER AND SUPERVISOR CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   Applicants seeking certification as a methamphetamine or other illegal
drug decontamination worker shall ensure the Building Inspector receives
evidence of successful completion of an approved basic methamphetamine or other
illegal drug decontamination training worker course within 60 days of
completing the basic worker course.
   (B)   Applicants seeking certification as a decontamination supervisor shall
ensure the Building Inspector receives the following within 60 days of
completing the basic supervisor course:
      (1)   List of on-site experience in methamphetamine or other illegal drug
lab site decontamination projects; and
      (2)   Evidence of successful completion of an approved basic
methamphetamine or other illegal drug decontamination training course.
   (C)   Worker and supervisor certificates are valid for one year from the
date of issuance.
   (D)   Workers and supervisors shall:
      (1)   Make certificates available for inspection at all times during a
methamphetamine or other illegal drug lab site decontamination project;
      (2)   Comply with applicable requirements of the state’s Department of
Environmental Protection and the United States Environmental Protection Agency
regulations;
      (3)   Comply with applicable contractor regulations;
      (4)   Notify the Building Inspector of all work performed within ten
business days after completion of the decontamination and final testing,
including final test results;
      (5)   Comply with the city’s public nuisance ordinance, and the Kanawha
County or Putnam County public nuisance ordinance, as appropriate; and
      (6)   Comply with all applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.156 DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   Disciplinary action against a decontamination worker, supervisor or
contractor may be taken for failing to comply with the requirements of this
subchapter. Disciplinary action may be taken on any of the following grounds:
      (1)   Failing to perform decontamination, testing or disposal work under
the supervision of trained personnel;
      (2)   Failing to perform work that meets the requirements of the Building
Inspector; or
      (3)   Obtaining a decontamination and testing certificate by error, fraud
or misrepresentation.
   (B)   Disciplinary action against a decontamination worker, supervisor or
contractor may include, but not be limited to, denial, suspension or revocation
of certification.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.157 CERTIFIED DECONTAMINATION CONTRACTOR LIST.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall maintain a list of authorized
methamphetamine or other illegal drug lab site decontamination contractors.
   (B)   The Building Inspector’s authorized contractor list shall be made
available to local health officials and other appropriate agencies, and to the
public upon request.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.158 DECONTAMINATION, SAMPLING AND TESTING REQUIREMENTS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Overall responsibilities.
      (1)   The Building Inspector’s responsibilities shall include, but not be
limited to:
         (a)   Posting methamphetamine or other illegal drug labs and property
with “DANGER - UNSAFE FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY”, “CONDEMNED” and “NO TRESPASSING”
signs and placards, as required by §
154.160, and placing boards over windows and doors to prevent access;
         (b)   Reviewing contractor test methods and results;
         (c)   Monitoring contractor decontamination, sampling, clean-up and
testing; and
         (d)   Approving final decontamination.
      (2)   The decontamination contractor shall be responsible for:
         (a)   Inspecting the property and structures containing
methamphetamine or other illegal drug labs;
         (b)   Determining levels of contamination;
         (c)   Performing all sampling and testing in a responsible manner;
         (d)   Developing a decontamination work plan which includes a floor
plan of the structure;
         (e)   Performing decontamination;
         (f)   Verifying decontamination;
         (g)   Proper disposal of all contaminated materials;
         (h)   Recording pre-cleanup contamination levels and post-cleanup
decontamination levels; and
         (i)   Details of final report including photographs of sampling sites,
floor plans, description of decontamination procedure.
   (B)   Inspecting property. After a law enforcement agency notifies the
Building Inspector of potential property contamination, the Building Inspector
shall notify the property owner to have a decontamination contractor inspect
and test the property. Any decontamination contractor who has been hired to
clean and test structures shall notify the Building Inspector before testing or
cleanup begins.
      (1)   To determine contamination, the property inspection shall include,
but be limited to, an acquisition of data such as evidence of:
         (a)   Hazardous chemical use or attempted use or storage of hazardous
chemicals on site (when available);
         (b)   Chemical stains; or
         (c)   Glassware or other paraphernalia associated with the manufacture
of methamphetamine on site.
      (2)   As part of the property’s inspection, the Building Inspector may
request copies of any law enforcement reports, forensic chemist reports and any
other information needed to evaluate:
         (a)   The total square footage of the structure used in the
manufacture or attempted manufacture or storage of methamphetamine or other
illegal drugs;
         (b)   What chemical process was involved in the manufacture of
methamphetamine or other illegal drugs;
         (c)   What chemicals were removed from the scene;
         (d)   The location of the methamphetamine or other illegal drug lab
site in relation to the habitable areas of the property; and
         (e)   The Building Inspector shall provide law enforcement reports, if
available, to the decontamination contractor upon request.
      (3)   The Building Inspector may coordinate the property’s inspection
with other appropriate agencies. At the request of the Building Inspector, the
appropriate County Health Department may conduct an environmental assessment
and may sample the property’s ground water, surface water, septic tank water,
soil and other media necessary to enable the County Health Department to
evaluate the long-term public health threats.
      (4)   Once a structure has been designated contaminated, all porous
materials such as mattresses, upholstered furniture, draperies, clothing, toys
and carpets shall be deemed beyond decontamination and shall be disposed of in
a safe manner. Record of the disposal shall be part of the final
decontamination report.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.159 SAMPLING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Alcohol or methanol-moistened filter papers or sterile gauze pads or
laboratory-approved media shall be used to collect wipe samples from hard, non-
porous surfaces from areas 100 square centimeter (10 cm X 10 cm) in size for
single, discrete samples and 100 square centimeter to 400 square centimeter in
size for composite samples. A separate filter paper is to be used for each
sample location. Upon completion of each composite sampling group, all of the
filter papers used to collect the composite sample are placed into a single
sample collection container.
   (B)   Proper sample techniques and procedures are to be used by the testing
and decontamination contractor. These techniques and procedures include proper
equipment and supplies, off-site preparation, on-site procedures, field quality
control, chain of custody record, transportation of samples, decontamination of
equipment and supplies (to prevent cross-contamination), site clean-up, sample
log form, and handling of methanol and alcohol. Photographic documentation
should also be included.
   (C)   The analytical results obtained through sampling shall be sued to
determine the levels of contamination. Required locations for sample
collections shall include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   HVAC duct system and all exhaust fans;
      (2)   Bathroom wall, floor and ceiling surfaces;
      (3)   Lab site wall, floor and ceiling surfaces;
      (4)   Kitchen wall, floor and ceiling surfaces, including range hoods and
exhausts; and
      (5)   All other room wall, floor and ceiling surfaces.
   (D)   Collection of samples shall be performed by certified decontamination
contractors using:
      (1)   Standards and protocols to ensure accuracy and the ability to
produce similar results with repeated sampling;
      (2)   Proper swabbing techniques to collect a representative sample of
the area being sampled;
      (3)   Proper care and prudent action to avoid contamination during
sampling, including the use of clean gloves for each sample; and
      (4)   Use of a blank for assurance that calibration is accurate, and use
a blank to test the cleanliness of the gloved hands of the inspector.
   (E)   All samples collected, transported or stored by the decontamination
contractor and sent by the decontamination contractor to the certified
laboratory for analysis under the provisions of this section must be secure to
assure an unbroken chain-of-custody.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.160 DESIGNATING CONTAMINATION.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall designate a structure as contaminated
when a law enforcement agency discovers a methamphetamine or other illegal drug
lab inside the structure, or discovers methamphetamine or other illegal drug-
making chemicals or chemical containers are found inside or near the structure,
or when inspection reveals the property is contaminated; provided, that if the
contaminated structure is a room in a hotel motel, apartment house, condominium
or townhouse, the area initially designated as contaminated shall include the
room on each side of the room that is contaminated; provided, however, that the
contaminated designation applicable to the adjacent rooms shall continue until
the decontamination contractor determines those rooms are not contaminated.
   (B)   If the structure is designated contaminated, the Building Inspector
shall immediately post “DANGER-UNSAFE FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY” and “NO TRESPASSING”
placards on the structure, shall board up windows and doors to prevent access
and shall prohibit use of all portions of the property; provided, that if the
property owner has not within 14 days immediately succeeding the day the
property was designated as being contaminated, commenced action to have the
property decontaminated, the Building Inspector shall remove the “DANGER-UNSAFE
FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY” placard and post “CONDEMNED” placards on the structure.
   (C)   If the Building Inspector designates the property contaminated, the
Building Inspector shall document the findings; provided, that such
documentation shall include:
      (1)   Description from law enforcement;
      (2)   Photographs of the property;
      (3)   Name of the property owner;
      (4)   Mailing and street address of the property owner;
      (5)   Tax map and parcel number of the property; and
      (6)   Clear directions for locating the property.
   (D)   The testing and decontamination standard is that methamphetamine or
other illegal drug levels shall be less than or equal to 0.1 micrograms per 100
square centimeters; provided, that the Building Inspector may require testing
and decontamination for additional hazardous chemicals if other hazardous
chemicals are present at the property where the methamphetamine lab was
discovered. The decontamination standards for any additional chemicals will be
determined by using currently established federal toxicity levels.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.161 NOTIFICATION OF CONTAMINATED PROPERTY.
   (A)   After the Building Inspector has determined that a property is
contaminated, the Building Inspector shall send out in writing, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, a letter prohibiting use to all known:
      (1)   Occupants; and
      (2)   Persons having a full or partial ownership of the property as shown
upon the records of the County Assessor’s office of the county in which the
property is located.
   (B)   If the whereabouts of a person or persons having a full or partial
ownership of the property is unknown or may not be ascertained, or if the
identity of those persons or person is unknown or may not be ascertained, the
Building Inspector shall:
      (1)   Instruct the Treasurer file a Class II legal notice stating:
         (a)   The property, as identified in the legal notice, has been
determined to be contaminated;
         (b)   If the property owner’s whereabouts or identity remains unknown,
the city will demolish the property on the date specified in the legal notice;
and
         (c)   A lien for all expenses and charges incurred by the city in the
demolition activity will be filed 90 days after the completion of the
demolition activity.
      (2)   If the property owner or owners do not respond to the legal notice,
demolish the property on the date stated;
      (3)   Prepare a complete itemized statement that clearly demonstrates the
costs and charges incurred to accomplish the demolition activity; and
      (4)   Provide the complete itemized statement, including a statement
stating when the demolition activity was completed, to the Treasurer who will
file a lien on the remaining real property for the total amount indicated in
the complete itemized statement plus any other applicable charges; provided,
that prior to filing the lien, the Treasurer shall file a Class II legal notice
stating:
         (a)   The property, as identified in the legal notice, was determined
to be contaminated;
         (b)   The property was demolished on the date specified;
         (c)   A lien for all expenses incurred and charges paid by the city in
the demolition activity will be filed on the specified date;
         (d)   Payment of the expenses incurred and charges paid by the city in
the demolition activity will prevent the lien from being filed; and
         (e)   If the required payment is not made on or before that specified
date, a lien in the amount indicated in division (B)(4)(c) above plus any other
applicable charges will be filed; provided, that the date specified for payment
shall be no less than 90 days from the date the demolition activity is
completed.
   (C)   If the property is to be decontaminated and the property owner refuses
to employ a decontamination contractor to start the decontaminating the
structure or structures within 30 days from the date that the property is
designated as contaminated, the Building Inspector shall:
      (1)   Instruct the Treasurer to send to the property owner by certified
mail, return receipt requested, a letter stating:
         (a)   The property identified in the letter has been determined to be
contaminated;
         (b)   Unless the property owner employs a decontamination contractor
who starts decontaminating the property by the date specified within the
letter, such date to be 14 days subsequent to the date the letter is mailed,
the property will be demolished;
         (c)   The property owner will be responsible for the costs and charges
incurred to demolish the structure or structures on the property; and
         (d)   If the property owner does not pay the demolition costs and
applicable charges within 90 days after completion of the demolition activity,
a lien for all expenses and charges will be fifed 90 days after the completion
of the demolition activity; provided, that the date specified for payment shall
be no less than 90 days from the date the letter is mailed.
      (2)   Proceed with the demolition or the structure on the date stated.
   (D)   If the property is to be demolished and the property owner refuses to
employ a demolition contractor for demolition of the contaminated structure or
structures within 30 days from the date that the property is designated as
contaminated, the Building Inspector shall instruct the Treasurer to send to
the property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, a letter
stating:
      (1)   The property identified in the letter has been determined to be
contaminated;
      (2)   Unless the property owner employs a demolition contractor who
starts demolishing the structure or structures by a date specified within the
letter, such date to be 14 days subsequent to the date the notice is mailed,
the property will be demolished;
      (3)   The property owner will be responsible for the costs and charges
incurred to demolish the structure or structures on the property;
      (4)   If the property owner does not pay the demolition costs and charges
within 90 days after completion of the demolition activity, a lien for all
expenses and charges incurred in the demolition activity will be filed 90 days
after the completion of the demolition activity; provided, that the date
specified for payment shall be no less than 90 days from the date the notice is
mailed.
   (E)   The Building Inspector’s letter to the persons identified in division
(A) above shall:
      (1)   Describe the Building Inspector’s intended course of action;
      (2)   Describe the penalties for noncompliance with the decontamination
order;
      (3)   Prohibit use of all or specified portions of the property as long
as the property is contaminated;
      (4)   Describe what measures a property owner must take to have the
property decontaminated; and
      (5)   Indicate the potential health risks involved.
   (F)   The Building Inspector shall advise that:
      (1)   A hearing before the City Planning Commission shall be held upon
the request of a person required to be notified of the condemnation;
      (2)   The person’s request for a hearing shall be made within ten days of
the Building Inspector serving notice of the condemnation;
      (3)   The hearing shall be held in a timely manner; and
      (4)   In any hearing concerning whether property is contaminated, the
property owner has the burden of proof in showing that the property is
decontaminated and meets the decontamination standards set forth by the
Building Inspector.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.162 PROPERTY OWNER DECONTAMINATION RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   An owner of contaminated property shall obtain the services of an
authorized decontamination contractor to clean and decontaminate the property.
Only authorized decontamination contractors are allowed to decontaminate
property.
   (B)   The Building Inspector shall provide the property owner with a list of
authorized testing and decontamination contractors upon request.
   (C)   Only a decontamination contractor approved by the Planning Office or
the Building Inspector shall decontaminate the property and meet the
decontamination standards as stated in this chapter.
   (D)   The property owner and the occupants shall not be allowed to salvage
or remove any items from inside the contaminated structure. Only certified
decontamination contractors are allowed inside.
   (E)   The property owner shall be responsible for:
      (1)   The costs of any property testing which may be required to
demonstrate the presence or absence of methamphetamine; and
      (2)   The costs of the property’s decontamination and disposal expenses.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.163 VERIFYING DECONTAMINATION.
   (A)   After decontamination is completed, final testing of the structure
shall be undertaken. Composite samples of the floor, wall and ceiling of each
room shall be taken. Testing results must show levels of methamphetamine or
other illegal drugs to be no greater than 0.1 micrograms per 100 square
centimeter If any room tests above this level, further decontamination will be
required before the structure can be designated as decontaminated.
   (B)   Within ten working days of a request for review of decontamination
records, the Building Inspector:
      (1)   Shall review the documentation from the approved decontamination
contractor to verify decontamination standards are met; and
      (2)   May visit the property site to access the thoroughness of the
decontamination, and to assure that all contaminated porous materials have been
disposed of properly. Landfill receipts should be kept for review by the
Planning Office.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.164 RECORDING DECONTAMINATION.
   If, after review of the information from the decontamination contractor, the
Building Inspector determines the property has been successfully
decontaminated, the Building Inspector shall, within ten working days:
   (A)   Send a letter notifying the property owner that the property is
decontaminated according to the decontamination standards established in this
subchapter;
   (B)   Remove the “CONDEMNED” placards and boards from the structure; and
   (C)   Note in the deed that the property was previously a methamphetamine or
other illegal drug lab and has been successfully decontaminated.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.165 REPAYMENT FOR DECONTAMINATION AND DEMOLITION SERVICES.
   If the property owner refuses to employ a decontamination contractor to
start the decontamination process within 30 days from the date that the
property is designated as contaminated or refuses to employ a demolition
contractor for demolition within 30 days from the date that the property is
designated as contaminated, the Building Inspector shall follow the procedure
provided in §
154.161.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 154.166 CREATION OF A LIEN TO PAY FOR DECONTAMINATION OR DEMOLISHING
CONTAMINATED PROPERTY.
   The city shall follow the procedure provided in §§
39.025 through
39.034 of this code of ordinances to file a lien against contaminated property
that was either decontaminated or demolished.
(Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009)
VACANT STRUCTURE REGISTRATION
§ 154.180 PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a system of
registration of vacant structures to aid the city in the verification and
management of vacant structures in order to protect and promote the public
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter are in addition to and not in lieu
of methods or processes otherwise permitted or authorized in any other
ordinance or law of the city, Kanawha or Putnam County or the state. Nothing in
this subchapter shall preclude the city from utilizing any existing or later
created legal remedy that may be available to it to protect the health, safety
and welfare of its residents or to enforce the ordinances and statutes
applicable within the city.
   (C)   The city is authorized under state law to create and establish a
vacant structure registration program pursuant to W. Va. Code 8-12-16c.
   (D)   This subchapter shall be construed liberally, to the extent permitted
under state law, to achieve the purposes and intent set forth herein.
(Ord. 13-2, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 154.181 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVELY MARKETED. Doing those things and performing those activities
necessary to sell a structure, and includes using the services of a realtor
licensed in West Virginia with the services being provided under contract
signed by both the realtor and the seller, with the sales price being
established to facilitate the sale of the property.
   CITY. The City of Nitro, West Virginia.
   NOTICE ADDRESS. The address of the property maintained by the Assessor of
Kanawha County or the Assessor of Putnam County for the purpose of assessing ad
valorem taxes assessed against the property.
   OCCUPIED or OCCUPYING. The present use of a structure for its intended
purpose by persons or for a commercial activity on a consistent basis over
time; provided, that the structure shall cease to be OCCUPIED if the qualified
use ceases for more than 180 consecutive days. The terms OCCUPIED or OCCUPYING
do not include use by unauthorized persons, trespassers or for an illegal
activity, unless such use is in conjunction with a legal activity.
   OWNER. The person assessed for ad valorem taxes as the owner of the
property.
   PERSON. A natural person or a firm, trust, corporation, association,
partnership, limited liability company, limited partnership, public entity,
joint venture or any other kind of entity or enterprise, whether or not
incorporated or certificated with any public body, of any kind or character.
   PROPERTY. Any parcel of real property or any right or interest in real
property upon which a structure is located and that is identifiable of record
with the County Clerk of Kanawha County or the County Clerk of Putnam County,
depending upon the county in which the property is situated.
   STRUCTURE. Any physical facility that is or was intended to be to be
occupied as a personal residence or for a legal commercial activity.
   VACANT STRUCTURE. A structure that is not occupied as defined in this
section. VACANT STRUCTURE shall not include those structures that are currently
under construction, being renovated or being actively marketed, or is otherwise
exempt from registration in accordance with §
154.190.
   VACANT STRUCTURE REGISTRATION FEE. The fee imposed under the authority of
this subchapter, and includes any fee imposed as a penalty for failure to
register a vacant structure.
(Ord. 13-2, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 154.182 OWNER REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner of each vacant structure located within the city shall
register the subject vacant structure by filing with the city a registration
form promulgated under the terms of this subchapter. The city shall provide to
the owner of each vacant structure a registration form which shall provide the
following information:
      (1)   If the owner of the subject vacant structure is an individual, the
registration statement shall include the street address and parcel number of
the subject vacant structure, the name and resident address of the individual
and any other information deemed necessary by the city;
      (2)   If the owner of the subject vacant structure is a corporation, the
registration statement shall include the street address and parcel number of
the subject vacant structure, the names and resident addresses of all officers
and directors of the corporation, and any other information deemed necessary by
the city;
      (3)   If the owner of the subject vacant structure is an estate, the
registration statement shall include the street address and parcel number of
the subject vacant structure, the name and resident address of the executor of
the estate and any other information deemed necessary by the city;
      (4)   If the owner of the subject vacant structure is a trust, the
registration statement shall include the street address and parcel number of
the subject vacant structure, the names and resident addresses of all trustees,
grantors and beneficiaries, and any other information deemed necessary by the
city;
      (5)   If the owner of the subject vacant structure is a partnership, the
registration statement shall include the street address and parcel number of
the subject vacant structure, the names and resident addresses of all the
partners with an interest of 10% or greater and any other information deemed
necessary by the city;
      (6)   If the owner of the subject vacant structure is any other form of
unincorporated association, the registration statement shall include the street
address and parcel number of the subject vacant structure, the names and
resident addresses of all principals and any other information deemed necessary
by the city; and
      (7)   If the owner of the subject vacant structure resides outside of the
state, the owner shall provide the name and address of the person that resides
within the state who is the agent authorized to accept service of process and
notice of fees due under this subchapter on behalf of the owner, and who is
designated as the local agent for the purposes of notification in the event of
an emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare.
   (B)   The required completed registration form shall be filed no later than
30 days after the structure qualifies as a vacant structure.
(Ord. 13-2, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 154.183 VIOLATION.
   (A)   It is a violation of this subchapter for the owner of a vacant
structure that is required to be registered under the terms of this subchapter
to fail to register the subject vacant structure.
   (B)   It is a violation of this subchapter for the new owner of a vacant
structure that remains a vacant structure to fail to register the subject
vacant structure under the terms of this subchapter within 30 days subsequent
to acquiring ownership of the subject vacant structure.
   (C)   The City Building Inspector shall be responsible for assessing all
fees, according the requirements and procedures of this subchapter.
(Ord. 13-2, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 154.184 INVESTIGATIONS; DETERMINING STRUCTURES NOT OCCUPIED.
   (A)   City Building Inspector. The City Building Inspector shall make lawful
and reasonable inspections, examinations and observations of any structure for
the purpose of determining whether the structure qualifies as a vacant
structure.
   (B)   Inspection, examination. The City Building Inspector shall make all
inspections, examinations and observations between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The
City Building Inspector shall wear proper identification at all times when
inspecting, examining or observing any structure under the terms of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 13-2, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 154.185 NOTICE OF STRUCTURE FOUND TO BE A VACANT STRUCTURE.
   (A)   Required notice. If the City Building Inspector has identified an
unregistered vacant structure, the City Building Inspector shall cause notice
to the property owner be delivered, by certified mail return receipt requested,
to the notice address of the vacant structure. If, for any reason, such
certified mail is returned without evidence of proper receipt thereof, then the
City Building Inspector shall cause a Class 1-0 legal advertisement to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and shall cause
notice to be posted on the front door or other conspicuous location on the
vacant structure.
   (B)   Form of notice. When, under the requirements of this section, notice
is to be sent, the notice shall include at least the following information:
      (1)   A description of the vacant structure is situated sufficient to
identify the property;
      (2)   A statement that the vacant structure has been identified by the
city to be in violation of this subchapter;
      (3)   A statement that the owner may dispute the determination by
contacting the City Building Inspector not less than 30 days from the date of
the notice;
      (4)   A statement that the failure of the owner to contact the city or
the failure to register the vacant structure pursuant to this subchapter shall
result in the assessment of a fee pursuant to §
154.999;
      (5)   A statement that the city may file a lien with the County Clerk of
Kanawha County or the County Clerk of Putnam County, depending upon the county
in which the property is situated, and/or may bring a civil action in the
Circuit Court of Kanawha County or the Circuit Court of Putnam County to
enforce assessed fees under this subchapter; and
      (6)   A statement that the owner has the right to appeal the
determination of the city to the Circuit Court of Kanawha County or the Circuit
Court of Putnam County, as applicable.
(Ord. 13-2, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 154.186 ASSESSMENT OF FEES.
   (A)   Fee assessment. An annual fee is hereby assessed and shall be
collected from the owner of each and every vacant structure registered with the
city as determined by the following scale; provided, that the time for
calculating the fee shall be measured from the month the vacant structure was
registered with the city:
      (1)   No fee shall be imposed where the structure is vacant for less than
12 consecutive months;
      (2)   A fee of $200 shall be imposed where the structure is vacant for
not less than 12 months nor more than 24 months;
      (3)   A fee of $400 shall be imposed where the structure is vacant for
not less than 25 months nor more than 36 months;
      (4)   A fee of $600 shall be imposed where the structure is vacant for
not less than 37 months nor more than 48 months;
      (5)   A fee of $800 shall be imposed where the structure is vacant for
not less than 49 months nor more than 60 months;
      (6)   A fee of $1,000 shall be imposed where the structure is vacant for
not less than 61 months nor more than 72 months; and
      (7)   A fee of $1,500 shall be imposed where the structure is vacant for
not less than 73 months, and for each subsequent 12-month period after 73
months.
   (B)   Challenging fee assessed. Any owner asserting that a registered vacant
structure was occupied on any specific date has the burden of establishing by
adequate proof that occupancy occurred on a later date.
   (C)   Evidence. For purposes of challenging the fee assessed, evidence
offered to prove a structure is occupied may include, but shall not be limited
to, the receipt or delivery of regular mail through the U.S. Postal Service;
evidence demonstrating the delivery and payment for telephone, cable, internet,
electric, gas, water and sewer services for a period of not less than 180 days
without interruptions of more than 30 consecutive days; a valid city business
license; or recent federal, state or city income statements indicating that the
subject structure is the official personal or business residence of the owner,
persons or businesses claiming occupancy of the subject structure.
(Ord. 13-2, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 154.187 COLLECTION OF FEES.
   (A)   Statement. The City Treasurer shall annually mail a statement of
accrued vacant structure registration fees to each owner charged with vacant
structure registration fees; provided, that failure to mail a statement for
said fees shall not be grounds for avoiding payment.
   (B)   Notice. The City Treasurer shall send a notice to the notice address
of each owner of vacant structures that is delinquent in the payment of
required vacant structure registration fees, or any portion thereof, by
certified mail return receipt requested, and shall post a copy of said notice
on the front doer or other conspicuous location on the vacant structure.
   (C)   Form of notice. When a notice is sent as required by this section, the
notice shall include at least the following information:
      (1)   A description of the property on which the vacant structure is
situated that is sufficient to identify the property;
      (2)   A statement that delinquent vacant structure registration fees were
assessed in accord with a city ordinance and are delinquent;
      (3)   A statement that payment of the delinquent vacant structure
registration fees are to be paid not more than 30 days from the date of the
notice;
      (4)   A statement that the city may file a lien against the property on
which the vacant structure is situated if payment is not received no later than
45 days from the date of the notice;
      (5)   A statement that the city may bring a civil action in the Circuit
Court of Kanawha County or Putnam County, as appropriate, to enforce payment
and collection of such delinquent vacant structure registration fees; and
      (6)   A statement that the owner has the right to appeal to the Circuit
Court of Kanawha County or Putnam County, as appropriate.
(Ord. 13-2, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 154.188 LIABILITY; REMEDIES AND CITY FUND.
   (A)   Liability of owner. The owner of the vacant structure shall be liable
to the city for said vacant structure registration fees imposed pursuant to
this subchapter. Multiple owners of a vacant structure shall be jointly and
severally liable for the vacant structure registration fees assessed and
imposed pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   Remedies of city. For the purpose of collecting delinquent vacant
structure registration fees assessed pursuant to this subchapter, the city may
impose the following remedies.
      (1)   Lieu against real property. The city shall have a lien upon the
property on which a vacant structure is situated, any improvements thereon and
any appurtenances thereunto belonging, and upon the interest of the owner
therein, to secure the payment of any fees due, owing or imposed under this
subchapter. The city may file a lien with the Clerk of the county in which the
property is located, against such property and provide notice of the city’s
lien as provided for by state law.
      (2)   A civil action. The city may bring a civil action in the Circuit
Court of the county in which the property is located to:
         (a)   Enforce payment and collection of delinquent vacant structure
registration fees assessed pursuant to this subchapter; and/or
         (b)   Seek the judicially ordered sale of the property to satisfy its
lien.
   (C)   Vacant structure registration account. The city shall deposit all
vacant structure registration fees collected pursuant to this subchapter into a
separate account titled Vacant Structure Registration Fund. The city shall use
such funds to: improve public safety efforts, including for police and fire
personnel; monitor and administer this subchapter; and repair, close or
demolish a vacant structure as authorized by W. Va. Code 8-12-16.
(Ord. 13-2, passed 4-16-2013; Ord. passed 3-19-2019)
§ 154.189 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   Any owner or other person aggrieved by any determination made by the city
pursuant to this subchapter shall have the right to appeal the determination to
the Property Maintenance Board. If the owner or other person is dissatisfied
with the decision of the Property Maintenance Board, owner or other person may
appeal that decision to the Circuit Court of the county in which the property
is located.
(Ord. 13-2, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 154.190 EXEMPTION FROM VACANT STRUCTURE STATUS.
   (A)   The owner of a vacant structure may formally request the city to
exempt the subject structure from the registration provisions of §
154.182. The city shall, upon a finding for good cause by the City Building
Inspector that the owner of the structure will be unable to occupy the
structure for a determinant period of time, exempt the owner from the
registration provisions of §
154.182. A finding for good cause may be established if the owner can
demonstrate that, due to facts or circumstances that differentiate the
structure from other structures required to be registered under the provisions
of §
154.182, or the requirements of this subchapter present a special or undue
hardship that is unique or unduly burdensome to the specific structure.
   (B)   All property owned by the United States of America, the state, Kanawha
County, Putnam County or the city is exempt from the requirements of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 13-2, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 154.191 FORMS.
   The City Building Inspector shall develop such forms or procedures, as
deemed to be necessary, to carry out the requirements of this subchapter
including, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements pertaining to
registration, investigations, notice, findings and procedures, and the
collection of fees.
(Ord. 13-2, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 154.192 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS.
   In no instance shall compliance with this subchapter exonerate any owner of
any vacant structure from compliance with any other city code provisions and
state code provisions, including, but not limited to, structure and housing
code provisions and requirements.
(Ord. 13-2, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter, or fail to
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted
within the limits provided by the applicable state laws and this chapter. The
fine for the first violation of this chapter or failure to comply with the
requirements of this chapter shall be an amount not to exceed state law plus
the costs to the city to institute the proceeding; the fine for the second
violation of this chapter or failure to comply with the requirements of this
chapter within 18 months of the first violation shall be an amount not to
exceed state law plus the costs to the city to institute the proceeding; and
the fine for the third and subsequent violation of this chapter or failure to
comply with the requirements of this chapter within 18 months of the first
violation shall be an amount not to exceed state law plus the costs to the city
to institute the proceeding; provided, that in lieu of a monetary penalty, the
Municipal Court may sentence the defendant for the violation to a commensurate
amount of community service. Each day that a violation continues after a formal
notice has been served in accordance with the §
154.008 shall be deemed a separate offense. Additionally, any person who shall
violate a provision of this chapter that results in the Department carrying out
the property owner’s responsibilities under this chapter shall pay the property
maintenance fee as calculated in accordance with§
154.004(A)(4) and any charge against the real property imposed under the
authority of this chapter.
   (B)   The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude
the city from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a
violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the
building, structure or premises.
   (C)   The penalties for violating §
154.041(D) shall be assessed based upon the number of citations within any
calendar year: an amount not to exceed state law for the first citation; an
amount not to exceed state law for the second citation; an amount not to exceed
state law for the third citation; and an amount not to exceed state law for
each citation thereafter. All fines imposed by citations shall be due within
ten days of service of the citation.
   (D)   The penalties for violating §
154.046(D) shall be assessed based upon the number of citations within any
calendar year: an amount not to exceed state law for the first citation; an
amount not to exceed state law for the second citation; an amount not to exceed
state law for the third citation; and an amount not to exceed state law for
each citation thereafter. All fines imposed by citations shall be due within
ten days of service of the citation.
   (E)   Any person violating any provision of §§
154.130 to
154.135, whether as principal, agent or employee, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of an
amount not to exceed state law; and such person shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each month during a portion of which any violation of this
subchapter is committed, continued or permitted; provided, that in the event of
an appeal from any such conviction, the period between the date a notice of
appeal is filed and the date of the final order of the court last considering
the appeal shall not be considered a period of continuing in violation of this
subchapter.
   (F)   A contractor violating any provision of §§
154.150 to
154.166 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor of the city’s public nuisance
ordinance and may be assessed a fine not to exceed state law for each
violation. In addition, a contractor violating any provision of §§
154.150 to
154.166 is also subject to certification denial, suspension or revocation.
   (G)   Any failure of the owner of a vacant structure to register the vacant
structure shall constitute a violation of §§
154.180 to
154.192 and shall result in a fee against that owner of an amount not to exceed
state law per violation. Each and every 12-month period following the
application of a fine under this division (G) and during which the structure
has not been registered as a vacant structure shall be a separate violation of
§§
154.180 to
154.192 and shall result in additional fine of an amount not to exceed state
law per violation.
(Ord. 09-05, passed 5-19-2009; Ord. 09-14, passed 12-15-2009; Ord. 11, passed
9-20-2011; Ord. 13-2, passed 4-16-2013; Ord. passed 9-5-2017; Ord. passed 12-5-
2017; Ord. passed 6-1-2020)
CHAPTER 155: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
   
155.01   City Council findings
   
155.02   Adoption of comprehensive plan
§ 155.01 CITY COUNCIL FINDINGS.
   (A)   W. Va. Code Chapter 8A, Article 3, as amended, describes the procedure
to be followed when drafting a municipal comprehensive plan.
   (B)   The City Planning Commission followed the procedure described when it
drafted the comprehensive plan for the city.
   (C)   In accordance with W. Va. Code 8A-3-7, the City Planning Commission
held a public hearing on March 20, 2014, to respond to questions from the
public relating to the comprehensive plan.
   (D)   In accordance with W. Va. Code 8A-3-7, the City Planning Commission
approved the comprehensive plan on April 3, 2014.
   (E)   In accordance with W. Va. Code 8A-3-7, the City Planning Commission
submitted the approved comprehensive plan to the City Council on April 15,
2014.
   (F)   On May 6, 2014, the City Council held a public hearing to respond to
questions from the public relating to the comprehensive plan.
   (G)   On May 6, 2014, the City Council passed on first reading this
ordinance adopting the comprehensive plan.
   (H)   On May 20, 2014, the City Council passed on second reading this
ordinance adopting the comprehensive plan.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2014)
§ 155.02 ADOPTION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The comprehensive plan as described in §
155.01 of this code of ordinances, as amended, is hereby adopted by reference,
and shall be effective on and after May 21, 2014.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2014)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   AGREEMENTS
      
II.   PROPERTY TRANSFERS
      
III.   ZONING
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
97-06    - -         Agreement to purchase an air sweeper
96-08    1-7-1997    Agreement concerning tax incentive
97-03    4-15-1997   Agreement concerning a grant agreement
97-09    9-16-1997   Changing the name of a street
98-03    2-24-1998   Agreement concerning a new bridge
98-05    8-18-1998   Agreement concerning law enforcement officers
00-01    1-18-2000   Housing consortium agreement
00-07    11-7-2000   Agreement for emergency dispatching services
01-03    2-6-2001    Lease agreement for a fire truck
01-09    5-15-2001   Agreement concerning a BMX track
05-07    8-2-2005    Housing consortium agreement
06-01    6-6-2006    Lease agreement with the state
08-03    2-19-2008   Intergovernmental agreement
08-05    5-6-2008    Agreement relating to tax incentives
08-      8-5-2008    Housing consortium agreement
11-3     6-21-2011   Housing consortium agreement
14-3     5-20-2014   Adoption of a comprehensive plan
-        7-15-2014   Housing consortium agreement
-        7-6-2017    Housing consortium agreement
-        6-16-2020   Housing consortium agreement
                     
 
TABLE II: PROPERTY TRANSFERS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
95-01    3-7-1995    Abandonment of a portion of Ivy Street
95-07    12-19-1995  Sale of property
95-07A   12-19-1995  Sale of property
95-08    12-19-1995  Purchase of property
96-04    5-7-1996    Abandoning property
01-01    1-2-2001    Abandonment of a portion of Wilson Avenue
01-02    2-6-2001    Abandonment of Ivy Street
01-14    11-6-2001   Annexation of a contiguous parcel of land
02-06    8-6-2002    Abandonment of DuPont Lane
02-08    11-19-2002  Amendment to Ord. 02-06
05-04    4-19-2005   Abandonment of Gum Street
05-06    7-6-2005    Abandonment of a portion on an alley
05-08    8-2-2005    Abandonment of an alley
05-09    10-18-2005  Abandonment of an alley
06-05    12-4-2006   Annexation of a contiguous parcel of land
09-12    11-3-2009   Abandonment of property
12-1     1-17-2012   Annexation of property
12-2     2-21-2012   Abandonment of streets/alleys
-        5-19-2015   Abandonment of a portion of Fir Street
18-      4-3-2018    Abandonment of a portion of Cedar Street
-        1-15-2019   Abandonment of a portion of Michigan Avenue
-        7-7-2020    Abandonment of a portion of Cedar Avenue
-        3-1-2022    Abandonment of a portion of Michigan Avenue
-        3-1-2022    Abandonment of a portion of 3rd Street
-        4-19-2022   Abandonment of a portion of Cedar Street
-        10-4-2022   Abandonment and transfer to Nitro Land Reuse Authority of
                     a portion of 24th Street
-        1-17-2023   Abandonment of a portion of Kanawha Avenue
-        1-17-2023   Abandonment of a portion of Kanawha Avenue
-        11-21-2023  Abandoning a portion of Blake Road
                     
 
TABLE III: ZONING
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
189  9-19-  Dividing Zoning District 18: part to be new District ZO, zoned B-2 Central
     1978   Business District; remainder of District 18 designated as R-3 District
80-2 6-30-  Lots 1912, 1914, 1916 and 1918 in Area “R” of the Nitro Reservation from R-2 to
     1980   B-2 District
     1-23-  Division of Zoning Area 11 into new Zoning Area 22, designated C-1 Heavy
81-2 1981   Business District; remainder of Area 11 designated R-l Single- Family
            Residential District
82-1 3-6-   Area beginning at intersection of Blackwood Avenue and Main Street from R-1 to
     1982   B-1 District
83-  10-4-  Carriage Way and surrounding area zoned as R-1 Single Family Residential
15   1983   District
84-3 2-20-  PAR Industrial Park zoned I Light Industrial District
     1984
84-4 2-20-  Area fronting Frederick Street from Kapok Street to Walker Street and extending
     1984   to alley between Frederick Street and First Avenue rezoned as R- Z District
84-5 2-20-  Lakeside Subdivision zoned R-1 District
     1984
84-  12-15- Christina Craigo, property on 40th Street from R-3 to B-1 District; Narberth
10   1984   Corp. property adjacent to Route 62 and Carriage Way from R-1 to B-1 District
85-7 8-20-  2505 25th Street from R-2 to B-1 District
     1985
87-1 3-17-  Property for the proposed senior citizen complex from R-11 to R-2 District;
     1987   variance to allow construction
88-  10-18- Lots 48 and 49, Old Riverdale Section from R-3 Residential to B-1 Business
10   1988   District
93-  12-7-  Real estate at 11th Street W. and 1st Avenue from R-2 to B- 1 District
07   1993
95-  11-21- Lot 1118 Main Avenue from B-1 to R-2 District
04   1995
95-  11-21- Lots 1912-1918 on east side of 19th Street from B-2 to R-2 District
05   1995
97-  4-4-   Property owned by L. and J. Conrad, at corner of Frederick Street and Walker
01   1997   Street from R-2 to B-1 District
97-  4-15-  14.4 acres, formerly/commonly known as the Fike/Artel property, zoned I Light
05   1997   Industrial District
98-  1-6-   Rezoning property
02   1998
98-  7-21-  Recently annexed property (the “development property”) for retail shopping
04   1998   center purposes zoned B-2 District
           
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to West Virginia Code
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO WEST VIRGINIA CODE
W. Va. Code Cites Code Section
W. Va. Code Cites              Code Section
1-5-1 et seq.                  33.045,
                               33.046
1-5-3                          33.045
2-2-3                          10.03
2-2-5                          10.06
2-2-8                          10.04
2-2-9                          10.04
2-2-10                         10.02,
                               10.03
2-2-11                         10.04
Chapter 3                      33.002,
                               33.015
3-1-1 et seq.                  Chapter 92
3-1-2a                         Chapter 33
3-1-6                          Chapter 33
3-1-27                         Chapter 33
Article 3-3                    33.004
3-3-13                         Chapter 33
3-7-9                          33.016
5-15-5                         72.057
Art. 6-9                       Chapter 31,
                               31.055
Art. 6-9A                      Chapter 30
Ch. 6, Art. 9-A                32.227
Ch. 6-b                        32.229
6B-2-5(g)                      51.11
7-1-3U                         153.02
7-1-32                         Chapter 111
Art. 7-12                      Chapter 32
7-18-1 et seq.                 38.106
7-22-1                         38.059
8-1-2                          38.052
                               33.045,
8-1-5a                         38.045,
                               38.054,
                               39.001
8-2-5a                         Chapter 133
Art. 8-5                       Chapter 31
                               10.09,
8-5-7                          Chapter 30,
                               30.02,
                               Chapter 31
8-5-8                          Chapter 30,
                               Chapter 31
8-5-9                          Chapter 30,
                               Chapter 31
                               Chapter 30,
8-5-10                         30.02,
                               Chapter 31
8-5-12                         Chapter 30,
                               34.090
8-5-13                         Chapter 33,
                               33.003
8-5-15a                        Chapter 33
Art. 8-6                       10.09
Art. 8-7                       10.09
Art. 8-9                       Chapter 30
8-9-2                          Chapter 31
                               Chapter 31,
8-10-1                         35.03,
                               Chapter 36
8-10-1a                        Chapter 31
                               Chapter 35,
8-10-2                         35.02,
                               35.03
8-10-2a                        Chapter 35
                               35.35,
8-10-2b                        35.36,
                               35.38
8-10-3                         Chapter 31
                               Chapter 10,
8-11-1                         Chapter 30,
                               35.12
8-11-1b                        35.12
8-11-2                         Chapter 30
8-11-3                         Chapter 30,
                               30.25
                               Chapter 30,
8-11-4                         Chapter 95,
                               Chapter 151,
                               151.30
8-11-4(b)                      Chapter 10
Art. 8-12                      Chapter 30
8-12-1(1)                      10.10
8-12-2                         Chapter 31
8-12-2(11)                     Chapter 10 
8-12-5(1)                      Chapter 93
8-12-5(2)                      Chapter 93
8-12-5(3)                      Chapter 71
8-12-5(10) et seq.             Chapter 50
8-12-5(15)                     Chapter 95
8-12-5(16)                     Chapter 133
8-12-5(17)                     Chapter 131
8-12-5(18)                     Chapter 131
8-12-5(19)                     Chapter 92,
                               Chapter 131
8-12-5(20)                     Chapter 112
8-12-5(21)                     Chapter 70
8-12-5(23)                     Chapter 91,
                               Chapter 111
8-12-5(26)                     Chapter 90
8-12-5(27)                     Chapter 90
8-12-5(31)                     Chapter 134
8-12-5(32)                     Chapter 52
8-12-5(37)                     Chapter 94
8-12-5(38)                     Chapter 32
8-12-5(44)                     Chapter 92
8-12-5(45)                     Chapter 30
8-12-5(56)                     Chapter 37
                               Chapter 10,
8-12-5(57)                     Chapter 30,
                               Chapter 92
8-12-5(b)                      131.10
8-12-10                        Chapter 31,
                               Chapter 33
8-12-13                        Chapter 151
8-12-14                        Chapter 151
8-12-15                        Chapter 151
8-12-16                        154.022,
                               154.188
8-12-16c                       154.180
8-12-18                        33.045,
                               33.046
8-12-19                        Chapter 30
8-13-4                         Chapter 38
8-13-5                         Chapter 38
8-13-5a                        Chapter 38
8-13-6                         38.059
8-13-7                         38.059,
                               Chapter 112
8-13-10                        Chapter 90
                               Chapter 38,
                               39.025,
8-13-13                        39.045,
                               39.048,
                               Chapter 93
8-13-15 et seq.                Chapter 31,
                               Chapter 38
8-13-17 et seq.                Chapter 31
8-13-23                        Chapter 31
8-13C-7                        38.054
Article 8-14                   36.005
8-14-1                         Chapter 36
8-14-2                         Chapter 36
8-14-2a                        Chapter 36
8-14-3                         Chapter 36
8-14-5                         Chapter 36
8-14-5a                        Chapter 36
8-14-6 to 8-14-20              36.006
8-14-6 et seq.                 Chapter 36
8-14-22                        36.006
8-14-23                        36.006
8-15-1                         Chapter 37
8-15-3                         39.045,
                               Chapter 37
8-15-4 et seq.                 Chapter 37
8-15-9 et seq.                 Chapter 37
8-15-11 through 8-15-27        37.04
8-15-11 et seq.                Chapter 37
8-16-1 et seq.                 32.082
8-18-22                        Chapter 52
                               Chapter 36,
Article 8-22                   36.048,
                               Chapter 37,
                               37.44
8-22-19                        37.43
8-22-19 to 8-22-27             36.049
8-22-21 – 8-22-27            37.43
Article 8-24-1 et seq.         150.003
8-24-6                         113.06
Art. 8-26A                     Chapter 32
8-26A-1 et seq.                32.130
Art. 8-27                      Chapter 32,
                               32.115
8-27-5                         32.116
Chapter 8, Article 33          32.080
8-33-5                         32.082
8-34-1                         Chapter 35
8-38-12                        38.059
Art. 8A-1                      Chapter 32
8A-1-1                         Chapter 32
                               32.067,
8A-1-1 et seq.                 72.090,
                               113.03,
                               113.06
Chapter 8A, Article 2          152.005
Chapter 8A, Article 3          155.01
8A-3-7                         155.01
8A-5-1 et seq.                 Chapter 32
Art. 8A-7                      Chapter 32
Chapter 8A, Article 8          152.007
Art. 8A-8                      113.06
8A-16-2                        Chapter 32
Art. 10-1                      Chapter 32
10-1-9                         32.097
Chapter 11                     38.082,
                               112.47
11-3-3A                        153.01,
                               153.07
11-8-14                        30.04
11-8-14a                       30.04
Chapter 11, Article 9          38.046,
                               38.057
11-9-1 et seq.                 38.056
Chapter 11, Article 10         38.046,
                               38.057
11-10-1 et seq.                38.046,
                               38.055
11-10-5d                       Chapter 33
11-10-11c                      38.054
11-12-4                        Chapter 38
11-12-86                       133.10
11-14C-1 et seq.               38.051
                               38.046,
Chapter 11, Article 15         38.057,
                               38.102,
                               38.104
                               38.045 –
11-15-1 et seq.                38.047,
                               38.051,
                               38.059
11-15-3c                       38.051
11-15-9f                       38.051
Chapter 11, Article 15A        38.046,
                               38.057
                               38.045,
11-15A-1 et seq.               38.046,
                               38.048,
                               38.059
Chapter 11, Article 15B        38.046,
                               38.057
                               38.045,
11-15B-1 et seq.               38.046,
                               38.048,
                               38.051
11-15B-2                       38.047
11-15B-33                      38.054
11-15B-34                      38.050
11-15B-35                      38.053
                               Chapter 112,
Article 11-16                  112.16,
                               112.51
11-16-2                        112.01
11-16-17                       Chapter 112
11-16-18                       112.51
11-16-19                       112.52,
                               112.99
11-24-1                        38.033
11-24-3a                       38.046
Ch. 11-a                       32.223
Ch. 11-a, Art. 3, § 8         32.223
Ch. 11-a, Art. 3, § 44        32.223
14-2A-4                        Chapter 35,
                               35.12
15-2-17 et seq.                Chapter 92
                               Chapter 32,
Article 15-5                   32.001,
                               32.012
15-5-5                         32.002
15-5-8                         32.002 –
                               32.004
15A-10-20                      92.57
                               91.11,
15A-11-5                       151.01,
                               151.36
Chapter 16, Article 2          32.025
Art. 16-2                      32.031
16-9-3                         Chapter 90
16-9A-2                        132.99
16-9A-3                        132.06
16-9A-7                        132.06
Article 16-13                  32.045 –
                               32.047
16-13-3 et seq.                Chapter 32
16-13-16                       Chapter 52,
                               52.17
16-13-18                       Chapter 32
16-13-18a                      Chapter 32
Chapter 17                     72.091,
                               72.092
17-4-26 et seq.                Chapter 93
17-5A-3a                       70.055
17-10-7                        Chapter 74
17-10-17                       Chapter 93
17-24A-1                       75.07
17-24A-2                       75.07
                               72.085,
Chapter 17A                    72.088,
                               152.011
17A-1-1                        73.25,
                               92.56
17A-3-1                        72.085
17A-3-13                       72.086
17A-3-15                       72.087
17A-8-4                        70.162
17A-8-6                        70.162
17A-9-2                        72.088
17A-9-3                        72.089
                               70.001,
17A-10-1                       72.018,
                               132.07
17B-2-1                        72.090
17B-2-1a                       72.091
17B-2-2                        72.091
17B-2-7b                       72.090
17B-2-9                        72.092
17B-3-3c                       35.37
17B-4-1                        72.093
17B-4-3                        72.094
17B-4-4                        72.095
Chapter 17C                    72.018
17C-1-5a                       70.001
17C-1-1                        70.001
17C-1-2                        70.001
17C-1-3                        70.001
17C-1-4                        70.001
17C-1-5                        70.001
17C-1-6                        70.001
17C-1-7                        70.001
17C-1-8                        70.001
17C-1-12                       70.001
17C-1-13                       70.001
17C-1-15                       70.001
17C-1-16                       70.001
17C-1-17                       70.001
17C-1-21                       70.001
17C-1-22                       70.001
17C-1-24                       70.001
17C-1-25                       70.001
17C-1-26                       70.001
17C-1-29                       70.001
17C-1-30                       70.001
17C-1-31                       70.001
17C-1-32                       70.001
17C-1-33                       70.001
17C-1-35                       70.001
17C-1-36                       70.001
17C-1-37                       70.001
17C-1-38                       70.001
17C-1-39                       70.001
17C-1-40                       70.001
17C-1-41                       70.001
17C-1-42                       70.001
17C-1-43                       70.001
17C-1-44                       70.001
17C-1-45                       70.001
17C-1-46                       70.001
17C-1-47                       70.001
17C-1-48                       70.001
17C-1-49                       70.001
17C-1-50                       70.001
17C-1-51                       70.001
17C-1-52                       70.001
17C-1-53                       70.001
17C-1-54                       70.001
17C-1-55                       70.001
17C-1-60                       70.001
17C-1-62                       70.001
17C-1-64                       70.001
17C-2-1                        70.186
17C-2-3(c)                     70.187
17C-2-4                        70.188
17C-2-5                        70.189
17C-2-6                        70.190
17C-2-7                        Chapter 70
17C-2-8                        Chapter 70
17C-2-8(a)(1)                  Chapter 75
17C-2-8(a)(2)                  Chapter 71
17C-2-8(a)(3)                  Chapter 71,
                               Chapter 93
17C-2-8(a)(6)                  Chapter 70,
                               Chapter 71
17C-2-8(a)(7)                  Chapter 72
17C-2-8(a)(8)                  Chapter 73
17C-2-8(a)(9)                  Chapter 70
17C-2-8(b)                     Chapter 71
17C-2-8(c)                     Chapter 71
17C-2-8(4)                     Chapter 70
17C-2-9                        70.192
17C-3-2                        Chapter 71
17C-3-3                        Chapter 71
17C-3-4                        71.15
17C-3-4a                       71.16
17C-3-4b                       71.23
17C-3-5                        71.17
17C-3-6                        71.18
17C-3-7                        71.19
17C-3-8                        71.20
17C-3-9                        71.21
17C-4-2                        70.035,
                               70.036
17C-4-3                        70.037
17C-4-4                        70.038
17C-4-5                        70.039
17C-4-6                        70.040
17C-4-8                        70.041
17C-4-12                       70.042
17C-4-15                       Chapter 70
17C-5-2                        35.12
17C-5-2a                       70.055
17C-5-3                        70.056
17C-5A                         Chapter 70 
17C-6-1                        70.070
17C-6-3                        Chapter 70
17C-6-3(a)                     Chapter 70
17C-6-3a(a)                    70.071
17C-6-4                        70.072
17C-6-4 et seq.                Chapter 70
17C-6-5                        70.072
17C-6-7                        Chapter 70,
                               70.074
17C-6-8                        70.999
17C-6-8(a)                     70.073
17C-6-11                       72.018
17C-7-1                        70.085
17C-7-2                        70.086
17C-7-3                        70.087
17C-7-4                        70.088
17C-7-5                        70.089
17C-7-6                        70.090
17C-7-7                        70.091
17C-7-8(b)                     70.092
17C-7-8(c)                     70.092
17C-7-9                        70.093
17C-7-10                       70.094
17C-7-11                       70.095
17C-7-12                       70.096
17C-8-1                        70.110
17C-8-2                        70.111
17C-8-3                        70.112
17C-8-4                        70.113
17C-8-5                        Chapter 70,
                               70.114
17C-8-6                        70.115
17C-8-7                        70.116
17C-8-8                        70.117
17C-8-9                        70.118
17C-8-10                       70.119
17C-9-1                        70.130
17C-9-2                        70.131
17C-9-3                        70.132
17C-9-4                        70.133
17C-9-5                        70.134
17C-10-1(a)                    72.050
17C-10-2                       72.051
17C-10-3                       72.052
17C-10-4                       72.053
17C-10-5                       72.054
17C-10-6                       72.055
17C-10-8                       72.056
17C-11-1                       73.01
17C-11-2                       73.02
17C-11-3                       73.03
17C-11-4                       73.04
17C-11-5                       73.05
17C-11-6                       73.06
17C-11-7                       73.07
17C-11A-3                      73.10
17C-11A-4                      73.10
17C-11A-5                      73.10
17C-11A-6                      73.10
17C-12-1                       71.35
17C-12-2                       71.36
17C-12-3                       71.37
17C-12-4                       71.38
17C-12-5                       71.39
17C-12-6                       71.40
17C-12-7                       71.41,
                               71.42
17C-12-8                       71.41,
                               71.42
17C-13-1                       75.01
17C-13-2                       75.02
17C-13-3                       75.03
17C-13-4                       Chapter 75
17C-13-6                       75.06
17C-14-2                       70.151
17C-14-4                       70.152
17C-14-5                       70.153
17C-14-6                       70.154
17C-14-9                       70.155
17C-14-10                      70.156
17C-14-11                      71.01
17C-14-12                      72.018
17C-14-13                      75.04
17C-14-14                      70.170
Article 17C-15                 70.191
17C-15-1                       72.001
17C-15-2                       72.002
17C-15-3                       72.003
17C-15-4                       72.004
17C-15-5                       72.005
17C-15-13                      Chapter 72
17C-15-14                      72.006
17C-15-15                      72.007
17C-15-16                      72.008
17C-15-17                      72.009
17C-15-18                      72.010
17C-15-19                      72.011
17C-15-20                      72.012
17C-15-21                      72.013
17C-15-22                      72.014
17C-15-23                      72.015
17C-15-24                      72.016
17C-15-25                      72.017
17C-15-26                      70.001,
                               72.018
17C-15-26(e)                   71.42
17C-15-27                      72.018
17C-15-31                      72.019
17C-15-32                      72.020
17C-15-33                      72.021
17C-15-34                      72.022
17C-15-35                      72.023
17C-15-36                      72.024
17C-15-36a                     72.034
17C-15-37                      72.025
17C-15-39                      Chapter 72
17C-15-41                      72.027
17C-15-42                      72.028
17C-15-44                      72.029
17C-15-45                      72.030
17C-15-46                      32.031,
                               72.999
17C-15-48                      72.033
17C-15-49                      72.035
Article 17C-16                 72.032,
                               72.033
17C-16-9                       72.032
Article 17C-17                 72.070,
                               72.072
17C-17-2                       72.072
17C-17-2(b)                    Chapter 72
17C-17-3                       72.071
17C-17-4                       72.072
17C-17-5                       72.072
17C-17-6                       72.073
17C-17-7                       72.074
17C-17-11b                     72.071
Art. 17C-19                    Chapter 70
17C-19-3                       72.999
Art. 17C-23                    70.157
Article 17D-2A                 70.169
Art. 17E-1                     Chapter 72,
                               72.110
17E-1-3                        72.110
17E-1-4                        72.111
17E-1-5                        72.112
17E-1-6                        72.112
17E-1-7                        72.113
17E-1-8                        72.114
17E-1-9(e)                     72.110
17E-1-14                       72.999
17E-1-15                       72.999
17E-1-25                       72.999
18-2A-9                        Chapter 92
18A-5-1                        134.02
18A-5-1a                       134.02
19-2H-1 et seq.                134.16
Article 19-4                   38.015
19-7-8                         Chapter 130
Art. 19-9                      Chapter 90
19-16A-7                       153.02
Art. 19-20                     Chapter 90
Art. 19-20A                    Chapter 90
19-21A                         151.50
19-21A-1 et seq.               Chapter 151
Chapter 19, Article 23         134.36,
                               152.011
19-23-9                        Chapter 130
19-36-1 et seq.                134.16
Art. 20-2                      Chapter 90
20-2-58                        133.09
20-7-18b                       35.12
21-9-4                         153.06
Chapter 21, Art. 10            133.10
21-11-3                        153.07
21-11-3(c)                     153.02
21-11-10                       153.07
Chapter 22                     Chapter 70,
                               70.191
22-15A-4                       35.12
24-2-4                         Chapter 52
24-3-8                         Chapter 52
Chapter 24A                    72.110
25-1-116                       133.03
Article 27-5                   112.99
Article 27-6A                  112.99
Article 29-3                   133.10
29-3-12                        154.026
Art. 29-3A                     Chapter 37,
                               Chapter 95
Art. 29-3E                     133.10
29-3E-5                        133.10
Chapter 29, Article 5A         152.011
Art. 29-19                     Chapter 110
29-22-101                      152.011
Chapter 29, Article 22A        134.36
29-22A-3                       134.36
29-22A-3(y)                    134.36
Chapter 29, Article 22B        152.011
Chapter 29, Article 22C        134.35,
                               152.011
Ch. 29-B                       32.227
29B-1-1 et seq.                33.082,
                               33.087
29B-1-3a                       33.086
29B-1-4                        33.083
30-6-4                         70.157
Chapter 30, Article 13         153.02
Chapter 30, Article 13 et seq. 153.02
30-29-1                        92.59,
                               133.03
30-29-4                        Chapter 35,
                               35.12
30-29-8                        36.008
30-42-6                        153.05
Chapter 31                     38.015
Article 31-2                   Chapter 74
31-2-13                        Chapter 74
Art. 31-2A                     74.01
31-2A-6                        74.99
31-18E-9(g)                    32.223
31-18E-9(g)(2)                 32.223
31-18E-9(g)(4)                 32.223
31-18E-12                      32.226
31-18E-16                      32.230
31D-14-1401 et seq.            38.046,
                               Chapter 132
31D-15-1501 et seq.            38.046
31-18E-1 et seq.               32.218,
                               32.220
31-18E-9(b)                    32.223
Ch. 46, Art. 8                 32.226
49-5-101                       133.05
49-5-101(b)                    Chapter 132
Art. 49-7                      Chapter 132,
                               132.01
Chapter 50                     35.02
54-1-1 et seq.                 32.082
55-7A-2                        132.03
Art. 55-9                      Chapter 130
Article 59-3                   31.056,
                               152.007
59-3-1                         33.032
59-3-1 et seq.                 33.046 –
                               33.048
59-3-2                         154.024
                               112.45,
Chapter 60                     112.47,
                               112.48,
                               112.50
                               92.25,
60-1-5                         112.01,
                               112.45
60-1-5a                        112.55
60-3-22                        112.48
60-3-22a                       112.49,
                               112.99
60-3A-24                       112.99
Art. 60-5                      Chapter 112
Article 60-6                   112.47
60-6-5                         112.46
60-6-7                         112.47
60-6-8                         112.48
60-6-9                         112.50,
                               112.99
60-6-18                        Chapter 112
                               38.015,
                               Chapter 112,
                               112.02,
Article 60-7                   112.30,
                               112.31,
                               112.51,
                               112.53,
                               152.011
60-7-2                         112.01,
                               112.30
60-7-7                         Chapter 112
60-7-12                        112.53,
                               112.99
60-7-12a                       112.54,
                               112.99
                               112.02,
Article 60-8                   112.51,
                               112.55
60-8-6                         112.55
60-8-20                        112.55
60-8-20a                       112.56,
                               112.99
                               Chapter 92,
                               92.40,
Ch. 60A                        92.41,
                               112.48,
                               Chapter 134
Art. 60A-1                     133.01
60A-1-101(d)                   90.02
60A-1-101(d)(32)               92.40
Chapter 61                     111.16,
                               111.33
61-1-9                         92.59,
                               92.99
Art. 61-2                      Chapter 134
61-2-15                        134.02
61-2-26                        132.04
Art. 61-3                      Chapter 134
61-3-13                        134.17
61-3-18                        134.18
61-3-24 et seq.                Chapter 110
61-3-30                        134.19
61-3-43                        74.02
61-3-44                        134.20
61-3-45                        134.20
61-3-53                        134.23
61-3A-1                        134.15
61-3A-2                        134.15
61-3A-3                        134.99
61-3A-4                        134.15
61-3A-5                        134.15
61-3A-6                        134.15
61-3B-1                        134.16
61-3B-2                        134.16
61-3B-3                        134.16
Art. 61-5                      Chapter 92
61-5-14                        92.55,
                               92.99
61-5-17                        92.56,
                               92.99
Art. 61-5A                     Chapter 92
Art. 61-6                      Chapter 33,
                               Chapter 92
61-6-1b                        92.20,
                               92.99
61-6-14a                       92.21,
                               92.99
61-6-17                        92.58,
                               92.99
61-6-20                        92.62
61-6-22                        92.22
Art. 61-7                      Chapter 133,
                               133.03
61-7-1                         134.16
61-7-2                         133.01
61-7-4 et seq.                 133.02
61-7-5                         Chapter 36
61-7-6                         133.03
61-7-7                         133.04
61-7-8                         133.05
61-7-9                         133.06
61-7-10                        133.07
61-7-11                        133.08
61-8-5                         131.01
61-8-6                         131.02,
                               131.99
61-8-7                         131.03,
                               131.99
61-8-8                         131.04,
                               131.99
61-8-15                        131.05
61-8-16                        131.06
61-8-19                        90.02,
                               90.99
61-8-19a                       90.03,
                               90.99
Art. 61-8A                     131.09
61-8B-10                       131.07
61-8D-4                        132.02
Art. 61-9                      Chapter 131
Art. 61-10                     Chapter 130
61-10-1                        130.01
61-10-2                        130.02
61-10-3                        130.03
61-10-4                        130.04
61-10-5                        130.05
61-10-6                        130.05
61-10-9                        130.07
61-10-10                       130.08
61-10-11                       130.09
61-10-15                       51.11,
                               Chapter 92
61-10-22                       Chapter 92
61-11-8                        92.60
62-1-5(a)                      92.61
62-1A-1                        Chapter 35
Chapter 62, Article 1C         35.08
62-11C-4(c)                    35.12
62-11C-4(d)                    35.12
110-28-8                       38.053
                               
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section Code Section
Prior Code Section Code Section
101.01             10.01
101.02             10.02
101.03             10.03
101.04             10.04
101.05             10.05
101.06             10.06
101.07             10.07
101.08             10.08
101.99             10.99
103.01             10.09
105.01             10.10
107.01             33.001
107.02             33.002
107.03             33.003
107.04             33.004
107.05             33.005
107.06             33.006
107.07             33.007
107.08             33.008
107.09             33.009
107.10             33.010
107.11             33.011
107.12             33.012
107.13             33.013
107.14             33.014
107.15             33.015
107.16             33.016
107.17             33.017
107.18             33.018
109.01             32.001
109.02             32.002
109.03             32.003
109.04             32.004
109.05             32.005
109.06             32.006
109.07             32.007
109.08             32.008
109.09             32.009
109.10             32.010
109.11             32.011
109.12             32.012
111.01             33.030
111.02             33.031
111.03             33.032
111.04             33.033
111.05             33.034
111.06             33.999
123.01             30.01
123.02             30.02
123.03             30.03
123.04             30.04
123.05             30.05
123.06             30.06
123.07             30.07
123.08             30.08
123.09             30.09
123.10             30.10
123.11             30.11
123.12             30.12
123.13             30.13
125.01             30.25
125.02             30.26
125.03             30.27
129.01             31.001
129.02             31.002
129.03             31.003
129.04             31.004
129.05             31.005
129.06             31.006
131.01             31.020
131.02             31.021
133.01             31.035
133.02             31.036
133.03             31.037
133.04             31.038
135.01             31.050
135.02             31.051
135.03             31.052
135.04             31.053
135.05             31.054
135.06             31.055
135.07             31.056
135.08             31.057
137.01             31.070
139.01             31.085
143.01             36.001
143.02             36.002
143.03             36.003
143.04             36.004
143.05             36.005
143.06             36.006
143.07             36.007
143.071            36.008
143.08             36.020
143.09             36.021
143.10             36.022
143.11             36.023
143.12             36.024
143.13             36.025
143.14             36.026
143.15             36.027
143.16             36.028
143.17             36.029
143.18             36.030
143.19             36.045
143.20             36.046
143.21             36.047
143.22             36.048
143.23             36.049
143.24             36.060
143.25             36.061
143.26             36.062
143.27             36.063
143.28             36.064
143.29             36.065
143.30             36.066
145.01             37.01
145.02             37.02
145.03             37.03
145.04             37.04
145.05             37.05
145.06             37.20
145.07             37.21
145.08             37.22
145.09             37.23
145.10             37.24
145.11             37.25
145.12             37.26
145.13             37.27
145.14             37.28
145.15             37.29
145.16             37.40
145.17             37.41
145.18             37.42
145.19             37.43
145.20             37.44
147.01             32.045
147.02             32.046
147.03             32.047
147.04             32.048
147.05             32.049
147.99             32.999
149.01             32.065
149.02             32.066
149.03             32.067
151.01             32.095
151.02             32.096
151.03             32.097
151.04             32.098
151.05             32.099
151.06             32.100
153.01             32.115
153.02             32.116
153.03             32.117
155.01             32.130
155.02             32.131
155.03             32.132
155.04             32.133
155.05             32.134
155.06             32.135
155.07             32.136
155.08             32.137
155.09             32.138
155.10             32.139
155.11             32.140
155.12             32.141
155.13             32.142
159.01             32.200
173.01             35.01
173.02             35.02
173.03             35.03
173.04             35.04
173.05             35.05
173.06             35.06
173.07             35.07
173.08             35.08
173.09             35.09
173.10             35.10
173.11             35.11
173.12             35.12
173.13             35.13
173.14             35.14
173.15             35.15
173.16             35.16
173.17             35.17
173.18             35.18
173.19             35.19
301.01 – 301.47  70.001
303.01             70.185
303.02             70.186
303.03             70.187
303.04             70.188
303.05             70.189
303.06             70.190
303.07             70.191
303.08             70.192
303.99             70.999
305.01             70.002
305.02             70.003
307.01             70.015
307.02             70.016
307.03             70.017
307.04             70.018
307.05             70.019
307.06             70.020
311.01             71.01
311.02             71.02
311.03             71.03
311.04             71.04
313.01             71.15
313.02             71.16
313.03             71.17
313.04             71.18
313.05             71.19
313.06             71.20
313.07             71.21
313.08             71.22
313.09             71.23
315.01             93.45
315.02             93.46
315.03             93.47
315.04             93.48
315.05             93.49
315.06             93.50
315.07             93.51
315.08             93.52
315.09             93.53
315.10             93.54
315.11             93.55
315.12             93.56
315.13             93.57
331.01             70.035
331.02             70.036
331.03             70.037
331.04             70.038
331.05             70.039
331.06             70.040
331.07             70.041
331.08             70.042
333.01             70.055
333.02             70.056
333.03             70.057
333.99             70.999
335.01             70.070
335.02             70.071
335.03             70.072
335.04             70.073
335.05             70.074
335.99             70.999
337.01             70.085
337.02             70.086
337.03             70.087
337.04             70.088
337.05             70.089
337.06             70.090
337.07             70.091
337.08             70.092
337.09             70.093
337.10             70.094
337.11             70.095
337.12             70.096
339.01             70.110
339.02             70.111
339.03             70.112
339.04             70.113
339.05             70.114
339.06             70.115
339.07             70.116
339.08             70.117
339.09             70.118
339.10             70.119
341.01             70.130
341.02             70.131
341.03             70.132
341.04             70.133
341.05             70.134
341.06             70.135
343.01             71.35
343.02             71.36
343.03             71.37
343.04             71.38
343.05             71.39
343.06             71.40
343.07             71.41
343.08             71.42
343.09             71.43
343.99             71.99
345.01             72.001
345.02             72.002
345.03             72.003
345.04             72.004
345.05             72.005
345.06             72.006
345.07             72.007
345.08             72.008
345.09             72.009
345.10             72.010
345.11             72.011
345.12             72.012
345.13             72.013
345.14             72.014
345.15             72.015
345.16             72.016
345.17             72.017
345.18             72.018
345.19             72.019
345.20             72.020
345.21             72.021
345.22             72.022
345.23             72.023
345.24             72.024
345.25             72.025
345.26             72.026
345.27             72.027
345.28             72.028
345.29             72.029
345.30             72.030
345.31             72.031,
                   72.999
345.32             72.032
345.33             72.033
345.34             72.034
345.35             72.035
347.01             72.070
347.02             72.071
347.03             72.072
347.04             72.073
347.05             72.074
349.01             70.150
349.02             70.151
349.03             70.152
349.04             70.153
349.05             70.154
349.06             70.155
349.07             70.156
349.08             70.157
349.09             70.158
349.10             70.159
349.11             70.160
349.12             70.161
349.13             70.162
349.14             70.163
349.15             70.164
349.16             70.165
349.17             70.166
349.18             70.167
349.19             70.168
349.20             70.169
349.21             70.170
349.99             70.999
351.01             72.085
351.02             72.086
351.03             72.087
351.04             72.088
351.05             72.089
351.06             72.090
351.07             72.091
351.08             72.092
351.09             72.093
351.10             72.094
351.11             72.095
351.99             72.999
353.01             72.110
353.02             72.111
353.03             72.112
353.04             72.113
353.05             72.114
353.06             72.999
353.99             72.999
361.01             75.01
361.02             75.02
361.03             75.03
361.04             75.04
361.05             75.05
361.06             75.06,
                   75.99
361.07             75.07
361.08             75.08
361.09             75.09
361.10             75.10
361.11             75.11
361.12             75.12
361.13             75.13
361.14             75.14
361.15             75.15
361.16             75.99
361.99             75.99
371.01             72.050
371.02             72.051
371.03             72.052
371.04             72.053
371.05             72.054
371.06             72.055
371.07             72.056
371.08             72.057
373.01             73.01
373.02             73.02
373.03             73.03
373.04             73.04
373.05             73.05
373.06             73.06
373.07             73.07
373.08             73.08
373.09             73.09
373.10             73.10
373.99             73.99
501.01             92.55
501.02             92.56
501.03             92.57
501.04             92.58,
                   92.99
501.05             92.59
501.06             92.60
501.07             92.61
501.08             92.62
501.09             92.63
501.99             92.99
505.005            90.01
505.01             90.02
505.02             90.03
505.03             90.04
505.04             90.05
505.05             90.06
505.06             90.07
505.07             90.08
505.08             90.09
505.09             90.10
505.10             90.11
505.11             90.12
505.12             90.13
505.13             90.14
505.15             90.16
505.16             90.17
505.17             90.18
505.18             90.19
505.19             90.20
505.20             90.21
505.21             90.22
505.22             90.23
505.23             90.24
505.24             90.25
505.25             90.26
505.26             90.27
505.28             90.29
505.99             90.99
507.01             92.40
507.02             92.41
507.03             92.42
507.99             92.99
508.01             92.01
508.02             92.02
508.03             92.03
508.04             92.04
508.05             92.05
508.06             92.06
508.07             92.07
508.08             92.08
508.09             92.09
508.99             92.99
509.01             92.20
509.02             92.21
509.03             92.22
509.04             92.23
509.05             92.24
509.99             92.99
513.01             130.01
513.02             130.02
513.03             130.03
513.04             130.04
513.05             130.05
513.06             130.06
513.07             130.07
513.08             130.08
513.09             130.09
513.99             130.99
517.01             131.01
517.02             131.02,
                   131.99
517.03             131.03,
                   131.99
517.04             131.04,
                   131.99
517.05             131.05
517.06             131.06
517.07             131.07
517.08             131.08
517.09             131.09
517.10             131.10
517.99             131.99
521.01             112.45
521.02             112.46
521.03             112.47,
                   112.99
521.04             112.48
521.05             112.49
521.06             112.50,
                   112.99
521.07             112.51
521.08             112.52
521.09             112.53
521.10             112.54
521.11             112.55
521.99             112.99
525.01             132.01
525.02             132.02
525.03             132.03
525.04             132.04
525.05             132.05,
                   132.99
525.06             132.06,
                   132.99
525.99             132.99
529.02             134.02
529.03             134.03
529.99             134.99
533.01             134.15,
                   134.99
533.02             134.16
533.03             134.17
533.04             134.18
533.05             134.19
533.06             134.20
533.07             134.21
533.08             134.22
533.09             134.23
533.99             134.99
541.01             74.01
541.02             74.02
541.03             74.03
541.04             74.04
541.05             74.05
541.06             74.06
541.07             74.07
541.08             74.08
541.09             74.09
541.10             74.10
541.11             74.11
541.12             74.12
541.13             74.13
541.14             74.14
541.99             74.99
543.01             33.060
543.02             33.061
543.03             33.062
543.04             33.063
543.05             33.064
543.06             33.065
543.07             33.066
545.01             133.01
545.02             133.02,
                   133.99
545.03             133.03
545.04             133.04
545.05             133.05
545.06             133.06
545.07             133.07
545.08             133.08
545.09             133.09
545.10             133.10,
                   133.99
545.11             133.11
545.12             133.12
545.99             133.99
705.01             112.01
705.02             112.02
705.021            112.03
705.03             112.15
705.04             112.16
705.05             112.17
705.06             112.18
705.07             112.19
705.08             112.30
705.09             112.31
705.10             112.32
705.11             112.33
711.01             38.001
711.02             38.002
711.03             38.003
711.04             38.004
711.05             38.005
711.06             38.006
711.07             38.007
711.08             38.008
711.09             38.009
711.10             38.010
711.11             38.011
711.12             38.012
711.13             38.013
711.14             38.014
711.15             38.015
711.17             38.017
711.18             38.018
711.19             38.019
711.20             38.020
711.21             38.021
711.22             38.022
711.23             38.023
711.24             38.024
711.25             38.025
711.26             38.026
711.27             38.027
711.28             38.028
711.29             38.029
711.30             38.030
711.31             38.031
711.32             38.032
711.99             38.999
713.01             93.58
719.01             90.50
719.02             90.51
719.03             90.52
733.01             38.070
733.02             38.071
733.03             38.072
733.04             38.073
733.05             38.074
733.06             38.075
733.07             38.076
733.08             38.077
733.09             38.078
733.10             38.079
733.11             38.080
733.12             38.081
733.13             38.082
733.14             38.083
733.15             38.084
733.16             38.085
733.99             38.999
741.01             39.002
745.01             110.01
745.02             110.02
749.01             38.130
749.02             38.131
749.03             38.132
749.04             38.133
749.05             38.134
749.06             38.135
749.07             38.136
749.08             38.137
749.99             38.999
750.01             33.999
753.01             37.55
753.02             37.56
753.99             37.57,
                   37.99
905.01             93.01
905.02             93.02
905.03             93.03
905.04             93.04
905.05             93.05
905.06             93.06
905.99             93.99
911.01             93.20
911.02             93.21
911.03             93.22
911.04             93.23
911.05             93.24
911.06             93.25
911.07             93.26
911.08             93.27
911.09             93.28
911.10             93.29
911.11             93.30
915.01             52.01
915.02             52.02
915.03             52.03
915.04             52.04
915.05             52.05
915.06             52.06
915.07             52.07
915.08             52.08
915.09             52.09
915.10             52.10
915.11             52.11
915.12             52.12
915.13             52.13
915.14             52.14
915.15             52.15
915.16             52.16
915.17             52.17
915.99             52.99
923.01             50.01
923.02             50.02
923.03             50.03
923.04             50.04
923.05             50.05
923.06             50.06
923.07             50.07
923.08             50.20
923.09             50.21
923.10             50.22
923.11             50.23
923.12             50.24
923.13             50.25
923.14             50.26
927.01             94.01
927.02             94.02
927.03             94.03
927.04             94.04
927.05             94.05
927.06             94.06
927.07             94.07
927.08             94.08
927.09             94.09
927.10             94.10
927.99             94.99
1117.01            50.08
1123.01            111.01
1123.02            111.02
1123.03            111.15
1123.04            111.16
1123.05            111.17
1123.06            111.18
1123.07            111.30
1123.08            111.31
1123.09            111.32
1123.10            111.33
1123.11            111.34
1123.12            111.45
1123.13            111.46
1123.14            111.99
1123.15            111.47
1123.16            111.48
1123.17            111.49
1129.01            91.01
1129.02            91.02
1129.03            91.03
1129.04            91.04
1129.05            91.05
1129.06            91.06
1129.07            91.07
1129.08            91.08
1129.09            91.09
1129.10            91.10
1129.11            91.11
1129.99            91.99
1511.01            95.35
1511.02            95.36
1511.03            95.37
1511.04            95.38
1511.05            95.39
1511.99            95.99
1519.01            95.01
1519.02            95.02
1519.03            95.03
1519.04            95.04
1519.05            95.05
1519.06            95.06
1519.07            95.07
1519.08            95.08
1519.09            95.09
1519.10            95.10
1519.11            95.11
1519.12            95.12
1519.13            95.13
1519.14            95.14
1519.15            95.15
1519.16            95.16
1519.17            95.17
1519.18            95.18
1519.19            95.19
1519.20            95.20
1705.01            151.30
1705.02            151.31
1705.03            151.32
1705.04            151.33
1705.05            151.34
1705.06            151.35
1705.07            151.36
1705.99            151.99
1711.01            151.01
1711.02            151.02
1711.03            151.03
1725.01            151.15
1733.03            153.03
1733.04            153.04
1733.05            153.05
1733.06            153.06
1733.07            153.07
1733.08            153.08
1733.09            153.10
1733.99            153.99
Appendix A         39.012
                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     151.50 –
04-05    - -         151.55,
                     151.99
08-      - -         90.33,
                     90.99
97-06    - -         TSO Table I
186      3-15-1977   151.15
189      9-19-1978   TSO Table III
79-6     7-17-1979   151.34
79-8     7-17-1979   70.999
79-9     9-18-1979   75.05,
                     75.11
80-2     6-30-1980   TSO Table III
80-5     11-25-1980  35.06
81-2     1-23-1981   TSO Table III
                     90.18,
81-4     6-2-1981    90.21-
                     90.24,
                     90.29
81-5     6-16-1981   112.02
81-6     7-21-1981   90.50
81-9     10-6-1981   31.037
82-1     3-6-1982    TSO Table III
82-3A    7-13-1982   75.13
                     33.030,
82-8     10-5-1982   33.032-
                     33.034,
                     33.999
                     32.136,
82-10    11-16-1982  32.137,
                     32.139-
                     32.142
83-5     5-17-1983   10.09,
                     33.001
83-15    10-4-1983   TSO Table III
83-17    11-1-1983   94.05
83-18    12-6-1983   90.06
                     94.01 –
84-1     1-24-1984   94.08,
                     94.99
84-3     2-20-1984   TSO Table III
84-4     2-20-1984   TSO Table III
84-5     2-20-1984   TSO Table III
84-6     6-5-1984    30.05
                     111.01,
                     111.02,
                     111.15-
                     111.18,
84-7     9-4-1984    111.30-
                     111.34,
                     111.45-
                     111.49,
                     111.99
84-10    12-15-1984  TSO Table III
85-1     3-19-1985   52.99
                     38.005,
85-3     4-16-1985   38.011,
                     38.012,
                     38.015
85-7     8-20-1985   TSO Table III
85-11    10-22-1985  75.13
86-4     4-1-1986    92.42,
                     92.99
                     92.40,
86-8     4-1-1986    92.41,
                     92.99
86-10    6-3-1986    93.06
87-6     9-15-1986   32.095
87-1     3-17-1987   TSO Table III
87-7     10-20-1987  94.05
88-1     2-11-1988   94.05
88-10    10-18-1988  TSO Table III
90-6     10-2-1990   32.200
90-7     10-16-1990  75.99
91-2     2-5-1991    112.03
91-3     2-19-1991   38.085
91-8     8-20-1991   151.36
93-05    9-21-1993   33.999
93-07    12-7-1993   TSO Table III
94-01    3-1-1994    132.05,
                     132.99
95-01    3-7-1995    TSO Table II
95-04    11-21-1995  TSO Table III
95-05    11-21-1995  TSO Table III
95-07    12-19-1995  TSO Table II
95-07A   12-19-1995  TSO Table II
95-08    12-19-1995  TSO Table II
96-02    3-5-1996    33.018
96-04    5-7-1996    TSO Table II
96-08    1-7-1997    TSO Table I
97-01    4-4-1997    TSO Table III
97-03    4-15-1997   TSO Table I
97-05    4-15-1997   TSO Table III
97-08    8-19-1997   94.10,
                     94.99
97-09    9-16-1997   TSO Table I
98-02    1-6-1998    TSO Table III
98-03    2-24-1998   TSO Table I
98-04    7-21-1998   TSO Table III
98-05    8-18-1998   36.008
99-03    5-4-1999    75.99,
                     Ch. 76 Schd. I
00-01    1-18-2000   TSO Table I
00-2     2-15-2000   33.005
00-07    11-7-2000   TSO Table I
01-01    1-2-2001    TSO Table II
01-02    2-6-2001    TSO Table II
01-03    2-6-2001    TSO Table I
01-06    4-3-2001    151.35
                     50.01,
                     50.04,
01-07    4-3-2001    50.05,
                     50.24,
                     50.25
01-09    5-15-2001   TSO Table I
01-11    9-18-2001   91.11
                     92.01 –
01-13    9-25-2001   92.09,
                     92.99
01-14    11-6-2001   TSO Table II
02-03    3-19-2002   152.125
02-06    8-6-2002    TSO Table II
02-07    9-16-2002   37.06
02-08    11-19-2002  TSO Table II
03-01    1-21-2003   133.02,
                     133.99
03-02    2-4-2003    94.05
                     73.25 –
03-04    10-7-2003   73.30,
                     73.99
04-01    2-17-2004   35.04
04-03    4-21-2004   90.01,
                     90.28
05-04    4-19-2005   TSO Table II
05-06    7-6-2005    TSO Table II
05-07    8-2-2005    TSO Table I
05-08    8-2-2005    TSO Table II
05-09    10-18-2005  TSO Table II
06-01    6-6-2006    TSO Table I
                     90.01,
                     90.15,
06-02    6-27-2006   90.28,
                     90.30-
                     90.32,
                     90.99
                     91.45 –
06-03    8-15-2006   91.62,
                     91.99
06-05    12-4-2006   TSO Table II
07-01    3-20-2007   90.12
07-02    5-15-2007   Ch. 77 Schd. I
07-04    9-18-2007   113.01 –
                     113.16
                     153.01 –
07-05    12-18-2007  153.10,
                     153.99
08-01    1-15-2008   35.20,
                     35.99
                     152.001 –
                     152.011,
                     152.025-
                     152.029,
                     152.040,
                     152.041,
                     152.085,
                     152.100,
                     152.115,
08-02    2-19-2008   152.130-
                     152.137,
                     152.150,
                     152.165-
                     152.170,
                     152.185-
                     152.187,
                     152.200-
                     152.205,
                     152.220-
                     152.224
08-03    2-19-2008   TSO Table I
08-05    5-6-2008    TSO Table I
08-      8-5-2008    TSO Table I
08-08    10-7-2008   70.055
                     38.101 –
08-      11-3-2008   38.116,
                     38.999
                     39.002,
09-01    2-17-2009   39.045-
                     39.047,
                     39.053
09-02    3-17-2009   36.080
09-03    5-19-2009   30.03
09-04    5-19-2009   33.080 –
                     33.087
                     154.001 –
                     154.008,
                     154.040-
                     154.047,
                     154.060-
                     154.063,
                     154.075-
09-05    5-19-2009   154.081,
                     154.095-
                     154.101,
                     154.115-
                     154.118,
                     154.130-
                     154.135,
                     154.999
09-06    7-21-2009   38.079 –
                     38.084
09-07    7-21-2009   72.094,
                     72.999
09-09    8-18-2009   134.35 –
                     134.39
09-10    10-20-2009  72.096
09-12    11-3-2009   TSO Table II
-        11-3-2009   32.050
09-13    11-17-2009  39.025 –
                     39.034
                     154.150 –
09-14    12-15-2009  154.166,
                     154.999
                     150.001 –
                     150.013;
                     150.025-
                     150.030;
                     150.045-
                     150.064;
                     150.075-
                     150.078;
                     152.001-
                     152.011,
                     152.025-
                     152.029,
                     152.040,
-        2-2-2010    152.041,
                     152.085,
                     152.100,
                     152.115,
                     152.130-
                     152.137,
                     152.150,
                     152.165-
                     152.170,
                     152.185-
                     152.187,
                     152.200-
                     152.205,
                     152.220-
                     152.224
                     152.070,
10-2     3-2-2010    152.071,
                     152.151
10-4     7-20-2010   35.35 –
                     35.39
                     32.025 –
11-1     1-4-2011    32.034,
                     32.999
-        3-15-2011   38.033
11-3     6-21-2011   TSO Table I
-        6-7-2011    38.033
                     154.004,
-        9-20-2011   154.007,
                     154.008,
                     154.999
                     154.007,
11       9-20-2011   154.008,
                     154.999
                     32.130 –
11-5     10-18-2011  32.135,
                     32.138
11-6     10-18-2011  32.155 –
                     32.162
11-7     10-18-2011  32.175 –
                     32.187
12-1     1-17-2012   TSO Table II
12-2     2-21-2012   TSO Table II
12-3     6-7-2012    70.058,
                     70.999
12-4     9-18-2012   71.24
12-5     9-18-2012   50.23
12-6     9-18-2012   38.082 –
                     38.084
12-10    10-2-2012   31.050
12-7     10-16-2012  90.34 –
                     90.38
12-8     10-16-2012  35.12
                     37.55 –
12-9     11-8-2012   37.57,
                     37.99
12-11    12-18-2012  52.14
-        3-19-2013   33.031
                     154.180 –
13-2     4-16-2013   154.192,
                     154.999
13-4     7-16-2013   33.031
13-3     9-3-2013    154.004
13-6     11-19-2013  52.14
14-3     5-20-2014   TSO Table I
-        5-21-2014   155.01,
                     155.02
-        7-15-2014   TSO Table I
                     38.006,
                     38.007,
-        1-6-2015    38.010,
                     38.014,
                     38.045-
                     38.059
-        4-21-2015   92.23
-        4-21-2015   92.25,
                     92.99
-        4-21-2015   134.01
-        5-19-2015   33.082,
                     33.086
-        5-19-2015   TSO Table II
15-      6-2-2015    39.001 –
                     39.011
-        6-2-2015    70.070
15-      6-16-2015   33.045 –
                     33.048
-        6-16-2015   70.070
-        8-18-2015   39.045 –
                     39.052
-        10-6-2015   39.045 –
                     39.052
-        8-16-2016   38.033
                     51.01 –
                     51.18,
-        10-4-2016   51.30-
                     51.42,
                     51.99
17-1     1-3-2017    32.080 –
                     32.083
17-      2-21-2017   10.11
-        7-6-2017    TSO I
-        9-5-2017    154.041,
                     154.999
17-      11-7-2017   91.12
-        12-5-2017   154.020 -
                     154.028
18-      4-3-2018    TSO Table II
                     152.011,
                     152.055,
                     152.056,
                     152.057,
-        8-7-2018    152.070,
                     152.071,
                     152.085,
                     152.100,
                     152.115
                     73.45 –
-        10-2-2018   73.49,
                     73.99
-        1-15-2019   152.070
-        1-15-2019   TSO Table II
-        3-19-2019   154.188
-        5-7-2019    32.215 –
                     32.232
                     152.010,
                     152.011,
-        8-16-2019   152.055,
                     152.056,
                     152.057
-        9-3-2019    39.003
                     73.60 -
-        10-15-2019  73.64,
                     73.99
-        11-19-2019  31.050
                     38.083,
-        12-17-2019  38.084,
                     38.086,
                     38.999
                     91.25 –
-        6-1-2020    91.33,
                     91.99
-        6-1-2020    154.046,
                     154.999
-        6-16-2020   TSO I
-        7-7-2020    TSO II
-        10-6-2020   90.39,
                     90.99
20-6     10-6-2020   151.01 –
                     151.03
-        5-4-2021    152.070
-        3-1-2022    TSO II
-        3-1-2022    TSO II
-        4-19-2022   TSO II
-        6-21-2022   33.031
-        10-4-2022   TSO II
-        1-17-2023   152.168
-        1-17-2023   TSO II
-        1-17-2023   TSO II
                     152.026,
                     152.055 –
-        5-16-2023   152.057,
                     152.130,
                     152.131,
                     152.150
-        10-3-2023   70.056
-        10-3-2023   70.057
-        10-3-2023   70.058
-        10-3-2023   70.071
-        10-3-2023   70.072
-        10-3-2023   70.073
-        10-3-2023   70.085
-        11-7-2023   70.087
-        11-7-2023   70.089
-        11-7-2023   70.090
-        - -         70.091
-        11-8-2023   70.070
-        - -         70.070
-        11-21-2023  TSO II
-        12-5-2023   70.092
-        12-5-2023   70.093
-        12-5-2023   70.095
-        12-5-2023   70.096
-        12-5-2023   70.111
-        12-5-2023   70.112
-        2-20-2024   70.131
-        2-20-2024   70.132
-        2-20-2024   70.133
-        2-20-2024   70.133
-        2-20-2024   70.134
-        2-20-2024   70.135
-        2-20-2024   70.150
-        3-19-2024   70.113
-        3-19-2024   70.119
-        3-19-2024   70.130
-        3-19-2024   70.131
-        3-19-2024   70.132
-        - -         70.134
-        - -         70.151
-        4-16-2024   70.135
-        4-16-2024   70.150
-        4-16-2024   70.152
-        4-16-2024   70.153
-        5-21-2024   70.154
-        5-21-2024   70.155
-        5-21-2024   70.156
-        5-21-2024   70.157
-        5-21-2024   70.158
-        5-21-2024   70.159
-        6-11-2024   90.40
-        7-2-2024    70.160
-        7-2-2024    70.161
-        7-2-2024    70.162
-        - -         70.163
-        7-2-2024    70.164
-        7-2-2024    70.165
-        8-6-2024    70.166
-        8-6-2024    70.167
-        8-6-2024    70.168
-        8-6-2024    70.169
-        8-6-2024    70.170
-        8-6-2024    70.187
-        9-3-2024    71.01
-        9-3-2024    71.02
-        9-3-2024    71.03
-        9-3-2024    71.04
-        9-3-2024    71.15
-        9-3-2024    71.16
-        10-1-2024   71.17
-        10-1-2024   71.18
-        10-1-2024   71.19
-        10-1-2024   71.20
-        10-1-2024   134.01
-        12-3-2024   71.21
-        12-3-2024   71.22
-        12-3-2024   71.23
-        12-3-2024   71.35
-        12-3-2024   71.36
-        12-3-2024   71.37
-        1-21-2025   35.20
-        1-21-2025   71.38
-        1-21-2025   92.04,
                     92.08
-        1-21-2025   134.16
-        2-18-2025   71.39
-        2-18-2025   71.40
-        2-18-2025   71.42
-        2-18-2025   132.06
-        2-28-2025   132.07
-        3-18-2025   71.41
-        3-18-2025   71.43
-        3-18-2025   72.001
-        3-18-2025   92.23
-        3-18-2025   92.42
-        4-15-2025   33.030 –
                     33.034
-        4-15-2025   70.162
-        4-15-2025   70.169
-        4-15-2025   72.002
-        4-15-2025   92.40
-        4-15-2025   132.05
-        5-20-2025   10.99
-        5-20-2025   72.003
-        5-20-2025   72.004
-        5-20-2025   72.005
-        5-20-2025   72.006
-        5-20-2025   112.50
-        5-20-2025   134.15
-        5-20-2025   154.049
-        6-17-2025   72.007
-        6-17-2025   72.008
-        6-17-2025   72.009
-        6-17-2025   72.010
-        6-17-2025   72.011
-        6-17-2025   72.012
-        7-15-2025   72.013
-        7-15-2025   72.014
-        7-15-2025   72.015
-        7-15-2025   72.016
-        7-15-2025   72.017
-        7-15-2025   72.018
-        9-2-2025    72.019 –
                     72.028
-        10-7-2025   39.002,
                     39.006
-        10-7-2025   72.029
-        10-7-2025   72.030
-        10-7-2025   72.031
-        10-7-2025   72.032
-        11-4-2025   72.034
-        11-4-2025   72.035
-        11-4-2025   72.050
-        11-4-2025   72.051
-        11-4-2025   72.052
-        11-4-2025   90.10
-        11-4-2025   90.13
-        11-4-2025   90.15
-        11-4-2025   90.23
-        11-4-2025   90.28
-        12-2-2025   72.053
-        12-2-2025   72.055
-        12-2-2025   72.056
-        12-2-2025   72.057
-        12-2-2025   72.070
-        12-2-2025   72.071
-        12-2-2025   72.072
-        12-2-2025   72.073
-        12-2-2025   72.074
-        12-2-2025   72.085
                    
 
